
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/25078/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th September 2018               |On 12th October 2018                 |
|                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                        MS MOTUNRAYO RACHEL OLUFARATI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Turnbull, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Z Kiss, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal G Andrews who, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27
    February 2018, dismissed her appeal against  a  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 29 October 2016 to refuse her leave to remain on  Article
    8 grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 27 November 1966.

3.   The judge appellant's immigration history as gleaned from  the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter is that the appellant first came to the UK in  2005.
    In May 2014 she applied for leave to remain in the UK.  The application
    was refused with no right of appeal.  In September 2014 she applied for
    an EEA residence  card.   The  application  was  refused.   Her  appeal
    against that refusal  was  dismissed  by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 2 June 2015.  On 21 December 2015
    she again applied for leave to remain on the basis of family life  with
    her husband, private  life,  and  exceptional  circumstances  that  she
    claimed prevented her return to Nigeria.

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the  appellant  did
    not give oral evidence.  The appeal took the form of submissions by the
    appellant's Counsel.  There was no appearance by the respondent.

5.   The judge made the following findings of fact.  In 2006 in the  UK  the
    appellant met the man who was  to  become  her  husband.   She  started
    living with him later that year.   He  was  a  British  citizen.   They
    married in 2013.  He suffered from health problems  and  the  appellant
    provided substantial care for  him.   Her  husband  sadly  died  on  26
    December 2015.  He is buried in the UK.

6.   A letter from the appellant's  vicar  said  the  appellant's  husband's
    death brought her enormous grief, distress and sadness from  which  she
    has not fully recovered.  The appellant  now  suffers  from  depressive
    illness and post-traumatic stress disorder and has been prescribed anti-
    depressant medication and has some sessions of  psychological  therapy.
    She suffers from chronic iron deficiency, anaemia.

7.   The judge found that the  appellant  has  extended  family  members  in
    Nigeria from the application she made for leave to  remain.   Both  her
    parents are deceased, and she does not have a family home  in  Nigeria.
    The appellant has no educational qualifications.

8.   The judge found that the appellant has friends in the UK based  on  the
    letters of support that were submitted on her  behalf.   Based  on  the
    letter from her vicar the judge  found  that  the  appellant  plays  an
    active role in the church community, where she is well-liked. She is  a
    church usher, participates in other church duties,  and  rarely  misses
    Sunday services.  Overall,  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  is
    socially and culturally integrated in the UK.

9.   The judge found that the  appellant  has  not  supplied  her  with  any
    evidence of ever having leave to be in the UK.  In response to question
    4.4 of her May 2014 application, she said she entered the  UK  in  2005
    without  entry  clearance,  using  someone  else's  documents.   Taking
    everything into account the judge found that the appellant has been  in
    the UK unlawfully, ever since arriving here in 2005.  She also accepted
    the appellant's representative's submission that the appellant has  not
    returned to Nigeria since arriving here in 2005.

10.   The  judge  considered  the  appellant's  claim  that  she  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.   She
    found that it was not disputed that the appellant is aged 18  years  or
    above and has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years.  The
    question she has to consider therefore is whether there would  be  very
    significant  obstacles   to   her   integration   into   Nigeria.    In
    consideration of this issue the judge relied on the  "very  significant
    obstacles"  test  in  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -
    compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13, paragraph 37.

11.  The judge  took  into  account  the  doctor's  letter  which  said  the
    appellant should not suddenly stop her anti-depressant medication,  and
    also that she will be assessed by a psychiatrist if she  does  not  get
    better.  The judge found however that the appellant does not argue that
    she would be unable to obtain appropriate medical support  in  Nigeria,
    and none of the evidence before her persuaded her  that  this  was  the
    case.

12.  The judge noted that the appellant has  mental  health  problems.   The
    appellant said that on some days she cannot bear  to  face  the  world.
    The judge found that despite this, the appellant  manages  to  play  an
    active role in her church community in the UK, and rarely misses Sunday
    services.  Having  considered  all  the  evidence,  in  particular  her
    doctor's letter, the judge was not satisfied that her  health  problems
    are so severe that she could not attend a church in Nigeria and, within
    a reasonable time, build up a variety of human  relationships  to  give
    substance to her private life in Nigeria.  In reaching this conclusion,
    the judge took account  of  the  appellant's  evidence  that  her  late
    husband's family wrongly believe in Nigeria that she has  property  and
    money from her late husband, which may make it difficult for her to  be
    accepted by those family members.

13.  The judge found that the appellant is now  51  years  old  and  has  no
    educational qualifications.  In her witness  statement  she  said  that
    friends who have recently arrived in the UK have said that  things  are
    very tough economically  in  Nigeria.   The  judge  said  she  was  not
    provided with any evidence to support this assertion.  In  her  witness
    statement the appellant said she  may  need  to  compete  with  younger
    people in order to get work in Nigeria.  The judge found  that  she  is
    still of working age and even taking account of  her  health  problems,
    she has not satisfied her that she would be unable to  support  herself
    in Nigeria.

14.  The judge noted that the appellant has not returned  to  Nigeria  since
    coming to the UK in 2005.  She found however  that  the  appellant  has
    lived all her life in Nigeria before coming here in her late 30s.   She
    speaks the Yoruba language.  As such,  she  would  be  returning  to  a
    country she is culturally familiar with.  Although she does not have  a
    family home in Nigeria, she has extended family members there, and they
    might be in a position to help her re-integrate.   Further,  she  is  a
    Nigerian citizen and should as such be able to enjoy the full  benefits
    of citizenship of that country.

15.  The judge took into consideration that the appellant is still  grieving
    for her late husband, whose death has clearly greatly affected her.  If
    she were to return to Nigeria she would be unable to visit his grave in
    the UK and she would of course have to leave the home she  shared  with
    him, where she currently lives.  The judge took into consideration  her
    representative's submission that the appellant's late husband is  still
    a source of comfort for her although he has now died.

16.  The judge considered all the evidence in the  round.   She  found  that
    the appellant may not have the same  standard  of  living  in  Nigeria,
    compared with her likely standard  of  living  if  she  remained  here.
    Also, there would no doubt be a period of adjustment but, as stated  in
    Treebhawon, she must apply an "elevated threshold" here, such that mere
    hardship,  mere  difficulty,  mere  hurdles  and   mere   upheaval   or
    inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  are  generally  insufficient.
    Having considered all the evidence in the  round,  the  judge  was  not
    persuaded that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration  into  Nigeria.   Accordingly  she  found  that
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) does not apply in this case.

17.  The judge then considered the appellant's appeal  under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR with respect to private life only.

18.  The judge  held  at  [26]  that  private  life  is  a  broad  term  not
    susceptible to exhaustive definition.  In view of the  length  of  time
    the appellant had been in the UK, her relationship here with  her  late
    husband, her friendships and her involvement in the church,  the  judge
    found that the appellant has private life in the UK.

19.  The judge then went on to apply the principles in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27.

20.  The judge accepted that the appellant's removal from the  UK  would  be
    an interference by a public authority with the exercise of her right to
    respect  for  private  life.   She  was  also   satisfied   that   such
    interference would have consequences  of  such  gravity  as  to  engage
    Article 8.  She answered the next two questions in  Razgar  positively.
    Consequently  she  held  that  the  appeal  turns  on  the   issue   of
    proportionality.

21.  The judge considered the appellant's representative's  submission  that
    on the appellant's side of the balance she has not  been  a  burden  on
    public funds and does not have a criminal record.   However  the  judge
    applied the head note of Nasim and Others (Article 8)  [2014]  UKUT  25
    which states that a person's human  rights  are  not  enhanced  by  not
    committing criminal offences or not relying on public funds.  The  only
    significance  of  such  matters  in  cases   concerning   proposed   or
    hypothetical removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  is  to  preclude  the
    Secretary of State from pointing  to  any  public  interest  justifying
    removal, over and above the basic importance of maintaining a firm  and
    coherent system of immigration control.

22.  At [30] the judge identified the factors that were on  the  appellant's
    side of the balance.  These were that she has  been  in  the  UK  since
    2005.  She is socially and culturally integrated here, has friends here
    and plays an active role in her church community.  However,  the  judge
    considered it likely that the appellant could maintain contact with her
    church and friends from Nigeria, through modern means of communication.

23.  The judge considered that the appellant's vicar  described  her  as  an
    asset to the church and the local community.  Her health problems, lack
    of education and lack of property in Nigeria are likely to make it more
    difficult for her to resume life in Nigeria.  She is  the  widow  of  a
    British citizen who died in late 2015.

24.  The judge held at [31] that the factors on the appellant's side of  the
    balance in no way outweigh those found to be on the  respondent's  side
    of the balance.   She  applied  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  MM
    (Lebanon) & Others, R (app) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10 where it  was  stated
    at paragraph 75 that although the tribunal must make its own  judgment,
    it should attach considerable weight to judgments made by the Secretary
    of State in the  exercise  of  her  constitutional  responsibility  for
    immigration policy.

25.  The Judge found that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules and attached great weight to this.  As stated  in
    Section  117B(1)  of  the  2002  Act,  the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest.

26.  The judge found that the appellant has been in the UK  unlawfully  ever
    since  she  arrived  here  in  2005.   In  the  circumstances   Section
    117B(4)(a) of  the  2002  Act  requires  her  to  have  regard  to  the
    consideration that little weight should be given to any of her  private
    life in the UK, established since 2005.

27.  The judge also  took  into  account  the  findings  that  she  made  at
    paragraph 24.

28.  Overall, the judge was not persuaded that the appellant has  been  able
    to show clear evidential reasons why her circumstances  mean  that  the
    usual policy considerations do not apply to her.  The judge found  that
    there are no exceptional circumstances or compassionate  or  compelling
    factors in this appeal, although she appreciated that there was no test
    of exceptionality as such.  The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal.

29.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal the  judge's  decision.   He  said  the  judge  was  undoubtedly
    correct, even after AM (Zambia) [2018] EWCA Civ 64 to conclude that the
    appellant's health did not meet the Article 3 threshold.  He said  that
    where the judge arguably erred was that having found that the appellant
    did have a "private life" in the UK of sufficient strength and  quality
    to engage Article 8, was in  failing  to  bring  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's health needs into the proportionality assessment.

30.  Ms Turnbull agreed with the reason for the grant  of  permission.   She
    said the judge did not properly consider the appellant's health  issues
    when considering Article 8 outside the Rules.

31.  Ms Turnbull submitted that the  judge  accepted  the  majority  of  the
    appellant's evidence, and that she was deeply  grieved  and  depressed.
    She relied on the decision in Bensaid made by  the  European  Court  of
    Human Rights which  held  that  private  life  "is  a  broad  term  not
    susceptible to exhaustive definition" (I note this was also  relied  on
    by the judge at paragraph 26).  Ms Turnbull said that  in  Bensaid  the
    European Court held that mental health  must  also  be  regarded  as  a
    crucial part of private life.  She submitted that whilst the  judge  at
    [31] refers to MM (Lebanon) and considers Section 117B of the 2002 Act,
    she does not say what consideration she has given  to  the  appellant's
    mental health when considering proportionality.   The  judge  considers
    reintegration and finds that the appellant has not returned to  Nigeria
    since 2005.  The judge's finding that the appellant has extended family
    members in Nigeria is speculation and not backed up by evidence.

32.  Ms Turnbull said that  are  exceptional  factors  in  this  case.   The
    appellant is grieving for her husband.  She nursed him through  serious
    health  issues.   The  respondent  did  not  appreciate  how  ill   the
    appellant's husband was.  He died at home.  The appellant has PTSD  and
    a depressive illness.  She would be forced to leave the area where  she
    lived with her husband and would  not  be  able  to  visit  his  grave.
    Involvement with the church community and friends assist her in dealing
    with  her  tragedy.   Ms  Turnbull  said  the  judge  skimmed   through
    consideration of these  factors.   The  judge  was  influenced  by  the
    overriding factor which is the appellant's illegal stay in the UK.

33.  I accept Ms Kiss's submission that  the  judge  has  done  enough  even
    though her findings under Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules  may
    have been brief.  At [26] the judge quoted from [47]  of  Bensaid  that
    private life is a broad term not susceptible to exhaustive  definition.
    This was the same paragraph relied on by Ms Turnbull.

34.  I find that the judge made her findings in respect of  the  appellant's
    mental health when she was considering paragraph 276ADE.   The  judge's
    findings at [24] were pertinent to the consideration of the appellant's
    appeal under Article 8.  At [24.i] the judge  considered  the  doctor's
    letter that the appellant should not suddenly stop her  anti-depressant
    medication, and also that she will be assessed by a psychiatrist if she
    does not get better.  The judge noted that the appellant did not  argue
    that she would be unable  to  obtain  appropriate  medical  support  in
    Nigeria and none of the evidence before her persuaded her that this was
    the case.  The judge's finding that the appellant has  extended  family
    members in Nigeria was taken from the appellant's application  form  of
    2015. Therefore the judge's finding that they might be in a position to
    help her reintegrate was open to her.

35.  At [24.ii] the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  has  mental  health
    problems.  She was not satisfied that her health problems are so severe
    that she could not attend a church in Nigeria and, within a  reasonable
    time, build up a variety of human relationships to  give  substance  to
    her private life in Nigeria.  The judge at  [24.v]  took  note  of  the
    submission that the appellant is still grieving for her  late  husband,
    and that if she were to return to Nigeria she would be unable to  visit
    his grave in the UK and that she would  have  to  leave  the  home  she
    shared with him.  Having looked at the evidence in the round the  judge
    found  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge was entitled when considering  Article  8
    to attach weight to her findings at [24].  Consequently, I  reject  the
    submission that the judge was greatly  influenced  by  the  appellant's
    illegal stay.  The appellant's illegal stay was one of the factors  the
    judge  took  into  account  when  considering  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

36.  I find that the judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  5 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

