
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/25685/2016
                                                               HU/25686/2016
                                                               HU/25687/2016
                                                             & HU/25688/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 November 2018                  |On 21 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                            Ge (FIRST appellant)
                            PS (SECOND appellant)
                            SE (THIRD appellant)
                            DE (FOURTH appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Miah instructed by Del & Co. solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 28 October 2016 refusing their private and  family  life  human
    rights claims.  Their appeal against that decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Graves  in  a
    decision promulgated on 15 March 2018.  For the reasons set out in  the
    annexed decision, I set that decision aside at  hearing  on  14  August
    2018.  Given the subsequent decision in of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53,
    I would not now have found an error of law. Nonetheless, I have proceed
    to remake the decision.

 2. In re-making the decision I have  taken  into  account  the  additional
    evidence supplied by the first and second appellants who adopted  their
    witness statements.

 3. I then heard submissions from Mr Miah on behalf of the  appellants  and
    Ms Everett on behalf of the Secretary of State. I  do  not  accept  the
    thrust of Mr Miah's submission that the  decision  in  KO  assists  the
    appellants, bearing in mind that this is a case where, as in one of the
    cases in KO, NS, neither parent has a right to remain.

 4. The starting point in this case is the  findings  of  fact  reached  by
    Judge Graves.  It is, as he noted, not submitted  that  the  appellants
    fall within Appendix FM and  the  issue  here  is  whether  removal  is
    proportionate given that the children have in the case of one of  them,
    lived here for more than seven years.  That in turn requires a  careful
    analysis of the provisions of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act in  light
    of the decision of KO [2018] UKSC 53.  As the Supreme  Court  noted  at
    [7] to [8] the substance of the provision  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    appears identical to that in Section 117B(6) taken with the  definition
    of  "qualifying  child".   Of  particular  note  is  what  is  said  at
    paragraphs 17 to 19:-

         "17. As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
             of the rule without material change,  but  this  time  in  the
             context of the right of the parent to remain.  I  would  infer
             that it was intended to have the same  effect.   The  question
             again is what is 'reasonable' for the child.  As Elias LJ said
             in MA (Pakistan) v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
             Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  1  WLR  5093,  para  36,
             there is nothing in the subsection to import  a  reference  to
             the conduct of the parent.  Section 117B sets out a number  of
             factors relating to those seeking leave to  enter  or  remain,
             but criminality is not one of them.  Subsection 117B(6) is  on
             its face free-standing, the only qualification being that  the
             person relying on it is not liable to deportation.   The  list
             of relevant factors set out  in  the  IDI  guidance  (para  10
             above) seems to me wholly appropriate and sound in law, in the
             context of section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
             to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where
             the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected
             to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child  to
             be with them.  To that extent the record of  the  parents  may
             become indirectly material, if it leads to  their  ceasing  to
             have a right to remain here, and having to leave.  It is  only
             if, even on that hypothesis, it would not  be  reasonable  for
             the child to leave that the provision may give the  parents  a
             right to remain.  The point was well-expressed by Lord Boyd in
             SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:

                  '22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
                  whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
                  UK one has to address the question, 'Why would  the  child
                  be expected to leave the United Kingdom?'  In a case  such
                  as this there can only be one answer: 'because the parents
                  have no right to remain  in  the  UK'.   To  approach  the
                  question in any other way strips away the context in which
                  the assessment of reasonableness is being made ...'

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
             considering the 'best interests' of children in the context of
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

                  '58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
                  interests of the children must be made on the  basis  that
                  the facts are as they are  in  the  real  world.   If  one
                  parent has no right to remain, but the other parent  does,
                  that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
                  conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then
                  that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
                  conducted.  Thus the ultimate  question  will  be:  is  it
                  reasonable to expect the child to follow the  parent  with
                  no right to remain to the country of origin?'

         20.  To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
             (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree.   There  is
             nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is  to
             be considered otherwise than in the real world  in  which  the
             children find themselves"."

 5. I note in passing that at [18] it is stated that "it will  normally  be
    reasonable for the child  to  be  with  [the  parents]".   Thus  it  is
    inevitably relevant to consider where  they  will  be.   Again,  it  is
    important to note what was said in EV (Philippines).

 6. When applying this reasoning to the facts in NS, one of the cases heard
    with KO (Nigeria), as here, the parents had  no  right  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom and at paragraph 51 the judgment of the court  reads  as
    follows:-

         51.  Mr Knafler supports the other appellants in their challenge to
             the reasoning of MM (Uganda). He says that it is even  clearer
             in the context of section 117B that parental misconduct is  to
             be disregarded. I accept that UTJ Perkins' final conclusion is
             arguably open to the interpretation that the  "outrageousness"
             of the parents' conduct was somehow relevant to the conclusion
             under section 117B(6). However, read in its full context I  do
             not think he erred in that respect. He had correctly  directed
             himself as to the wording  of  the  subsection.  The  parents'
             conduct was relevant in that it meant that they had  to  leave
             the country. As I have explained (para 18 above),  it  was  in
             that context that it had  to  be  considered  whether  it  was
             reasonable for the children to leave  with  them.  Their  best
             interests would have been for the whole family to remain here.
             But in a context where the parents had to leave,  the  natural
             expectation would be that the children would go with them, and
             there was nothing in the evidence reviewed  by  the  judge  to
             suggest that that would be other than reasonable. The starting
             point  in  this  case  must  be  that  the  first  and  second
             appellants, that is the parents of the children, do  not  have
             the right to be in the United Kingdom.  That is  because  they
             have overstayed and have no right to be here.

 7. It should be borne in mind also  the  error  found  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision although the judge appears  not  to  have  considered
    properly the best interests of the children as noted in my error of law
    decision at [5].  There is nothing in KO which  suggests  that  a  best
    interests consideration is not to be done in the  real  world  analysis
    put forward by EO identified in KO.

 8. I accept that the children are settled in school and are  happy  there,
    doing well and, as was noted by Judge Graves, will have  made  positive
    relationships there.  They speak English and they will now have spent a
    number of years in school in the case of  the  older  child.   He  has,
    however, been here for nine and a half years.  I accept, as  the  judge
    found, that they  had  been  raised  with  close  cultural  and  social
    connections to Ghanaian diaspora and had contact with  extended  family
    in this country and that they are educated in this country.

 9. In the case of the younger child it is  inevitable  that  she  will  be
    focused primarily on her parents and I find nothing such that I  should
    not follow and it is of note that, as the judge found, the children  do
    not  have  significant  relationships  with  adults  other  than  their
    parents.  It was open to him to conclude, as I do, that  they  will  be
    able to access education and healthcare in Ghana and that  there  would
    be no real obstacles to their integration into  the  country  of  which
    they are citizens, not least as their mother and father would  be  with
    them and could help them adapt.  It was also found that, and I  accept,
    they have some family who could assist with integrating and  with  whom
    to  develop  with  positive  relationships.   There  is  nothing  of  a
    particularly significant nature in terms of their connections  to  this
    country over and above what one would expect for children of their age.
     There are no significant health problems and  whilst  there  would  be
    disruption, there does not appear to be  evidence  that  the  education
    system or the healthcare system would be significantly inferior such as
    to prejudice the children.

10. The reality is that in this case, as with KO in particular and  NS  the
    reason why the children will  have  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  is
    because their parents have no right to be here.  That is not  punishing
    the children for  the  actions  of  their  parents,  it  is  simply  an
    observation of the reality of the situation.  I do not consider, having
    undertaken a best interests analysis of the  children,  that  there  is
    anything such as would take this out of the situation of  their  having
    to  return  to  Ghana  with  their  parents  to  be  unreasonable,  and
    accordingly the requirements of the Immigration Rules are not met.

11. Turning then to consider whether the removal of the appellants would be
    disproportionate, I bear in mind  first  that  they  do  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules,  and  that  there  is  a  strong
    public interest in maintaining immigration control. I accept  that  the
    appellants all speak English, but  that,  and  an  ability  to  support
    themselves is at best neutral.   The private lives of the parents  have
    been developed as indeed has their family life, at a  time  when  their
    presence was precarious.  Taking all of these factors into account, and
    bearing in mind the best interests of the children, I am satisfied that
    the decision to remove  the  appellants  is  proportionate,  given  the
    strong public interest in maintaining immigration control.  I therefore
    dismiss the appeal.

Summary of Conclusions

      1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 14 December 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/25685/2016
                                                               HU/25686/2016
                                                               HU/25687/2016
                                                             & HU/25688/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 August 2018                             |                              |
|Extempore                                     |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     G E
                                     P S
                                     S E
                                     D E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Miah instructed by Del & Co solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr David Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Graves promulgated  on  15  March  2018  dismissing
    their appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State made on  28
    October 2016 refusing  their  private  and  family  life  human  rights
    claims.

 2. Briefly the facts are set out in  the  decision  regarding  the  family
    which consists of husband, wife and their two  children  both  of  whom
    were born in the United Kingdom, the older having been resident in  the
    United Kingdom in excess of seven years at the date of the decision  of
    Judge Graves.  The judge did not consider that it was  unreasonable  to
    require the children to leave the United  Kingdom  and  concluded  that
    weighing up the public interest  and  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control, that the family's rights to remain in the United Kingdom  were
    outweighed and thus removal was not disproportionate.

 3. The principal thrust  of the grounds of challenge  is  that  the  judge
    has erred first, in not properly assessing the best  interests  of  the
    children and second,  failed properly to assess the  reasonableness  of
    their removal not having proper regard to Section 117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act, the decision  in  MA  (Pakistan)  and  also  the  policy  guidance
    provided by the respondent which is set out in part in the decision  at
    [28].

 4. Mr Clarke submitted that the  decision  was  rational,  reasonable  and
    sustainable in that the judge had properly directed himself first, that
    the best interests of the children are to be considered first and  this
    is to be done without regards to other matters, second, that the  judge
    had then gone on to  consider  the  issue  of  reasonableness  and  had
    properly directed himself as to the law as well  as  properly  applying
    that law reaching conclusions having weighed the relevant factors which
    were open  to  the  judge  and  from  which  adequate  and  sustainable
    reasoning had been given.

 5. Whilst the judge has in my view properly directed himself as to the law
    with regard to best interests, it does not appear to me that at [25] in
    particular that that has been properly applied given the  reference  to
    the best interests in the longer term.  There appears also not to  have
    been proper weight attached to the fact that seven years had been spent
    here and the observations on that made in the  case  law.   Second  and
    more importantly with regard to reasonableness I consider that at  [29]
    the judge has misdirected  himself  in  law  with  regards  to  Section
    117B(6) of the 2006 Act and in  light  of  MA  (Pakistan)  in  that  he
    appears to have diminished  the  importance  of  the  guidance  without
    having regard to section 117B(6) and the weight to be attached  thereto
    as set out in MA (Pakistan).

 6. I consider also that the judge has  failed  properly  to  assess  their
    position in the light of that and has  reached  conclusions  which  are
    unsustainable having taken into account a number of factors  which  are
    not relevant and failed to take into account the  strong  weight  which
    has to be attached to the fact that one of  the  children  had  reached
    seven years and that the reasoning as to why in  this  case  there  are
    serious reasons, it is not adequately and properly reasoned.

 7. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which will be remade in the Upper Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 24 August 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
