
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25061/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6 March 2019                      |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 Badsha [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Eurasia Legal
                    Services (Birmingham Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh who applied for leave to remain
as the partner of Ms [SB] on 26 January 2016, having married her on 14
November 2015.  A daughter was born to the couple on 28 January 2016.

The Appellant had first arrived in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student on
19 September 2009 with entry clearance valid to 31 January 2012.  The
application was refused on the basis that the Secretary of State asserted
that the Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements of Appendix FM
because ETS had confirmed that his TOEIC speaking test certificate taken on
16 November 2011 had been fraudulently obtained by use of a proxy test
taker.

The Appellant's appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pacey
for hearing on 2 October 2017.  In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 9
October 2017 the judge dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal was
sought in time on the basis that the judge materially erred in law: in
failing to take into consideration that the Appellant satisfied the
requirements under Appendix FM of the Rules.  This is in relation to the
fact that whilst the judge dismissed the appeal she found at [26] that the
Respondent had not established that the Appellant had fraudulently utilised
a proxy test taker and thus the burden of proof had not been discharged.

The second ground of appeal is that the judge had misdirected herself in
law in her assessment of the proportionality exercise, given that as a
result of the judge's findings the Appellant satisfied all the requirements
under Appendix FM, including the suitability requirements.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro in a
decision dated 3 April 2018 on the basis that the grounds disclosed a
material error of law.

    Hearing

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I asked Ms Aboni for the
Secretary of State's position when she stated that she accepted that as a
result of the judge's finding at [26] that the Immigration Rules were met.
However, the judge found that the requirements of Section 117B of the NIAA
2002 were not met and thus Ms Aboni did not accept there was a material
error of law in her decision.

In his submissions on behalf of the Appellant, Mr Ahmed sought to rely on
his skeleton argument.  He submitted in light of the decision in TZ
(Pakistan)[2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at [34] where the Rules are satisfied that
is positively determinative of the appeal.  He submitted this was clearly a
relevant consideration in respect of Section 117B(1) of the NIAA 2002 and
that if the Appellant satisfies the Rules then the public interest cannot
be utilised against him.  Any issues of his immigration history had to be
considered in light of the fact that the Appellant qualifies for leave to
remain under Appendix FM of the Rules.  He submitted that the Secretary of
State has not made out the main case that the suitability requirements were
not met and the decision in SF [2017] UKUT 00120 applies as the child is a
British citizen.

Mr Ahmed submitted that, in light of the fact that the requirements of the
Rules are met, there is a material error of law in the judge's decision to
dismiss the appeal with regard to Article 8.  He asked for a decision
allowing the appeal.  He informed the Upper Tribunal that there were now
two children, the second one having been born on 10 March 2018.

I found a material error of law in the decision of Judge Pacey and I
announced my decision at the hearing.  I now give my reasons.

It is apparent that, in light of the Judge's finding at [26], that, even if
someone with the Appellant's details sat the test that in itself cannot
serve to discharge the burden placed on the Secretary of State and that the
Respondent has not established that the Appellant's details were not
fraudulently given to someone else, that as a consequence, the Appellant
was able to meet the suitability requirements of Appendix FM of the
Immigration Rules. Given that the Appellant's purported inability to meet
the suitability requirements was the only reason put forward by the
Respondent in the refusal decision for refusing his application for leave
to remain as a partner, I find that the Judge should have gone on to
consider the appeal on the basis that the requirements of Appendix FM of
the Rules were met. However, she failed so to do and that is a material
error of law.

The parties agreed, having found an error of law, that I should remake the
decision, which I now do. The Judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that
the Appellant was unable to meet the requirements of section 117B(2), (3)
and (4) of the NIAA 2002. In TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 the Senior
President held at [34]:

         "... where a person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by
         reference to an article 8 informed requirement, then this will be
         positively determinative of that person's article 8 appeal,
         provided their case engages article 8(1), for the very reason that
         it would then be disproportionate for that person to be removed."


12.  Given the  acceptance  by  both  the  Respondent  and  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge that the Appellant had established family life with  his
    wife and British child, the fact that the Appellant is able to meet the
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Rules [R-LTRP  1.1.(d)]  is  I  find
    determinative of the appeal, "because that formulates the  strength  of
    the public policy in immigration control 'in the case before it', which
    is what the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (at [50]) held was to be taken
    into account." In these circumstances it is unnecessary  to  go  on  to
    consider sections 117A & B of the NIAA 2002. Even if it were necessary,
    I find in light of the Senior President's judgment, that the fact  that
    the Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  outweighs  his
    inability to satisfy  the  public  interest  requirements  set  out  in
    section 117B of the NIAA 2002 such that the public  interest  does  not
    require his removal, which would be disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I make a fee award of any  fee  which  has  been  paid  or  may  be  payable
(adjusted where full award not justified) for the following reason.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 21 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

