
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/25309/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2019                            |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                    A A L
                     (democratic republic of the congo)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ashraf Ali, Legal Representative instructed by
                    ASH Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  order.  I  continue  that  order
pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008:
unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall identify  the  original
appellant, whether directly or indirectly.  This order applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties.

Any failure to comply with this order could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellant is a young man from the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
    now 19 years old.  On 2 October 2018, he applied pursuant to  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended), for entry clearance to
    join his mother in the United Kingdom for settlement.  He was  12  days
    away from his 18th birthday when he made that application.

Background

 2. The appellant's account is that  his  father  was  a  soldier  who  was
    deployed on military service in 2003 and has not been seen  since.   He
    has had no hand in the upbringing of the  appellant.   The  appellant's
    mother came to live in the United Kingdom in 2004, when  the  appellant
    was 3 or 4 years old, but has returned from time to  time  to  see  her
    children and has sent  money.  Her  mother,  the  appellant's  maternal
    grandmother, brought up the sponsor's three children for  three  years;
    in 2007, one of the appellant's younger sisters joined  his  mother  in
    the United Kingdom (she was 5 years old).

 3.  The  appellant  and  his  other  younger  sister  remained  with   the
    grandmother until she died on 12 July 2017.  The appellant was then  16
    years old. Following the death of his grandmother,  the  appellant  and
    his sister went to live with a friend of the sponsor  in  DRC  and  the
    appellant began to study to be a teacher.  At the date of  hearing,  he
    had completed a year of that study.

Refusal letter

 4. The respondent refused entry clearance on human  rights  grounds  in  a
    refusal letter dated 5 December 2018, by which time the  appellant  was
    no longer a minor, having passed his 18th birthday on 14 October  2018.



 5. The respondent  noted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    assertion that the appellant was living with a friend of  the  sponsor,
    that the sponsor had visited him and could continue to do so, and  that
    the appellant could not bring himself  within  the  provisions  of  the
    Rules as he was now an adult.

 6. The respondent also considered whether the appellant should be  granted
    leave to enter under Article 8 ECHR outside the  Rules.   She  was  not
    satisfied that it was  disproportionate  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    continue to live apart from the sponsor and his other sister, as he had
    done for most of his life.

 7. The respondent refused the appellant's application for entry  clearance
    for settlement and the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 8. The First-tier Judge heard oral evidence from  the  sponsor,  who  knew
    very little about the appellant's life in Democratic  Republic  of  the
    Congo, and in particular, about his schooling there.  Until her  death,
    the grandmother decided which schools  the  appellant  and  his  sister
    would attend.  Thereafter, the appellant undertook the teaching  course
    already mentioned.

 9. The sponsor said that she  had  not  made  the  application  for  entry
    clearance promptly after the appellant's grandmother died  because  she
    did not have  a  good  job  and  could  not  afford  the  cost  of  the
    application, but when pressed, she gave details of her 'good job' which
    dated back to four years before the grandmother's death.

10. The First-tier Judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing, applying  TD  (paragraph
    297(i)(e): 'sole responsibility') Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.  The First-
    tier Judge found as a fact that the sponsor did not  have  or  exercise
    continuing control  and  direction  over  the  appellant's  upbringing,
    including making all the important decisions in his life.

11. The sponsor had sent money and had visited in 2014 and 2017  (the  year
    the grandmother died).   The appellant and his sister  were  living  in
    settled accommodation with the sponsor's friend and had been  doing  so
    since  their  grandmother  died.   The  sponsor  could   continue   her
    relationship with him by electronic means and visits.

12. The First-tier Judge was also not satisfied that serious and compelling
    family or other considerations had been shown which made  exclusion  of
    this appellant undesirable.

13. The primary findings of the First-tier Judge begin at [19].   At  [22]-
    [24], the Judge summarised his findings and at  [23]  he  proceeded  to
    consider the section 55 of the appellant, as though the appellant  were
    a child and living in the United Kingdom:

         "23. The appellant's best interests are  a  primary  consideration.
             It would usually be in the child's best interests to  be  with
             the biological parent who can be located.  In the  appellant's
             case he has not lived with the sponsor his mother  since  2004
             when he was 3 years of age.  He has not lived with the sponsor
             for around fourteen years.  He has not lived outside the  DRC.
             He has grown up there.  His formative  adolescent  years  have
             been spent in the DRC.   He  has  been  educated  there.   His
             experience is of society and culture in the DRC.   His  sister
             ...  is  with  him  in  the  DRC.   He  will  have  a   strong
             relationship with her by virtue of  their  proximity  as  they
             have grown up.  I take into account that the accommodation and
             care provided by [the family friend] is said to  be  temporary
             but that accommodation and care has been provided since around
             12 July 2017.  It seems to be settled accommodation.   In  all
             the circumstances I am satisfied that it is in the appellant's
             best interests to remain in the DRC with  his  sister  in  the
             country of his birth and  upbringing.   He  can  continue  the
             relationship with the sponsor in the way it has been conducted
             throughout most of his life time by electronic  means  and  by
             visits.  There is nothing to suggest  that  the  sponsor  will
             cease to provide financial assistance and so  the  appellant's
             financial circumstances will be unaffected.

         24.  Having  come  to  that  finding  about  the  appellant's  best
             interests I am also not satisfied that there are  serious  and
             compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion
             of the appellant undesirable."

14. The First-tier Judge dismissed  the  appeal  under  paragraph  297  and
    outside the Rules.  The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

15. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Judge  Simpson  on  the
    basis that the First-tier Judge had  arguably  erred  in  his  decision
    under Article 8 ECHR, within  and  outwith  the  Rules,  in  particular
    regarding the weight given to a lack of evidence that the appellant can
    speak English, or to the positive evidence that he could be  maintained
    and accommodated adequately.  The appellant asserted that following his
    grandmother's death in 2017, his mother  had  sole  responsibility  for
    him.

16. First-tier  Judge  Simpson  also  noted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
    challenged the First-tier Tribunal's recital of the sponsor's evidence.
     There is no note produced from either Counsel or solicitor of the oral
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, the solicitor not having  been
    present until the very end of  the  hearing  and  Counsel  when  asked,
    having apparently referred the solicitor to the  Birmingham  First-tier
    Tribunal's own presumed recording of the evidence  which  he  considers
    the Tribunal would have retained, but of which no transcript  has  been
    sought.



Rule 24 Reply

17. There was no Rule 24 Reply to the grant of permission.



18. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

19. For the respondent, Mr Avery argued  that  the  Judge's  findings  were
    sustainable.   Following  the  grandmother's  death,  alternative  care
    arrangements were in place for the appellant and his  sister,  and  the
    First-tier Judge recorded  that  the  sponsor  had  only  very  sketchy
    knowledge of the children's schooling and their daily lives.  At  best,
    her relationship with these children was 'very hands off'.   There  was
    still no application for the other sister to join  her  mother  in  the
    United Kingdom.



20. The sponsor's evidence to the First-tier Tribunal had been that she had
    waited to make her application for entry clearance  for  the  appellant
    until a year after his grandmother's death because of the difficulty of
    affording the fee for the application and the travel  arrangements  but
    that was not supported by her evidence to the First-tier Tribunal.


21. Mr Ali argued that paragraph 297(i)(e) or (f) were met and  that  entry
    clearance should have been granted on human rights grounds.



Analysis

22. Paragraph 297 is not set out in full in  the  judgment:   the  material
    parts thereof are as follows.

    "297.    The requirements to be met  by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             ... present and settled or being admitted  for  settlement  in
             the United Kingdom are that he:

               1) Is seeking leave to accompany or join a parent ... in  one
                  of the following circumstances: ...

             (e)  one parent is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
                  or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and
                  has had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or



             (f)  one parent or a relative is present and  settled  in  the
                  United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion  for
                  settlement and there are serious and compelling family  or
                  other considerations which make  exclusion  of  the  child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been  made  for
                  the child's care."

23. On the evidence before the First-tier Judge, at the  date  of  decision
    this appellant was  no  longer  a  child  and  paragraph  297  was  not
    applicable to him.  Even if it had been, I am  satisfied  that  it  was
    open to the First-tier Judge to find on the evidence that  the  sponsor
    did not have sole responsibility for his upbringing and that there were
    no  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  making
    exclusion of this child undesirable.

24. There is a slightly confused summary of the legal position at [40]:

         "40. I have balanced the weight  of  the  public  interest  in  the
         maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  very   carefully
         against the appellant's Article 8 family and  private  life  claim.
         The public interest has considerable weight for the reasons I  have
         identified.  Balancing the factors which add weight to and subtract
         weight from the appellant's claim I am not satisfied that his claim
         can be said to amount to the very compelling or  exceptional  claim
         required.  On the basis of the facts I have found  the  appellant's
         claim does not outweigh the public interest in the  maintenance  of
         effective immigration controls.  I  do  not  find  any  exceptional
         factor.   The  respondent's   decision   does   not   represent   a
         disproportionate interference with the appellant's right to respect
         for his family and private life.  The respondent has justified  the
         decision."

25. I apprehend that the last three sentences relate to Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  The appellant's  family  life  with  his  mother  has  been
    conducted at a distance for 15 or 16 of his 19  years.   He  is  now  a
    student teacher in Democratic Republic of the  Congo  and  has  settled
    accommodation there with his younger sister.  The First-tier Judge  did
    not err in concluding that there were no exceptional circumstances  for
    which entry clearance should be granted on human rights grounds outside
    the Rules.

26. The suggestion in the grounds of appeal that there is an error  in  the
    record of  the  sponsor's  evidence  is  unsupported  by  any  reliable
    evidence and I give it  no  weight.   The  First-tier  Judge  correctly
    placed only minimal negative weight on the lack of  evidence  that  the
    appellant could speak English, and  neutral  weight  on  the  sponsor's
    ability now to maintain and accommodate him.

27. These grounds of appeal do not identify any arguable material error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Judge.

28. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    upheld.

DECISION

29. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law.


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     14 November 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
