
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/25068/2018 (P)

                                                          HU /25069/2018 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 May 2021                     |On 3 June 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                TEJMAN LIMBU

                                AKALMAN LIMBU

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation
For the appellant:     Everest Law Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer

          Background

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal to the appellants by Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin,  sitting
          as a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, on 29 January 2020  against
          the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sweet,  dismissing
          this joint entry clearance human rights appeal. The  decision  was
          promulgated on 10 September 2019 following  a  hearing  at  Hatton
          Cross on 29 August 2019.

       2. The appellants are brothers and  Nepalese  nationals  born  on  18
          April 1979 and 3 June 1985. They seek to join their former  Gurkha
          father, the sponsor, as dependent  relatives.  Their  applications
          were refused on 8 November 2018 because  the  respondent  was  not
          satisfied that the requirements of Annex K or EC-DR of Appendix FM
          of the  Immigration  Rules  had  been  met.  The  respondent  also
          concluded that there was no article 8 breach because  the  reasons
          for their refusal outweighed the considerations of the  historical
          injustice set out in relevant case law.

       3. The appeal was heard by Judge Sweet who heard  evidence  from  the
          sponsor and  his  wife  and  submissions  from  both  parties.  He
          concluded  that  the  reasons  for   refusal   did   not   warrant
          overturning, that the requirements of Annex K could not be met due
          to the ages of the appellants,  that  they  were  not  emotionally
          dependent on the sponsor, that they had family in Nepal,  were  in
          good health and could find work there. He found that there was  no
          family life beyond normal emotional ties and that  the  appellants
          had been living an independent life since their parents  had  come
          to the UK in December 2018. Accordingly, he dismissed the  appeal.



       4. The appellants sought permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
          judge had incorrectly applied the family life threshold in that he
          had failed to  factor  in  the  historic  injustice  element  when
          assessing the  matter.  It  is  further  argued  that  matters  of
          proportionality were wrongly used  to  support  the  finding  that
          family life did not exist. Permission was granted  by  the  First-
          tier Tribunal.

          Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

       5. The matter was due to be listed for a hearing on 1 April 2020  but
          due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take precautions  against
          its spread, this did not happen and  the  hearing  was  adjourned.
          Directions were sent to the parties on 17  July  2020.  They  were
          asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt with  on
          the papers and to make any further submissions on the error of law
          issue within certain time limits.

       6. The Tribunal has received written submissions from the  respondent
          but no submissions have been received on behalf of the appellants.
          Their representatives have simply  sent  numerous  emails  to  the
          Tribunal asking for the appeal to be  re-listed.  I  now  consider
          whether it is appropriate to determine the matter on the papers.

       7. In doing so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
          Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v  The
          Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61,  and  the  Senior  President's  Pilot
          Practice  Direction  (PPD).  I  have  regard  to  the   overriding
          objective which is defined in rule 2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
          (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper Tribunal
          to deal with  cases  fairly  and  justly".  To  this  end  I  have
          considered that dealing with a case fairly  and  justly  includes:
          dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to  the  importance
          of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;   avoiding
          unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in the  proceedings;
          ensuring, so far as practicable, that  the  parties  are  able  to
          participate fully in the proceedings; using any special  expertise
          of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so  far  as
          compatible with proper consideration of the issues (Rule  2(2)  UT
          rules).

       8. I have had careful regard to all the  evidence  before  me  before
          deciding how to proceed. I take the view that a  full  account  of
          the facts are set out in those papers, that the arguments for  and
          against the appellant have been clearly set out and that the issue
          to be decided is straightforward and narrow. There are no  matters
          arising from the papers which would require clarification  and  so
          an oral hearing would not be  needed  for  that  purpose.  I  have
          regard to the importance of  the  matter  to  the  appellants  and
          consider that a speedy determination of this matter  is  in  their
          best interests. I am satisfied that I am able to fairly and justly
          deal with this matter on the papers before me and I now proceed to
          do so.

          Submissions

       9. By way of her submissions of 6 January 2021, the  respondent  does
          not oppose the appellants' grounds for permission and invites  the
          Tribunal to determine the appeals with a fresh continuance hearing
          to consider whether there is family life  between  the  appellants
          and their parents.

      10. The appellants have not submitted any representations in  response
          to the Upper Tribunal's directions. Their  representatives  simply
          repeat the request for the matter to be relisted for an  error  of
          law hearing after the last adjournment.

          Discussion and conclusions

      11. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission and
          the respondent's concession as to the appellants'  grounds.  I  am
          satisfied that for the following reasons the judge's determination
          contains errors of law and that his decision in  that  respect  is
          unsustainable.

      12. Although Judge Sweet self directed as to  the  historic  injustice
          factor (at paragraph 25), his  assessment  and  reasoning  in  his
          brief concluding paragraph (at 26) omitted  any  mention  of  that
          issue and nothing in his conclusions points to consideration of it
          when assessing family life. The grounds are right to complain that
          the judge has dealt with the issue of family life  solely  on  the
          basis of the Kugathas  principles  and  as  though  this  were  an
          ordinary immigration case. Further, the reasoning  appears  to  go
          little further than an acceptance of the respondent's grounds  for
          refusal and without any independent consideration of the evidence.
          The misapplication of  the  relevant  threshold,  the  absence  of
          adequate reasoning and the failure to factor in arguments made for
          the appellants all lead me to conclude that the  judge's  decision
          is unsustainable. No findings are preserved and the  matter  shall
          be decided afresh by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

          Decision

      13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside  on  human
          rights grounds. It shall be re-made by a judge of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal other than Judge Sweet.

          Anonymity

      14. No request for an anonymity order has been made at any time and  I
          see no reason to grant one.




          Directions

      15. The First-tier Tribunal shall issue directions in due course.




      Signed


        R. Keki?


      Upper Tribunal Judge


      Date: 24 May 2021


