
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25674/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2019                       |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                          Olasunkanmi Aina Fagbemi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Yong of Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal panel comprising Judges Woodcraft and Gillan promulgated on 17
    May 2019 dismissing the appellant's human rights claim.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Macdonald  on  14  June  2016
    observing that the grounds include the claim  that  the  panel  ignored
    relevant evidence from Dr  Victoria  Sarkissian  who  stated  that  the
    appellant was  the  sole  carer  of  her  daughter  Adetokunbo.   Judge
    Macdonald found it arguable that these points were not fully considered
    by the panel.

 3. The appellant first arrived in the UK on a visit visa in December 2005.
     She has made a number of applications to be able to remain,  including
    four EEA residence  card  applications.   After  being  served  with  a
    liability to removal on 17 August 2015 she then  applied  on  form  FLR
    (FP), the ten year parent route.  The refusal decision was  made  on  9
    November 2016.

 4. In the first instance I had to determine whether or not  there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. In preliminary observations Mr Jarvis very fairly  indicated  that  the
    respondent had taken a view on the matter of  the  error  of  law.   He
    first made it clear that the Secretary of State does not accept all the
    complaints made and indeed on my observation many of the complaints and
    much of the grounds  is  little  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Tribunal and an attempt  to  reargue  the  appeal.   Mr
    Jarvis also asserted that the panel was entitled to conclude  that  the
    appellant had not been fully transparent about her  family  background,
    even if she had referred to having siblings in her  witness  statement.
    Neither, says Mr Jarvis, was there anything wrong on the  face  of  the
    decision in the Tribunal's findings about the ex-husband, or indeed  Dr
    Stein's report on the basis that Dr Stein was doing  little  more  than
    reporting what he had been told by the appellant.

 6. However, Mr Jarvis  accepts  that  there  is  more  difficulty  in  the
    Tribunal's treatment of other medical evidence and in  particular  that
    of Dr Victoria  Sarkissian  which  is  not  addressed  at  all  in  the
    decision.  Dr Sarkissian appears to  be  the  GP  for  the  appellant's
    daughter and at  page  17  of  the  appellant's  bundle  Dr  Sarkissian
    confirms that  the  daughter  suffers  from  sickle  cell  anaemia,  an
    inherited chronic lifelong condition because of  which  she  has  three
    hospital admissions in the last  twelve  months.   She  has  also  been
    diagnosed  with  depressive  disorder  since   2016.    She   has   had
    difficulties with the anti-depressants  because  of  side  effects  and
    ceased taking the medication.  She finds that a talking therapy is more
    effective for her.  The letter concludes that the appellant is the sole
    carer for  the  daughter  at  times  of  sickle  cell  anaemia  crisis,
    providing physical and moral support.  Not only is  that  evidence  not
    considered in the decision,  but  at  paragraphs  43,  47  and  48  the
    Tribunal had this to say, "there is no  independent  confirmation  from
    outside the family of what if anything the appellant actually does for"
    her daughter.  At paragraph 47 of the decision the Tribunal also said:

         "It was reasonable  to  have  expected  some  medical  evidence  to
         support these claims but the only evidence we have is  from  Doctor
         Stein and for the reasons we have already given his  evidence  does
         not go far enough."

    It is true to say that at paragraph 48 the Tribunal panel referred to a
    substantial amount of GP records which had been produced, but stated at
    paragraph 48 of the decision "this does not  indicate  what  assistance
    the appellant was giving since the appellant  is  barely  mentioned  at
    all."  The  panel  appears  to  have  overlooked  the  letter  from  Dr
    Sarkissian which appears to be independent.  I agree with  Mr  Jarvis's
    submissions that it would have been open to the  Tribunal  to  question
    the independence or the extent  of  knowledge  of  the  GP  as  to  the
    mother's involvement, however, had  it  been  ignored  or  missed,  the
    evidence could have made a difference to the overall assessment of  the
    appellant's role in the care of her daughter.  That omission  or  error
    undermines the other findings so that it would not be  safe  to  retain
    any of the factual findings of the Tribunal.  In all the  circumstances
    I am satisfied that there was an unfortunate error in the  decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  what  was  an  otherwise   careful   and
    comprehensive assessment of the evidence.  I am not satisfied that  the
    decision as a whole can stand independently  of  that  error.   In  the
    circumstances the decision must be set aside.

 7. I canvassed with the parties whether this is a case that could be dealt
    with immediately in remaking, however  it  was  pointed  out  that  the
    daughter has had a recent relapse and her medication has  changed.   It
    is  clear  that  up-to-date  evidence  is  required.   The   Tribunal's
    directions were that the case should be ready to proceed immediately to
    a remaking, but on the particular facts  of  this  case  I  agree  that
    significant further evidence  will  be  required  than  that  which  is
    currently available.

 8. Miss Yong sought a remittal of this matter to the First-tier  Tribunal;
    Mr Jarvis took a neutral view on the  matter.   Having  considered  the
    matter carefully I find that this is  a  decision  falling  within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement making  it  appropriate  for  the
    appeal to be relisted to be decided afresh in the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The effect of the error has been to deprive the  appellant  of  a  fair
    hearing and the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which  is
    necessary for the decision in the appeal to  be  remade  is  such  that
    having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2 to deal with  cases
    fairly and justly, including the avoidance  of  delay,  I  find  it  is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to  determine
    the appeal afresh.

Decision

 9. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error of law such as to require it to be set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided  afresh  in  accordance
                    with the attached directions.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 8 July 2019


Consequential Directions

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross.

 2. The estimated length of hearing is two hours.  The appeal may be listed
    before any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  with  the  exception  of  Judges
    Woodcraft, Gillan and Macdonald.

 3. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated indexed and paginated bundle  of
    all objective  and  subjective  material  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all case authorities to  be  relied  upon.   The
    Tribunal is unlikely to accept material submitted on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing.

 4. I was informed that no interpreter will be required.



Anonymity

I have considered whether any parties require protection  of  any  anonymity
direction.   No  submissions  were  made  on  the  matter.   The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  No request for anonymity  was
made to the Upper Tribunal. In the circumstances I also  make  no  anonymity
order.





To the Respondent

Fee Award



In the light of my decision I make no fee award because the outcome  of  the
appeal remains to be decided.





                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 8 July 2019

