
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/25164/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 December 2018                 |On 18 December 2018                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               SIDALI BENNOUI
                        (ANONYMITY DIECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Cutting, RC Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Thew  promulgated  on  01/03/2018,  which   dismissed   the
Appellant's appeal against refusal of an application  for  indefinite  leave
to remain in the UK.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 16/04/1978 and is a  national  of  Algeria.  On
20/10/2016 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's  application  for
indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  10  years  continuous
lawful residence.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Thew ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  01/11/2018  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Smith gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    Although the appeal is on human rights grounds, the challenge to
    the decision relates to the appellant's EEA rights. He asserts that  he
    can demonstrate ten year's lawful residence based  on  his  EEA  rights
    deriving first from his continued status as the family member of an EEA
    national and then as a person entitled to permanent residence.


    3.     It is arguable that there is an inconsistency between on the one
    hand [11] of the decision where the Judge records the submission by the
    appellant's representative that the appellant had obtained a  right  to
    permanent residence and [14] recording the evidence that the  appellant
    's EEA national sponsor was exercising Treaty rights between  2008  and
    2013 (when the appellant was still married to her)  and  on  the  other
    [19] where the Judge records  that  the  appellant  might  be  able  to
    establish a right of permanent residence but did not  rely  on  such  a
    right.


    4.     That inconsistency arguably impacts on  the  issue  whether  the
    appellant's residence has been lawful throughout  the  period  asserted
    and in turn whether the article 8 claim should succeed."

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant,  Mr  Cutting  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
explained that the appellant applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  under
the 10 years  long  residence  route.  The  appellant  had  previously  been
granted EEA residence cards  covering  a  period  from  2004  to  2012.  The
appellant had previously been married to a French national who left  the  UK
in 2013. There had been evidence of the French national's employment in  the
UK for five years until she left in 2013.

(b) Mr Cutting told me the respondent refused  the  appellant's  application
because there is an undocumented gap  in  his  residence  between  2012  and
2014. At [16] the Judge finds that the appellant was granted  EEA  residence
cards between March 2004 and June 2012. At [17] the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant was granted leave under the  immigration  rules  between  February
2014 and August 2016. Mr Cutting told me that the Judge's findings  at  [14]
and [15] demonstrate that there is evidence of EEA residence,  but  at  [19]
the Judge shies away from finding the appellant was  entitled  to  permanent
residence under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations.

(c) Mr Cutting told me that the Judge's failure to make a finding  that  the
appellant was entitled to permanent residence is a material  error  of  law.
If the Judge had  made  that  finding  the  appellant's  appeal  would  have
succeeded. He urged me to set the decision aside.

7. For the respondent, Mr Walker took me to [8]  and  [9]  of  the  decision
where the Judge quotes correctly from  paragraph  276A  of  the  immigration
rules and from the respondent's  guidance  on  applications  for  indefinite
leave to remain. He told me that the decision makes it clear that the  Judge
was aware that she could not step into the shoes of the decision maker,  and
that the application was not  for  confirmation  of  a  right  to  permanent
residence; it was an application for indefinite leave to remain. He told  me
that the decision does not contain a material error of law and asked  me  to
dismiss this appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. At [8] and  [9]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  correctly  sets  out  the
definition of continuous  lawful  residence  contained  in  the  immigration
rules and then correctly quotes from the respondent's own guidance. Page  23
of the respondent's guidance confirms that a caseworker may include time  in
the UK as an EEA National or family member  at  their  discretion.  Evidence
would need to be provided to show when the applicant became  an  EEA  family
member and that the EEA national was exercising treaty  rights  during  that
period. Any  Residence  Cards  held  during  this  time  would  need  to  be
provided.

9. It is common ground (and the Judge correctly records at  [16])  that  the
appellant held residence cards between  15  March  2004  and  6  June  2012.
Reading [16] and [17] together, there is a gap between 6 June 2012  and  the
grant of leave to remain on 18 February 2014.

10. The appellant's argument is clearly that his residence card  establishes
lawful residence from 15 March 2004. In his witness statement the  appellant
explains that he  and  his  French  wife  separated  in  2008,  but  divorce
proceedings did not start until 2017. He says that his French wife left  the
UK in 2013.

11. In the appellant's bundle there is a letter from  HMRC  confirming  that
the appellant's French wife has left the UK. That letter is  dated  14  June
2013. The appellant's French wife's P60 for the tax year ending  April  2013
is also produced.

12. The Judge's findings of fact between [14] to [17] are  drawn  from  that
evidence. At [18] the Judge clearly focuses on  the  perceived  gap  between
June 2012 and February 2014, but then falls into error by saying that  there
is no evidence of the  continued  exercise  of  treaty  rights  by  the  EEA
national after April 2013. There is no need for such  evidence  because  the
appellant had established a permanent right  of  residence  prior  to  April
2013.

13. In simple  terms,  the  appellant's  residence  between  June  2012  and
February 2014 was lawful because  he  had  acquired  a  permanent  right  of
residence.  At  [19]  the  Judge  draws  a  false  distinction  between  the
Immigration Rules and the Immigration (EEA) Regulations,  and  then  chooses
not to grapple with the legality the appellant's presence  in  the  UK.  The
determinative question is the legality of the appellant's  presence  in  the
UK. On the facts as the Judge found them to be between [14] and [17] of  the
decision, the only conclusion that could be reached is that the  appellant's
presence in the UK was lawful for a continuous period from 15 March 2004.

14. The  appellant  can  only  appeal  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds.  After
considering s.117B of the 2002 Act at [25], the Judge  finds  at  [26]  that
the appellant's inability to meet the immigration  rules  is  a  significant
factor in the proportionality exercise. On the  facts  as  the  Judge  found
them to be, the judge should have reached the conclusion that the  appellant
met the immigration rules - as a  result  the  proportionality  exercise  is
flawed. That is a material error of law.

15. I set the decision aside. I am able to substitute my own decision.

16. For the reasons given between [9] and [13] I  find  that  the  appellant
establishes  more  than  10  years  lawful  residence  in  the  UK.  If  the
respondent had followed his own guidance the appellant's  application  would
have been successful under the immigration rules.
Article 8 ECHR.
17.  In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC  60  it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord  Reed  at
paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality  (to
be found in Razgar) and said "what has now become the established method  of
analysis can therefore continue to be followed..."

18. In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, Lord Reed (when explaining  how  a  court  or
tribunal  should  consider  whether  a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   was
compatible with Article 8) made clear that the critical issue was  generally
whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the  public  interest  in
removal, the article 8 claim was sufficiently strong to outweigh it.   There
is no suggestion of any threshold to be overcome before proportionality  can
be fully considered.

19. I have to determine the following separate questions:


    (i)    Does family life, private life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8


    (ii)   If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with


    (iii)  If so, was the interference in accordance with the law


    (iv)   If so, was the interference in pursuit of one of the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and


    (v)    If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?

20. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

21. The weight  of  reliable  evidence  indicates  that  the  appellant  has
established both family and private life. The appellant produces  a  contact
order to his children. There is clear evidence of family life. On the  facts
as I find them to be the appellant has lived in the  UK  for  more  than  14
years. His home, his employment, his ordinary  routines  and  activities  of
daily living are all focused on the UK. He establishes the  component  parts
of article 8 private life.

22. If the respondent had followed his  own  guidance,  enquiry  would  have
been  made  into  the  appellant's  status  under  the   Immigration   (EEA)
regulations, and the appellant's application would have  met  with  success.
In SF and others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT  00120  (IAC)
it was held that even in the absence of a "not in accordance with  the  law"
ground of appeal, the Tribunal  ought  to  take  the  Secretary  of  State's
guidance into account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome  in  the
instant case.  Only in that way can consistency be  obtained  between  those
cases that do, and those cases that do not, come before the Tribunal.

23. As the appellant meets the substantive requirements of  the  immigration
rules. The respondent's decision must  be  a  disproportionate  interference
with article 8 rights.

24. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  112  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that the claimant's ability to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules
is not the question to be determined by the  Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of
being a weighty, though not  determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether
such  refusal  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate   aim   of   enforcing
immigration control.

25.  I find that this appeal succeeds on article 8 ECHR grounds.


CONCLUSION

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 1 March  2018  is
tainted by a material error of law.  I set it aside.

27. I substitute my own decision.

28. The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.





Signed
         Date 10 December 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle







