
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25344/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th August 2018                    |On 12th October 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                  Stacy [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  her  human  rights
    claim was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Munonyedi  ("the
    judge")  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  24th  April  2018.   In   an
    application for permission to appeal, it was contended that  the  judge
    erred in failing to give due weight to abuse suffered by the  appellant
    in Jamaica, before she  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom,  erred  in
    finding that the appellant was not receiving specialist care for mental
    health issues and erred, overall, in failing to assess the  appellant's
    Article 8 case.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  4th
    June 2018.  On 13th August 2018, the day  before  the  hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal,  the  appellant's  solicitors  applied  to  adduce  new
    evidence, consisting of a  letter  dated  10th  August  2018  from  the
    Ashiana Network, recording that the appellant has attended  counselling
    sessions since 19th June 2018 and has been  prescribed  antidepressants
    by her GP.

Submissions on Error of Law

3.   Mr Sharma said that the judge erred  in  relation  to  whether  or  not
    there were very significant obstacles to the  appellant's  integration,
    on return to Jamaica.  Paragraphs 27 to 29 of  the  decision  contained
    the judge's reasoning in this respect.  Prior to that, at paragraph 23,
    the judge found the appellant to be a  credible  witness.   Taking  the
    oral  evidence  with  the  appellant's  witness  statement,  there  was
    sufficient before the Tribunal to require engagement with the  question
    of significant obstacles.  It was accepted that  the  judge  considered
    the evidence regarding  the  Article  3  case,  in  the  light  of  the
    appellant's ill-health.  For the purposes of paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    rules, however, paragraph 28 showed that the judge referred to positive
    factors, tending to show that the appellant would be able to  integrate
    on return but not the negative factors present in the  case,  including
    the abuse she suffered in Jamaica before arriving in the United Kingdom
    in 1999, tending to show that there were very significant obstacles.

4.   The  appellant's  witness  statement  detailed  the  ill-treatment  she
    suffered, the attempts she made on her life and the  counselling  which
    followed.  All of  this  was  relevant  to  the  significant  obstacles
    threshold but the decision did not show that  the  judge  had  properly
    assessed this  aspect.   Paragraph  28  simply  contained  the  reasons
    supporting the judge's finding that the appellant could adjust to  life
    on return to Jamaica.

5.   Ms Holmes said that the judge had done enough to show  that  there  was
    no error of law.  She considered the appellant's mental ill-health  and
    treatment, in the Article 3 context.  It was clear that she had in mind
    the treatment received by the appellant, summarised  at  paragraphs  13
    and 14 and 15.  The decision was detailed  and  the  findings  of  fact
    regarding the appellant's mental ill-health were  open  to  the  judge.
    She considered available care in Jamaica, for example at paragraphs  21
    and 22 of the decision and had regard to  the  appellant's  health  and
    wellbeing.

6.   There was  no  need  to  rehearse  the  evidence  regarding  the  abuse
    suffered by the appellant in the past in the Article 8 context, because
    the judge provided a  clear  summary  earlier  in  the  decision,  when
    assessing the Article 3 case.  Paragraph 28 of  the  decision  set  out
    positive elements showing that the appellant would be able to integrate
    but that paragraph was preceded by others in which the judge considered
    the health aspects in detail.  Earlier paragraphs, including 13, 14 and
    15, showed that the judge was aware of the consequences  of  the  abuse
    suffered by the appellant.

7.   At paragraph 44 of the decision, the judge struck the overall  balance,
    having taken into account the public interest and section 117A to D  of
    the 2002 Act.  The judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  scales
    tipped in the  respondent's  favour.   There  were  no  exceptional  or
    compassionate circumstances.

8.   Mr  Sharma  made  a  brief  response.   Paragraph  44  illustrated  the
    problem.  The judge did not properly consider the rules themselves.  At
    paragraph 28, the judge may have had the Article 3 case in mind but  if
    that paragraph were taken with paragraphs 21 and 24, it was  not  clear
    that the judge properly  considered  Article  8.   The  judge  did  not
    expressly return to obstacles to integration, taking into  account  the
    abuse suffered by the  appellant,  the  absence  of  a  proper  support
    network and the adverse memories associated with some parts of Jamaica.
     All of that fell to be considered.  Although the judge might have  set
    out some of these aspects in  considering  Article  3,  the  Article  8
    question was different.   The  judge  considered  the  availability  of
    medical care in relation to the Article 3 threshold but appeared not to
    have done so in relation to paragraph  276ADE  of  the  rules,  in  the
    Article 8 context.  The impact of the abuse suffered by  the  appellant
    was not considered.  The judgment in SL (St Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ 1894
    concerned a different argument.  The question for the Court  of  Appeal
    in that case  concerned  the  impact  of  the  Strasbourg  judgment  in
    Paposhvili and whether Article 8 might be relied upon as an alternative
    to Article 3.  The question in the present appeal was not  confined  to
    healthcare.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   As Ms Holmes submitted, the judge's  decision  is  detailed  and  shows
    that she had in mind all the evidence relied upon by the appellant.  At
    paragraph 2, the salient issue under the rules was  identified  in  the
    context of the Secretary of State's decision to refuse the human rights
    claim.   Also  clearly  identified  was  the  appellant's  reliance  on
    Articles 3 and 8 of the Human Rights Convention.  The account of  abuse
    suffered by the appellant in Jamaica, before she arrived here  aged  21
    to visit relatives, is also clearly  set  out.   The  judge  found  the
    appellant to be a truthful witness.

10.  Paragraphs 13 to 16 contain a summary of the medical evidence.  In  the
    written grounds, complaint is made that the judge  could  not  properly
    find, at paragraph 22 of the  decision,  that  the  appellant  was  not
    receiving specialist care as a letter from  her  GP  described  her  as
    having been seen by a clinical psychologist.  This complaint is without
    merit.  The judge accurately  summarised  what  appeared  in  the  GP's
    letter.  The conclusion  reached  by  the  judge  that  the  Article  3
    threshold  was  not  reached,  in  the  light  of  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's ill-health and having regard to the healthcare available in
    Jamaica, was open to her on the evidence.

11.  So far as Article 8 is concerned, having set out the relevant  rule  at
    paragraph 27, the judge concluded at paragraph 29 that  there  were  no
    significant obstacles to reintegration and  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the rules were not met.  Paragraph 28 does contain,
    as Mr Sharma properly observed, an assessment of the factors tending to
    show that the appellant  would  be  able  to  re-establish  herself  in
    Jamaica.  However, a sensible reading of the decision  shows  that  the
    judge had in mind and did not overlook the past abuse,  the  extent  of
    the appellant's ill-health and the treatment  she  has  received.   The
    absence of rehearsal of the earlier findings  does  not  amount  to  an
    error of law.  The brief conclusion on the rules at paragraph 29 builds
    upon the earlier paragraphs in the decision  and  paragraph  28  cannot
    sensibly be isolated from the rest of the reasoning.

12.  The judge went on to assess the appellant's  case  outside  the  rules,
    taking into account the factors set out in section  117B  of  the  2002
    Act.  She also took into account guidance given by the Supreme Court in
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  At paragraph 44, the  judge  briefly  restates
    her conclusion that the requirements of the rules were not met and adds
    that no exceptional or compassionate circumstances are present  in  the
    case.

13.  It is apparent that the judge found the appellant's private  life  case
    not to be a strong one.  She became an overstayer many years  ago.   In
    giving  due  weight  to  the  appellant's   particular   circumstances,
    including the abuse she suffered and the extent of her ill-health,  the
    judge concluded that the balance fell to be struck in the  respondent's
    favour.  That conclusion was open to her on the evidence.

14.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.


Signed                                  Date  08 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




ANONYMITY

The judge made no anonymity direction and there has been no application  for
anonymity in the Upper Tribunal.  I make  no  direction  or  order  on  this
occasion.


Signed                                  Date  08 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

