
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/26710/2016
                                                               HU/26711/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th September 2018                        |On 28th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                      Nandakumar [S] (first appellant)
                        Janani [N] (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are husband and wife born on 19 August 1980 and 2  April
    1986 respectively.  They applied on 5 April 2016 for leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom on family and private life grounds.  The appellant's
    wife had raised a medical condition and the couple  had  a  newly  born
    child.  The application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  on  23
    November 2016.  While it was accepted that the  appellants  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship it was not accepted that there were
    any insurmountable obstacles in  continuing  family  life  together  in
    India and as their child was not a British citizen and  had  not  lived
    continuously in the UK for  at  least  seven  years  and  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK with both parents.   The
    couple did not meet the residential requirements and there were no very
    significant  obstacles  to  integration  into  India.   There  were  no
    exceptional circumstances and suitable medical treatment was  available
    for back pain in India.  The Secretary of State took into  account  the
    welfare of the appellants' child in accordance with Section 55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.   The  respondent  noted
    that the child would be returning to India together with the appellants
    who would be able to support him and there was a functioning  education
    system in India.

2.   The judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  first  named  appellant  who
    decided not to call the second named appellant as  her  evidence  would
    only duplicate his.  The  judge  also  heard  evidence  from  a  former
    landlord and neighbour of the appellants.  Having  correctly  addressed
    himself on legal issues and having taken into account the provisions of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act the judge made the following  findings  at
    paragraphs 33 and 34 of his decision:

         "33. The first appellant Mr Nandakumar [S]  is  a  senior  software
             engineer.  He first gained entry in 2011 on a Tier 2 visa.  He
             returned to his family  in  October  2011.   He  entered  this
             country again in April 2013 I believe as a Tier 2  worker  and
             his leave ended  on  25  April  2016.   He  made  his  current
             application in  April  2016  and  his  wife's  application  is
             dependent on his.  They have one child who was one  month  old
             at the time of the application and is currently two years old.
              I have no reason to doubt that the appellant is  a  qualified
             and experienced person who has been working full-time  in  the
             United Kingdom and previously  had  leave  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom as a point-based migrant.

         34.  The  appellant's  wife  Mrs  Janani  [N]  had  medical  issues
             conceiving but this is now behind her.  The first appellant is
             fit and well and his wife apart from chronic back pain is  fit
             and well.  She receives  physiotherapy.   They  have  concerns
             about the child's development but the child is not  under  the
             care of a paediatrician.  These concerns must not therefore be
             major.  His wife takes  standard  painkillers  for  a  painful
             back.  In India they have their parents and extended family."

    The judge then turned to consider the issue of a claimed  land  dispute
    but noted that the appellant had not  made  an  asylum  claim  and  the
    grounds did not form part of the grounds of appeal and in any event the
    judge was unable to place great reliance upon such evidence as  he  had
    heard.  The determination concludes as follows:

         "39. The appellant has a BSC in mathematics and  studied  computers
             for two years.  He has worked in computers for 14 years and in
             a modern developing country such as India he has a  very  good
             skills which will enable him to obtain employment.

         40.  Parliament has passed laws  to  ensure  that  the  immigration
             rules are satisfied and it is in the public interest that they
             are followed

         41.   As  section  117(1)  makes  clear  the  issue  is   effective
             immigration control.  I have found the appellant does not meet
             the immigration rules and therefore at the relevant date there
             is a public interest served by the refusal.

         42.  I find that the appellant does not meet  the  requirements  in
             respect of private life under paragraph 276ADE  (vi)  and  the
             appellant has failed to show there would be  very  significant
             obstacles to his integration into India.  because  he  was  33
             years old when he entered the UK and will  have  retained  his
             knowledge of the customs, practices, traditions, culture, laws
             and languages in India.; He can settle in any part of India he
             wishes in order to seek work or establish himself in  business
             and the appellant has family there. Therefore it is considered
             that he has a home to return to.

         43.  I note the following recent case Treebhawon and  Others  (NIAA
             2002 Part 5A -  compelling  circumstances  test)  [2017]  UKUT
             00013 (IAC) where it said

         44.  Mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere  hurdles,  mere  upheaval
             and mere inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to
             satisfy the test of "very significant  hurdles"  in  paragraph
             276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

         45.  I find in this case that the appellant's problems on return to
             his own country would amount to no more  than  mere  hardship,
             mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere inconvenience.  As such
             he does not satisfy test set out in rule 276ADE

         46.  I take into account Section 55 of the UK Borders  Act  in  the
             best interest of their child who is  two  years  old.   It  is
             settled law that the best interests of the child in this  case
             is to be with their parents and he is young enough to adapt to
             his new life in India.  He is not a qualifying child

         47.  This is the case where a pleasant hard-working man has come to
             this country to obtain qualifications and worked lawfully.  If
             he wishes to continue to work and live in this country he must
             return to India with his family to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application.  I find it would not be  unreasonable  to  expect
             him to do this as he does  not  comply  with  the  immigration
             rules and there is no reason to go beyond the rules and  allow
             the appeal under article 8.  There are no major medical issues
             with his family and I dismiss the appeal."

3.   There was a very lengthy application for  permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds were considered by a Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  who
    noted that the main ground of application was an  allegation  that  the
    hearing was unfair.  The appellants had stated that  the  hearing  took
    place at the end of the sitting day  and  lasted  fifteen  minutes  and
    there was no Presenting Officer.  They did not  feel  able  to  present
    their case properly because of the attitude of the First-tier Judge and
    they were unable to provide the additional  documentary  evidence  they
    had brought to the hearing.  They were unable  to  explain  that  their
    previous legal representatives had failed to submit  a  bundle  and  it
    took time to have the documents returned to them.   They  claimed  that
    the judge had failed to address the question of whether their child was
    stateless.  The judge cautioned the appellants about being too  hopeful
    about the outcome  as  the  grounds  revealed  that  they  had  limited
    understanding of the assessment of  proportionality  which  required  a
    balancing exercise to be undertaken and  the  need  to  factor  in  the
    question of effective immigration controls.  Accordingly if  there  had
    been unfairness the appeals might still fail.

4.   The First-tier Judge was asked for his comments given the  claims  made
    about unfairness at the hearing in accordance with the usual  procedure
    and these have been circulated to the  parties  and  I  reproduce  them
    here:

         "I have been asked to comment regarding  the  allegation  that  the
         appellant's hearing was unfair.  I have not been asked  to  comment
         on the legal arguments they have put forward.

         The record shows that the hearing started at 3 o'clock and finished
         at 3.30.  It was unusual in the sense that the  presenting  officer
         said that he needed 30 minutes to prepare the case and  this  would
         mean it would start after 3.30 when he was due to  finish  and  had
         asked to be excused.   As  I  have  no  control  over  the  working
         practice of presenting officers' I had no alternative but to  agree
         to this.

         The appellants say and I have no reason to doubt it that they  came
         to court at 10 o'clock and waited until 3.05.  They also  say  that
         the hearing lasted 15 minutes.  The record does not show  this.   I
         have no control over the length of  the  hearing  of  the  previous
         cases.  I am not aware whether the case itself was in the  floating
         list.  I suspect it  was  as  the  presenting  officer  would  have
         prepared the case.  I seem  to  recall  that  if  you  are  in  the
         floating list you are advised  not  to  come  to  court  before  11
         o'clock.

         The appellant makes the point that no one else  was  in  the  court
         room and the evidence was not electronically  recorded.   They  are
         quite right and I do feel it is inappropriate for  me  to  be  left
         alone with appellants.  However, I am aware of staff shortages  and
         never complain about this.  I have experienced  hearings  in  court
         rooms where the evidence was electronically recorded  and  in  this
         sort of case it would be very useful to retrieve this  information.



         I reject any suggestion that I was in a haste to  end  proceedings.
         I normally sit in Manchester and only come to Taylor House  once  a
         month to attend a meeting.  As this meeting starts  at  430  and  I
         have no recording equipment to dictate my judgements when I  attend
         Taylor House.  I see no reason why I would rush to finish.

         There was no presenting officer and the Surendran guidance makes it
         clear that I should not conduct the  hearing  in  an  inquisitorial
         manner.  The reason for refusal letter stands as  the  reasons  for
         the objection  and  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  the  appellant's
         response.

         The reason for refusal letter argues that the appellant  could  not
         comply with the rules.  The grounds  of  appeal  effectively  argue
         that the appeal should be allowed outside the rules.

         I note from my determination that  I  explained  procedure  to  the
         appellant.   This  included  the  fact  that  we  did  not  have  a
         presenting  officer.   It  is  clear  from  the  grounds   of   the
         application that  the  appellants  are  very  articulate  and  well
         educated.  The grounds of the application are extremely lengthy and
         argue their points very well.  It  was  agreed  that  Mr  [S]  give
         evidence and that his wife's evidence was not necessary as it could
         have the same grounds.  There is no record that they disagreed with
         this approach.  The appellant, on my  prompting  went  through  his
         immigration history

         He was asked whether he was fit and well and whether his  wife  was
         fit and well

         He was asked if he has family in India  and  he  mentioned  a  land
         dispute and threats to his father and son

         He was asked about relocation as an alternative

         I heard evidence from Zina Mohammed and a submission was made where
         I specifically asked the appellant it there was  anything  else  he
         wanted to say and he gave me  several  reasons  why  he  thinks  he
         should stay in this country

         The appellant is a very  articulate  well-educated  person  and  my
         recollection of the hearing was that he was able to put across  his
         views without problems

         At paragraph 47 of my determination I note that I found  that  they
         were pleasant hard-working people who came to this country to work.
          Therefore, my reflection of the hearing that was  conducted  in  a
         pleasant and informal manner.

         They are  very  well  educated  and  articulate  and  I  reject  my
         suggestion that the hearing was unfair.  At no stage did  they  ask
         for an adjournment and I have no recollection that they  asked  for
         documents to be produced and I refused.  For  the  record  I  can't
         remember the last time I refused to admit documents to a hearing.

         There is some suggestion in the application that the documents  had
         previously been submitted.

         I have no control over the presenting officer's failure  to  attend
         the hearing and reject any suggestion that  this  prejudiced  their
         case.  On the contrary in my experience the absence of a presenting
         officer to put in alternative  points  increases  their  chance  of
         succeeding

         I have conducted many hearings without a presenting officer  and  I
         feel I gave the appellant every opportunity to present their  case.
         I am sorry that they felt the experience  of  attending  court  was
         prejudicial to them.

         I felt I helped them present their  case  by  asking  a  series  of
         questions which elicited the information required and gave them  an
         opportunity to  add  further  comments.   I  do  not  restrict  the
         evidence they presented or the length of their hearing.

         I did not refuse to hear their witness who can only  offer  hearsay
         testimony regarding the land dispute."

5.   The appellants confirmed at the hearing before  me  that  they  already
    had been supplied with the comments of  the  First-tier  Judge  and  Mr
    Tarlow was given the opportunity to see them.

6.   The appellant explained that  he  had  previously  had  solicitors  and
    learnt that a bundle needed to be lodged with the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and this bundle had reached the judge but he claimed he had been  given
    no opportunity to provide documents which he had brought with him.   He
    claimed it was common knowledge that a child would be stateless if  the
    birth was not registered and there were difficulties about getting  the
    child registered  in  the  light  of  technical  difficulties  such  as
    presenting passports.

7.   Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the  grounds  did  no  more  than  express
    disagreement.  The judge had covered the issues raised in paragraphs 33
    and 34 of his decision.  There was no evidence that the stateless issue
    had been raised.  The judge had dealt with all matters with  which  had
    been seized.  The decision read as a whole was not flawed in any way or
    unfair as claimed.  The material that it  was  claimed  the  judge  had
    refused to consider was not contentious in any  event.   The  appellant
    submitted that he had worked hard and had built  up  a  position  in  a
    leadership team and  he  referred  me  to  a  recent  testimonial.   He
    submitted that all the work that he had undertaken would be in vain  if
    he were to be returned to India at present.  The First-tier  Judge  had
    adopted too narrow a spectrum when considering the issue of his  wife's
    back problem.  She was at high risk of  a  permanent  disk  slip.   The
    treatment she had had in India had been no good in contrast to the good
    care his wife had had in the UK.

8.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me and  the  very  lengthy
    grounds of appeal that have been filed in this case.  I appreciate that
    the appellants had plainly had a difficult day  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and had a long wait before the hearing commenced and I am sure
    it was scant consolation that their case was  heard  first  before  me.
    They had done their best to get the bundle before the  judge  and  they
    were concerned about the absence of a Presenting Officer.

9.   I do not feel that the appellants were prejudiced by the absence  of  a
    Presenting Officer. When considering the case the judge applied  as  he
    says the Surendran guidance which  is  set  out  in  an  annex  to  MNM
    (Surendran guidelines for Adjudicators) Kenya *  [2000]  UKIAT  00005).
    Further, the absence of a Presenting Officer is not  ordinarily  likely
    to  increase  an  appellant's  difficulties  as  the  First-tier  Judge
    observes.  In my view the judge gave a full and satisfactory account of
    the hearing and I have no reason to doubt what the judge  said.   I  do
    not find any  evidence  of  unfairness  whatever.   I  agree  with  his
    assessment of the appellants being pleasant and hardworking people  who
    were well-educated and very articulate.  As the  judge  points  out  no
    adjournment was requested and I accept that the  judge  was  not  asked
    about documents and was not in the habit of refusing to admit documents
    at a hearing.  As Mr Tarlow submits the documents do not appear  to  be
    contentious in any event. The appellants were given  every  opportunity
    to  state  their  case.   The  appellants  argue  that  the  issue   of
    statelessness was raised.  No material was lodged  to  support  such  a
    claim.  I am satisfied that the First-tier Judge  dealt  with  all  the
    salient points raised and that the hearing was perfectly fair.

10.  I would comment that the appellant in making his  case  before  me  was
    understandably emotional about matters and I have the greatest sympathy
    for the family but I do not find that the hearing before the First-tier
    Judge was in any way unfair.  I  agree  with  the  comments  made  when
    permission was granted about the eventual outcome, even  if  unfairness
    was established.  In my view no such unfairness arose.

11.  For the reasons I have  given  these  appeals  are  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge shall stand.

Anonymity Order

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed   Date: 26 September 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
