
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26227/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                           MRS Velma Sharon Whyte
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ECO - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie, counsel instructed by Migrant Law
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national of Jamaica, date of birth  27  February  1963,
    appealed against the ECO's decision, dated 25 October 2016,  to  refuse
    entry clearance with reference to paragraph EC-P.1.1. of  Appendix  FM.
    The appeal by  way  of  an  Article  8  ECHR  human  rights  claim  was
    considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg  who  on  12  October  2016
    dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal  was  given  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 13 November 2017 and the Respondent  made  a
    Rule 24 response on 21 December 2017.

2.   The grounds of appeal asserted that amongst other things the Judge  had
    failed to have regard  to  supporting  evidence  contained  within  the
    Appellant's  bundle  (AB62-68).   Other   grounds   were   raised   and
    essentially the gravamen  of  the  complaint  is  that  the  Judge  was
    essentially  requiring  photographic  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsors being together to  demonstrate  that  it  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship.  It is clear that under  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM paragraph E-ECP.2.6. that the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor
    must be in a genuine and subsisting relationship or as it is  otherwise
    sometimes expressed have the necessary intention to remain together  as
    husband and wife and intend to live  together  permanently  in  the  UK
    (paragraph E-ECP.2.10. of Appendix FM).

3.   Ms Dirie who did not appear before the Judge  properly  indicated  that
    the point relating to supporting letters and the contents of tab 62  to
    68 were addressed by the Judge; essentially in paragraphs 12 to  13  of
    the decision.  It is also clear that the Judge was given an explanation
    by the Sponsor as to his abilities  to  take  photographs  or  lack  of
    interest in taking photographs and his  claim  as  to  why  there  were
    limited use of photographic evidence obtained by use for example on his
    telephone.  The Judge noted those matters and ultimately concluded with
    reference to the wedding on the same evidence was before me today:-

         "I find that whilst there photographs of the  couple's  wedding  in
         Jamaica, there are no  photographs  in  the  two  years  that  they
         claimed they knew each other and were in a relationship  together."



    The Judge considered the evidence of the Appellant's written  statement
    including her account of their relationship and concluded:-

         "I find that the Sponsor gave no  credible  explanation  in  cross-
         examination as to why there are no photographs of the couple  going
         to various social events or any evidence from friends  about  their
         relationship."

     In addition in relation to evidence  being  considered  from  Ms  Tanya
    Osborn, a friend of the Appellant, the Judge said:-

         "However, I find that she (Tanya Osborne) was unable to produce any
         photographs of social events with the couple when the Appellant was
         in the United Kingdom."

4.   It is clear that evidence of continuing devotion as might be  expressed
    by the parties is an aspect of the evidence that may be  sufficient  to
    establish the necessary intention.  It is also clear when the  evidence
    was that they had known each other from about 2013 and had got together
    later than that, the Judge was  entitled  to  ask  whether  there  were
    photographs which might evidence that relationship, their affection and
    so  forth.   Plainly  the  Judge  could  not  make  the  existence   of
    photographs determinative ultimately of the issue of whether there  was
    a genuine relationship  and  the  parties  intended  to  live  together
    permanently.  The Judge at paragraph 13  makes  reference  to  evidence
    concerning the Appellant's activities  involved  in  church  activities
    including fund raising and noted that there were no photographs of  her
    undertaking any of those activities.

5.   Ms Dirie says that the Judge was effectively demanding  photographs  at
    every single opportunity of every event  involving  the  Appellant  and
    requiring evidence to establish the relationship.  I disagree with  the
    level at which she puts this matter.  It seemed to me  that  the  Judge
    was  using  the  absence  of  photographs  as  an  indicator,  but  not
    determinative, of the relationship.  The Judge took the  view  that  it
    was not a genuine relationship and that that was a view of one  of  the
    issues with which the Judge was entitled to make.  I do no  regard  the
    Judge's conclusions  looking  at  the  evidence  overall,  reading  the
    decision as a whole as demonstrated  that  the  Judge  was  not  making
    photographs a requirement: Rather she was assessing the totality of the
    evidence.  I might well have  reached  a  different  decision  on  this
    evidence but that is not my role now.  It is the question of whether or
    not the Judge made a material error of law not  whether  I  would  have
    reached a different decision.

6.   The Judge has fairly comprehensively  addressed  in  the  decision  the
    evidence that was advanced about the genuineness  of  the  relationship
    and,  it  follows  from  that,  their  intentions  to  remain  together
    permanently.  The Judge concluded that that case had not been made  out
    on  the  evidence  before  her.   Accordingly  that  finding   is   not
    demonstrably showing in  the  error  of  law  nor  is  it  perverse  or
    irrational.

7.   For these reasons therefore I conclude that  this  is  not  a  decision
    where it is appropriate for me to interfere with the  Judge's  findings
    in this matter.  It is unfortunate I am sure so far as the Appellant is
    concerned that she is not being reunited with her partner but that is a
    matter for further consideration and advice on the evidence that can be
    produced.  A further application could be made with better evidence  at
    a later date.  That is a matter for others to deal  with  and  for  the
    Appellant and Sponsor to be advised upon.

8.   For these reasons therefore I conclude the Original  Tribunal  made  no
    arguable error of law.

DECISION
The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY
No anonymity order was made nor is one required or appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 20 March2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

If a fee was paid the appeal has failed and in the circumstances so  too  it
is not appropriate for any fee award to be made.

Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
