
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26249/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2018                         |On 15th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 Kedien [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mgbeike, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 19th November 1991.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history.   She  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 15th December 2004 and thereafter applied for and was
    granted leave to remain as a dependent child.  That leave was  extended
    until 30th June 2009 and an application for further leave  was  refused
    in August 2009.  In October 2011 the Appellant was served  with  notice
    as an overstayer.  On [~] 2011 the Appellant's  son,  [KM],  was  born.
    The Appellant applied on 15th November 2012 for leave to  remain  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  That application
    was refused on 28th March 2013 and a subsequent application was made on
    12th September 2016.  That application was refused by Notice of Refusal
    dated 8th November 2016.  It is proceedings arising out of that  Notice
    of Refusal that come before me.  However,  based  on  that  immigration
    history it would appear that the Appellant has  been  in  this  country
    without leave to remain since 30th June 2009.

 2. Following the refusal of the Secretary of State to grant the  Appellant
    leave to remain on 8th December 2016 the Appellant  lodged  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  That appeal came  before  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Cohen sitting at Taylor House on 24th September
    2018.  The Appellant failed to appear.  Despite  that  the  Appellant's
    appeal was successful and  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 5th October 2018.

 3. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    contending that there were material errors of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge on 16th October 2018.

 4. On 24th October 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge Ford noted that it was arguable that the Tribunal had
    erred in:-

      a) failing to give adequate reasons for finding that the decision  was
         disproportionate; and

      b) failing to consider Sections 117A  and  B  of  the  NIAA  2002  (as
         amended) in the proportionality exercise.

    The judge found that the remaining grounds were unarguable.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  now  by  her  Legal
    Representative, Mr Mgbeike.  The Secretary of State appears by his Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Tufan.  I note that this is an appeal  by
    the Secretary of State, but for the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process Miss [F] is referred to herein  as  "the  Appellant"
    and the Secretary of State as "the Respondent".

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Tufan takes me to the decision of Judge Cohen and submits  that  the
    findings therein are brief in the extreme and points out to me that the
    judge makes in his decision three findings which are  negative  to  the
    Appellant at paragraphs 12, 13 and 14, in that  firstly,  he  concludes
    that the Appellant cannot succeed under  the  parent  route;  secondly,
    that the Appellant, having not put forward  any  details  of  having  a
    partner in the UK, the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the  partner
    route; and thirdly, that  the  Appellant's  appeal  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE is bound to fail.

 7. The judge makes some findings he acknowledges at paragraph 16  in  what
    effectively leads to a conclusion that  the  Appellant  succeeds  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  However, he stipulates that the judge has
    failed to give reasons and in failing to give reasons  that  the  judge
    has materially erred.  He asked me to  find  that  there  are  material
    errors of law and to remit the matter back to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.

 8. In response Mr Mgbeike states that the judge has at paragraph 18 looked
    at the case properly and has come to conclusions and has made  findings
    that lead to the judge's decision being the correct  one.   He  submits
    that when the Appellant came to this country she was aged  14  and  was
    dependent upon her mother and that she is now aged 27  and  lives  here
    with her child, as does her sister, grandfather and  all  other  family
    members.  He further points out that the Appellant's child is  7  years
    old and has lived here all her life.   He  asked  me  to  maintain  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. This is a judge who had to make a decision on appeal  by  an  Appellant
    who failed to attend before the First-tier Judge.  What the  judge  has
    done is to set out  from  paragraphs  9  to  17  his  analysis  of  the
    evidence.  However, the only finding that he has made is to be found at
    paragraph 16 where he has acknowledged that the Appellant  lives  in  a
    family unit with her son and that removal would cause interference with
    her right to family and private life.  The judge goes on  at  paragraph
    18 to draw conclusions and it is important to consider that  paragraph.
    All the judge states is:-

         "Having regard  to  my  findings  above,  I  find  the  Appellant's
         circumstances are sufficiently serious that the Appellant's case is
         amongst the small  proportion  of  cases  that  the  Supreme  Court
         anticipated would be allowed under Article 8 in Agyarko."


12. I am satisfied that this is an insufficient conclusion.  The judge  has
    effectively made no findings.   He  has  taken  no  evidence  from  the
    Appellant nor considered witness statements.  He has failed to give any
    consideration to the submissions made by the Secretary of State and  he
    has failed to give any consideration whatsoever to or to  even  mention
    the requirements of paragraph Section 117B of the 2002  Act.   To  that
    extent there are material errors of law and the decision is set  aside.



13. Mr Mgbeike has made submissions orally on behalf of the Appellant  with
    regard to her family and private life in the UK.  As  Mr  Tufan  points
    out, this is not a case where  having  made  an  error  of  law  it  is
    appropriate that I should go on and  remake  it  because  there  is  no
    evidence before the Tribunal, and whilst  it  might  be  open  for  the
    Appellant's Legal Representative to make an application under paragraph
    15(2)(a) of the Upper Tribunal Procedural Rules, he indicates  that  he
    would oppose this because there is no opportunity for the Secretary  of
    State to consider such evidence.  That is a fair comment.  This  is  an
    Appellant who has knowingly, persistently overstayed.  That may well be
    a relevant  factor  in  any  proportionality  analysis.   Equally,  the
    extensive family and private life that she would appear to have as  set
    out by Mr Mgbeike in his submissions are also factors that need  to  be
    taken into account by any judge when balancing the issues in  order  to
    come to a reasoned decision.  In such circumstances, all these  factors
    should be considered and  the  matter  is  best  addressed  by  way  of
    remittal for complete rehearing with none of the findings  of  fact  to
    stand before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision and Directions

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law
    and is set aside.  The following directions will apply:-

      1) On finding that there are material errors of law in the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal is set aside and the appeal is remitted to the  First-tier
         Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be heard on the first available
         date 28 days hence with an ELH of two hours.

      2) That the appeal is to be heard before any Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Cohen.

      3) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

      4) That there be leave to both parties to file and serve a  bundle  of
         such subjective and/or objective evidence upon which they  seek  to
         rely by 23rd January 2019.

      5) That it is  not  envisaged  that  the  Appellant  will  require  an
         interpreter or that an interpreter will be required for  any  other
         person giving evidence.  If however an interpreter is required,  it
         is the responsibility of the Appellant's instructing solicitors  to
         notify  the  Tribunal  within  seven  days  of  receipt  of   these
         directions giving details of the language requirements.

      6) The Appellant is to personally attend the restored appeal.

      7) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           4th January 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           4th January 2019
