
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/26128/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th January 2019                           |On 8th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Mohammed [H]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maih, (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cary, promulgated on 31st January 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 5th January 2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born  on  2nd
    March 1986.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 15th November 2016, rejecting his  application
    to remain here on the basis of his family and private life rights.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is married to Mrs [SH],
    a British citizen who is settled in the UK, and has a son by  her,  who
    was born to them on 16th April 2016, who is  also  a  British  citizen.
    They cannot be expected to return back to Bangladesh  with  him.   This
    would violate his Article 8 rights.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant could not establish a  insurmountable
    obstacle to his wife and himself continuing their life together outside
    the United Kingdom.  There were  now  two  children  of  the  marriage.
    However, the children were young.  And there would  be  no  significant
    degree of hardship which  would  amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles,
    although it was accepted that there would be significant hardship at  a
    lower level.  (See paragraph 25).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

The Grant of Permission

 6. The grant of permission states that the Appellant was the father of two
    British citizen children.  Even if it was accepted that  the  Appellant
    could not rely on EX(1A), it was arguable that the approach that he had
    taken to the "reasonableness" of the family life continuing abroad  was
    flawed, especially given that the Respondent's own policy made it clear
    that a British citizen child could not be expected  to  leave  the  UK,
    which was endorsed in the decision of SF.

Error of Law

 7. At the hearing before me on 8th January 2018, Mr  Bates,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, conceded that there was an
    error of law in the judge's determination, particularly in the light of
    the recent Supreme Court  Judgment  in  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53
    because on the question of "undue harshness" only the best interests of
    the child remains a relevant consideration, and the public interest  in
    favour of removal is not a factor to be considered.  For his  part,  Mr
    Maih referred to the case of SR  (subsisting  parental  relationship  -
    s.117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334, where the Upper Tribunal  stated
    that, it was not the case that a qualifying child had to leave the  UK,
    because what Section 117B(6) does is not  require  a  consideration  of
    whether the Appellant's child will in fact or practice  leave  the  UK,
    but only poses a straightforward question: would it be  reasonable  'to
    expect' the child to leave the UK?  In this case this was  plainly  so.
    Moreover, given that the essential findings of the fact in relation  to
    the family life of the Appellant with his wife and  two  children  have
    not been challenged by the Secretary of State, Mr Bates conceded  that,
    I should make a finding of an error of law and allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

Given the concession made by Mr Bates before me, the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of  law  such  that
it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of the  original  judge.
I remake the decision as follows.  I am allowing this appeal  on  the  basis
of the findings of the original judge, the  evidence  before  him,  and  the
submissions I have heard today.  In particular, I note Mr  Bates  concession
that this appeal should be allowed and I so decide.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th January 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th January 2019


