

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/26518/2016

                                                HU/26521/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 March 2018                         |  On 09 April 2018                |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                    miss Sawera Asghar - first Appellant
                    miss Ammara Asghar - second appellant
                       (anonymity directions NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Bagral, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan who appealed against  decisions
    of the Respondent refusing their applications for  entry  clearance  to
    join their father in the United Kingdom. That decision was appealed and
    following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 19 October  2017,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal A Kelly, dismissed  the  appeals.  The
    Appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Osborne in a decision dated  15  January  2018.
    His reasons for so granting were: -

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal a decision  and  reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge A Kelly who  in  a  decision  and
             reasons promulgated 19 October 2017 dismissed the  Appellants'
             appeal  against  the  Respondent's  Decision  refusing   their
             applications for entry clearance to join their father  in  the
             UK.

         2.   The grounds assert that the judge adopted an approach  to  and
             treatment of the evidence which was unfair. The judge  wrongly
             considered the guardianship  order.  The  Respondent  did  not
             challenge the reliability of the guardianship order. The judge
             found that the order cannot be relied upon. That  approach  is
             unfair as the guardianship order was  not  challenged  and  no
             concerns were raised  at  the  hearing.  The  Appellants  were
             therefore denied an opportunity to address the concerns  which
             were only raised in the Decision. The judge  relied  upon  the
             delay  between  the  grandparents'  death  and  the  date   of
             application. Neither the ECO nor the Presenting Officer raised
             this as an issue. The delay  was  not  inordinate.  The  judge
             could and should have raised this as an issue in the  hearing;
             to fail to do so was a further unfairness.

         3.   In an otherwise careful decision and reasons it is nonetheless
             arguable  that  if  the  judge  had  any  concerns  about  the
             authenticity/reliability of the guardianship order then  those
             concerns should have  been  raised  at  the  hearing  when  an
             explanation could have been provided. It is at least  arguable
             that the judge's failure to  do  so  amounts  to  an  arguably
             material error of law.

         4.   This arguably material error of law  having  been  identified,
             all the issues raised in the grounds are arguable."

 2. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 3. Ms Bagral expanded  upon  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
    emphasising that this was primarily a challenge to the fairness of  the
    procedure adopted by  the  Judge  at  the  hearing  which  renders  her
    decision unsustainable. The Appellants are  sibling  children  born  in
    1998 and 2002 and are the daughters of  their  Sponsor  father  who  is
    present and settled in the United Kingdom. Their application for  entry
    clearance was to join him following their abandonment by  their  mother
    in 2008 and residing with the Sponsor's parents, since deceased. It was
    not accepted by the ECO that the Sponsor had  sole  responsibility  for
    the  Appellants  or  that  there   were   serious   or   other   family
    considerations that made their exclusion undesirable.

 4. The nub of Ms Bagral's submissions is that  the  Judge's  approach  and
    treatment of the evidence was unfair in that the Judge took issue  with
    evidence not put  in  issue  by  the  Respondent  thereby  denying  the
    Appellants  an   opportunity   to   address   the   Judge's   concerns.
    Consequently, the Appellants have been deprived of a fair hearing.  The
    consideration of the "guardianship order" is erroneous.  The  court  in
    Pakistan awarded the Sponsor guardianship of the two  Appellants.  That
    order is within the Appellants' bundle and was submitted along with the
    application to the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO). The ECO  acknowledged
    in the decision that no challenge was made to the reliability  of  this
    document. At the hearing, while the Sponsor was asked about  the  order
    during cross-examination, the Home Office Presenting Officer (HOPO) did
    not challenge the reliability of the order either in  cross-examination
    or in his submissions. The Appellants' case therefore proceeded on  the
    basis that the order was not in issue. However, the  Judge  found  that
    the order could not be relied on at paragraph 23 of her decision noting
    several deficiencies with the evidence. Ms Bagral's submission is  that
    this is fundamentally unfair as the evidence was not challenged and the
    Judge did not raise her concerns at the hearing. The failure to  do  so
    has deprived the Appellants  of  an  opportunity  to  deal  with  those
    concerns which may have been addressed by the Sponsor given that he was
    involved in the obtaining of  the  order.  These  were  not  incidental
    matters but ones material to the Judge's  decision.  Additionally,  the
    Judge rejected the order on the  basis  that  it  is  "poorly  worded",
    "poorly  spaced"  and  contains  "ungrammatical  statements"  but  only
    identifies one such statement and fails  to  direct  herself  that  she
    should not consider the documents from a UK standpoint. The Judge  does
    not give allowance for the fact  that  this  order  is  produced  by  a
    foreign country and  there  is  no  evidence  to  support  the  Judge's
    assumption that the document could not be relied on because it  was  in
    English and not Urdu. Further the Judge has taken the  point  that  the
    order was made by the court in 2015 but not signed until the  following
    year as indicative of its unreliability but has failed to consider  the
    Sponsor's evidence that it took him a year to obtain the document.  Had
    the Judge aired her concerns at the hearing it  is  probable  that  the
    Sponsor would have been able  to  explain  the  delay  further  to  the
    Judge's  satisfaction.  Finally,  in  relation  to  this  first  ground
    (unfairness)  the  Judge  has  relied  on   the   delay   between   the
    grandparents' death and the date of application. Neither  the  ECO  nor
    HOPO raised this as an issue.  If  the  Judge  was  unclear  about  the
    reasons  for  this  delay  then  it  was  incumbent  on  her  to   seek
    clarification and to enable the  Sponsor  to  address  it.  Again,  the
    failure of the Judge to do so gives rise to unfairness.

 5. Ms Bagral, with less force, also relied on grounds two and three.  That
    at paragraph 22 of  her  decision  the  Judge's  findings  are  not  in
    accordance with the evidence and, in any  event,  the  failure  of  the
    Sponsor to obtain a copy of the witness statement the  mother  provided
    to the court and a statement confirming that she did not object to  the
    applicants coming to the United Kingdom, when  the  Sponsor's  evidence
    was that the statement was provided to the court by the mother and that
    he did not know about the mother's whereabouts,  caused  the  Judge  to
    misconstrue the evidence. She was accordingly wrong to conclude that it
    was reasonably open to the Sponsor to obtain  such  evidence.  Finally,
    the judge  has  misdirected  herself  in  law  when  stating  that  she
    recognises "that it is particularly important in entry clearance  cases
    involving children that the Immigration Rules  are  strictly  applied".
    This direction is plainly wrong and suggests that the Judge  applied  a
    restrictive approach to  her  consideration  of  the  evidence  in  the
    appeal.

 6. Mr Wilding urged me to accept that the  Judge  had  not  dismissed  the
    issue of the guardianship order "out  of  hand"  but  had  given  clear
    reasons why it was rejected. The order was before the ECO but  had  not
    been accepted. He asserted that the Appellants'  Counsel  was  treating
    the document as "determinative" which it is plainly  not.  Further  the
    Judge's conclusion at paragraph 25 of her decision is  not  unfair  and
    what Counsel for the Appellants is putting forward is no  more  than  a
    disagreement. No evidence has been brought forward today to answer  the
    question of delay, the relevant date in  the  appeal  is  the  date  of
    hearing and the Judge cannot be said to have acted unfairly. As to  the
    Judge's findings not being in accordance with  the  evidence  there  is
    here no mistake of fact. The Judge has made findings that were open  to
    be made. Finally, it was incumbent upon the Judge to  record  that  the
    appeal failed under the Immigration Rules and all that  the  Judge  has
    done is to reflect the weight  that  should  be  given  to  the  public
    interest in a case of this nature. There is, he concluded, no  material
    error of law.

 7. I reject Mr Wilding's submissions. I find that the Appellants have been
    denied an opportunity to address the concerns which were only raised in
    Judge  Kelly's  decision.  Had  the  Judge  any  concerns   about   the
    authenticity or  reliability  of  the  guardianship  order  then  those
    concerns should have been raised at the  hearing  when  an  explanation
    could have been provided by the Sponsor. Likewise, the Judge could  and
    should have raised the issue of "delay" between the grandparents' death
    and  the  date  of  application  at  the  hearing.  These  two  factors
    themselves amount to procedural unfairness  such  as  to  render  Judge
    Kelly's decision unsustainable. In those circumstances grounds two  and
    three are redundant as the decision cannot stand. The  Appellants  have
    been deprived of a fair hearing.

Decision

The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge A Kelly.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 5 April 2018.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


