
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
hu/26002/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15th March 2018                         | On 9th April 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                       entry clearance officer - amman
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 MISS C.P.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Litchfield of Counsel

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
I make an anonymity direction because the Appellant is a minor.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer Amman appeals with permission  against  the
    decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Callow)   allowing   the
    Respondent's appeal  in  respect  of  a  decision  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer refusing to grant the Respondent leave to enter.

 2. For the sake of clarity throughout this decision, I shall refer to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer as "the Respondent" and to Miss C.P.A. as  "the
    Appellant" reflecting their respective positions before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria (born 31st July 2002).  She is a
    minor.

 4. On 7th November 2017, the FtT  allowed  her  appeal,  on  human  rights
    grounds, against the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  ("the
    ECO") to refuse her entry clearance as the adopted child of her aunt Ms
    O.C.A. ("the Sponsor").  The Sponsor is  a  British  citizen  presently
    settled in the UK.

 5. The ECO was given permission to appeal against the  FtT's  decision  on
    the grounds that it had:

      i) failed to appreciate the issue  surrounding  the  legality  of  the
         adoption, which it is said, took place in Nigeria in 2003;

     ii) failed to take into account material matters; and

    iii) failed to give adequate reasons on the key issue of  whether  there
         are serious and compelling factors, such as to render the  decision
         to refuse entry disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

 6. The Appellant had applied for entry clearance as the dependent  adopted
    child  of  her  Sponsor.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the
    application on the basis that the Appellant  had  not  shown  that  her
    Sponsor had sole responsibility for  her  care,  nor  that  there  were
    serious   or   compelling   family   circumstances   making   exclusion
    undesirable.

 7. The ECO also considered whether the adoption could amount to a de facto
    adoption but noted  that  the  requirement  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    relating to de facto adoption had not been met.

 8. Finally, the ECO considered Article 8 ECHR, but noted that  there  were
    no exceptional circumstances presented sufficient to warrant a grant of
    leave under that provision.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 9. At the hearing before the FtT, it was conceded by  the  Appellant  that
    she could not meet the Immigration Rules and that  therefore  the  only
    issue before the judge was an Article 8 ECHR one.  In a decision, which
    spends over three pages simply repeating the Respondent's case verbatim
    [5] the judge then arrives at a heading  entitled  "Findings  of  Fact"
    [9].  However  rather  than  setting  out  any  facts  he  repeats  the
    Respondent's policy of 2011 concerning S.55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009. Thereafter he arrives at a  heading  entitled
    "The Law" under which at [14], he draws the following conclusions:

         "In addressing the issue of proportionately, I am minded  that  the
         best  interests  of  the  appellant,  a   child,   is   a   primary
         consideration involving an assessment of what her welfare and  best
         interests require.  Taking the circumstances at their highest,  the
         appellant is notionally being looked after by the sponsor's aunt in
         circumstances where, occasioned by carer's ill  health,  she  is  a
         victim of neglect and at risk, as a  vulnerable  child,  of  abuse.
         Outside term time when  she  is  a  boarder  at  school  no  stable
         arrangements exist for her care..."

    Thereafter he allowed the appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  outside  the
    Rules.

10. The Entry Clearance Officer appealed against this decision to the Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission having been granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the matter comes before me to determine whether the decision of the FtT
    discloses such error of law that it must be set aside and be remade.

Error of Law Hearing

11. Before me Miss Fijiwala appeared for the ECO and Ms Litchfield for  the
    Appellant. Miss Fijiwala's  submissions,  kept  to  the  lines  of  the
    grounds seeking permission.  She emphasised that the FtTJ had failed to
    make findings, firstly on the legality or otherwise of the adoption and
    secondly  had  made  wholly  inadequate  findings  on  the  Article   8
    proportionality issue.  She added that  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and Sponsor had not been properly assessed and this  in  turn
    meant the FtTJ had simply failed to carry out an appropriate  balancing
    exercise under Article 8.

12. She said that the judge's findings appeared  to  start  at  [14].  They
    amounted to two sentences which were conclusions rather  than  reasoned
    findings. Referring to [14] Miss  Fijiwala  said  there  is  simply  no
    evidence or findings of fact to  support  such  conclusions.   Equally,
    where the judge says "outside term time when she is a boarder at school
    no stable arrangements exist for her care", it is clear that  the  FtTJ
    failed to grapple with one of the key  questions  raised  by  the  ECO.
    This question concerns what arrangements are presently in place for the
    care of the Appellant and why is it said that those arrangements cannot
    continue? The decision is wholly inadequate in its reasoning it  should
    be set aside for legal error and remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a full rehearing and for proper findings of fact to be made.

13. Miss Litchfield defended the decision.  She referred  to  [3]  and  [4]
    wherein the  FtTJ  sets  out  the  Appellant's  case  under  a  heading
    "Background".  She  submitted  that  [3]  to  [4]  should  be  read  in
    conjunction with [8] which appears under  a  heading  "Hearing  of  the
    Appeal".  She said that [8] showed that at the hearing the Sponsor gave
    evidence.  The Sponsor was cross-examined and the  judge  records  that
    the Respondent's representative did not challenge  the  credibility  of
    the Sponsor's evidence.  She reminded me that reasons only need  to  be
    adequate; a judge does not need to set out  every  piece  of  evidence.
    She submitted therefore that this  was  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    Sponsor's evidence as set out in [3] and [4] was accepted by the  FtTJ.
    The judge had provided adequate reasons for his decision  allowing  the
    appeal.

14. Further in support of  this,  she  said  that  the  ECO  was  wrong  in
    questioning the legality of the adoption.   The  adoption  was  not  an
    inter-country adoption.  The Sponsor was a Nigerian citizen at the time
    of the adoption and the only reason why the concession  had  been  made
    concerning the Appellant's inability to meet the Immigration Rules, was
    because there was no Rule covering the particular circumstances of  the
    Appellant's case.  This factor had been pointed out to the judge at the
    hearing.  Two documents were also handed in at the FtT hearing both  of
    them from the Abia State Hospital and dated 16th December 2015 and 21st
    April 2016 respectively.  Miss Litchfield  did  acknowledge  that  this
    evidence was not referred to by the FtTJ in his decision.

15. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    reasons.

Consideration

16. I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT discloses error of law  and
    I find,  despite  Ms  Litchfield's  assertions  to  the  contrary,  the
    decision is a poorly constructed one.

17. I find that the judge has simply set out the Appellant's  case  at  [3]
    and  [4]  under  the  heading  "Background".   The  majority  of   this
    background evidence relies on the statement of the Sponsor.  The  judge
    then says at [8] under "Hearing of the Appeal" that  the  Sponsor  gave
    evidence and was cross-examined and confirmed the facts  summarised  at
    [3] and [4].  I do not accept Miss Litchfield's submission that reading
    [3] and [4] in conjunction with [8] shows that the judge has turned his
    mind adequately to the key issues before him.

18. I say this  because  on  a  reading  of  the  decision  at  [8]  it  is
    unhelpfully recorded by the FtTJ at [8] "In  his  closing  submissions,
    while not challenging the credibility of  the  Sponsor's  evidence,  Mr
    Talacchi (the HOPO) was critical of  the  lack  of  recent  documentary
    evidence addressing the current position."

19. I find that it is not  clear  at  all  which  parts  of  the  Sponsor's
    evidence the judge accepts as credible and  which  parts,  if  any,  he
    rejects. Nowhere do I see that  the  FtTJ  has  addressed  the  current
    position with reference to the evidence.

20.  As  Miss  Fijiwala  pointed  out  this  appeal  hinges  on  the   care
    arrangements in place for the  Appellant,  at  the  date  of  decision.
    There is nothing to show that the judge has addressed this point.

21. Indeed there is a conspicuous lack of evidence concerning the key issue
    which was highlighted by the ECO as to who provides the day-to-day care
    for the Appellant, and more particularly why the  current  arrangements
    are no longer suitable bearing in mind that there is no  evidence  that
    the Appellant has come to any harm.  The evidence certainly  points  to
    the Appellant attending school and so her needs appear  to  be  catered
    for then, but there is no proper analysis setting out what  happens  to
    the Appellant  during  the  school  holidays.   Neither  is  there  any
    evidence of why suitable arrangements cannot be made  for  her  holiday
    periods.  It would seem that presently she remains with  the  Sponsor's
    aunt and that a neighbour helps by looking in.  There is nothing in the
    decision to demonstrate that the judge's conclusion at  [14]  that  the
    Appellant is a "victim of neglect and at risk, as a  vulnerable  child,
    of abuse" is founded on evidence.  Again, as Miss Fijiwala pointed  out
    there is no evidence that the Appellant is neglected - the evidence  is
    that  whilst  the  present  arrangement  may  not  be   deemed   ideal,
    nevertheless the Appellant has come to no harm with it.

22. I find force in Miss Fijiwala's submission that  no  proper  Article  8
    assessment has taken place.  This has resulted in neither  party  being
    afforded a full and fair hearing.  Equally I see no reference  made  by
    the judge to the  point  raised  by  Miss  Litchfield,  concerning  the
    circumstances surrounding the adoption which it is said took  place  in
    2003.  The FtTJ was addressed on this point but has made no findings on
    it.

23. In these circumstances, there is no alternative but to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety. The decision  will
    need to be remade at a fresh hearing.  There is  nothing  that  can  be
    preserved from the original hearing.  It is right therefore  that  this
    matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  full  rehearing,
    with fresh findings of fact being made and the decision being remade by
    that Tribunal.  The hearing should be before a judge other  than  Judge
    Callow.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  13th  November  2017
is hereby set aside.  The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
that Tribunal to remake the decision (not Judge Callow).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     06 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
