

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/26388/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 9 November 2018                            |On 16 November 2018          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 SALIM AHMED

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:        Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr L Kennedy, Advocate, instructed by Paul John &
Co, Solicitors, London

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a decision by FtT Judge Farrelly,  promulgated
    on 30 May 2018.

 3. The point of the grounds of appeal is caught by the grant of permission
    and was succinctly  advanced  by  Mr  Govan,  as  follows.   The  judge
    directed himself accurately up to [20] on the essential issue:  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's wife  continuing
    her family life with the  appellant  in  Bangladesh.     Inconsistently
    with those self-directions, he then  allowed  the  appeal  not  because
    there were such obstacles, but because the appellant's wife  would  not
    choose to move to Bangladesh.

 4. Mr Kennedy's first proposition in reply was that the judge's finding at
    [29] and [34] that the appellant's wife in reality  would  not  go  and
    live with him was sufficient to justify his decision.  He conceded that
    might apply only if her decision was not "arbitrary or capricious".

 5. The further argument for the appellant was that although  the  decision
    might be somewhat muddled, and no  express  conclusion  was  stated  on
    insurmountable obstacles, there were findings adequate to  support  the
    outcome, and it was sufficiently clear,  although  only  by  inference,
    that the necessary conclusion had been reached.

 6. I reserved my decision.

 7. The first proposition  for  the  appellant  is  not  well-founded.   In
    principle, an election not to move cannot constitute an  insurmountable
    obstacle.  That requires matters such as those set out  at  [15],  [16]
    and [20] of the judge's self-directions.

 8. Those self-directions are impeccable, particularly as the judge appears
    to have been left by representatives to formulate matters for himself -
    see [13].

 9. The judge did not think that the case turned only on  the  election  of
    the appellant's wife.  He understood that more was involved.   To  that
    extent,  the  grounds  and  submissions  for  the  SSHD  are  an  over-
    simplification.

10. I have considered whether the decision from [21] to [35] can be read as
    a resolution, by inference, of whether the difficulties in the  way  of
    the appellant's wife moving  to  Bangladesh  are  insurmountable.   The
    judge does mention, more than once, all her objections.  He finds  some
    of them not very great, and others wholly understandable.  He does  not
    say whether any are insurmountable, or relate them back to the tests he
    has cited.

11. Under the heading "application of the principles",  the  judge  reminds
    himself of the high threshold at [24],  but  at  [26]  he  says  he  is
    engaged in a balancing exercise; at [28], he briefly cites  Razgar  and
    says the key issue is proportionality; and in the last paragraph, [35],
    he states his conclusion in terms of the balance of proportionality.

12. The legal landscape has changed since Razgar.  In some (not all)  cases
    there is a further exercise after assessing the case in  terms  of  the
    immigration rules; but  the  rules  are,  in  general,  compliant  with
    article 8, and they must be considered first.

13. The  judge  set  out  at  [14]  the  onus  on  the  appellant  to  show
    insurmountable obstacles.  I am unable to read into the  decision  that
    he ever  answered  that  question.   Rather,  he  by-passed  it  for  a
    generalised balancing exercise.  That was an error of  legal  approach,
    and inconsistent with his earlier self-directions.

14. While the judge did not take the wife's election  as  solely  decisive,
    his expressions suggest that the question he posed was whether that was
    an understandable choice, not whether difficulties rose  to  the  level
    required:  at [29], "I believe the reality is ... his  wife  would  not
    join him";  and at [34], "... it is ... unrealistic ...  to  think  the
    appellant's wife would go and live in Bangladesh".

15. The decision errs on a point of law, by failing to reach  a  conclusion
    on the decisive issue, whether difficulties faced  by  the  appellant's
    wife reached the level  of  insurmountable  obstacles,  as  defined  in
    paragraph EX.2 of appendix FM of the immigration rules.

16. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.  The nature of the case is such  that  it
    is appropriate under section 12 of the 2002 Act and Practice  Statement
    7.2 to remit to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

17. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Farrelly.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            9 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




