
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26513/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 February 2019                  |On 06 December 2019                  |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  Sunny [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Furner, Solicitor, Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision posted on 6 September 2018 Judge Row  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a citizen  of  Nigeria,
    against the decision made by the respondent on 16 November 2016 to make
    a deportation order.  This decision had been made  because  between  12
    August 2003 and 15 October 2015 the appellant  had  accumulated  eleven
    convictions for 38 offences.  The appellant is a foreign criminal.

2.   I need not set out my decision in detail because  both  representatives
    were in agreement with me that the  judge's  decision  is  vitiated  by
    legal error.  The principal issue the judge had to decide  was  whether
    the appellant could show he met the requirements of paragraph 399(a) of
    the Immigration Rules and s.117C(b) of the NIAA 2002 that it  would  be
    "not be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK", namely  SJ,  a
    British citizen child born 23 October 2008.  SJ is 13 years old.   SJ's
    mother is Oumie [C].  It was the appellant's evidence before the  judge
    that there would be undue hardship because the appellant was  the  only
    one in a position to care for SJ; SJ's  mother,  Oumie  [C],  lived  in
    Gambia; SJ's adult sister Sarah attends university and did not wish  to
    be involved; and the appellant's wife, Mrs K, had serious mental health
    problems.

3.   The judge did not accept that SJ's circumstances  were  as  claimed  by
    the appellant, particularly in light of inconsistencies in the evidence
    of the witnesses at the hearing.

4.   Unfortunately, when elaborating why he did not believe the  appellant's
    account of SJ's circumstances, the judge stated at paragraph 31 that it
    was "beyond belief" that the local authority social services would  not
    have been involved with the three children when the  appellant  was  in
    prison in October 2015 (see also paragraph 37).  This  was  unfortunate
    because the issue of social service involvement over  this  period  had
    not previously been an issue  and,  before  rejecting  the  appellant's
    claim as "beyond belief",  the  judge  should  have  afforded  him  the
    opportunity of substantiating it.  Had the judge done so, it would have
    come to light that none of the three agencies involved with the  family
    (Dudley Children's Service; Birmingham Children's  Trust  and  Sandwell
    Children's Trust) had records of involvement during  this  period.   It
    was not immediately obvious on the evidence what other local  authority
    social services could have been involved.  This  error  clearly  had  a
    material impact on the judge's assessment of the  appellant's  evidence
    relating to the care of SJ.

5.   There are also significant shortcomings in the judge's  proportionality
    assessment, particularly in relation  to  the  appellant's  history  of
    offending.  What the judge stated at paragraphs 41  to  42  appears  to
    attach no weight to the fact that the  appellant  had  not  re-offended
    since 2013 or been in prison since and to have not weighed  at  all  in
    the balance that the Probation Officer had stated in December 2017 that
    the appellant posed a  "very  low  risk"  of  further  offending.   The
    judge's proportionality assessment  also  makes  no  reference  to  the
    impact of the appellant's removal on Mrs K, to whom he acts as a carer.
     These and other shortcomings  in  the  judge's  decision  lead  me  to
    conclude that it should be set aside.

6.   The case will need to be remitted to the FtT because in the  nature  of
    the errors identified, none of the judge's  findings  of  fact  can  be
    preserved.

7.   Whilst the legal issue is a narrow one  -  the  issue  of  whether  the
    effect of the appellant's deportation on SJ would be unduly harsh,  the
    issues of fact are potentially wide-ranging.   It  is  the  appellant's
    case that he is the only person in a position to care for SJ if  he  is
    deported.  The respondent's position is that SJ could be cared  for  by
    his mother or otherwise by his older sister Sarah.  I do not understand
    the respondent's position to be that another option  that  would  avoid
    undue hardship would be for SJ to be taken into care.

8.   As regards SJ's mother, Oumie [C], there is conflicting evidence as  to
    whether she lives in the UK or Gambia or whether (given the  allegation
    that her partner abused SJ in 2014/2015) even if she lives in  the  UK,
    she would be a suitable carer.   As  regards  Sarah,  the  respondent's
    position is somewhat unclear as to whether she could  be  an  available
    carer.  Clearly her evidence is that she is not willing to and  if  she
    is in college education it is difficult to see that she would be  in  a
    suitable  position  to  take  on  that  role,  but   nevertheless   the
    respondent's position as stated  in  paragraph  18  is  that  SJ  would
    "either live with his mother or with whomever he lived  with  when  the
    appellant was in prison between October 2015 and May 2017".

9.   In an attempt to assist the next  judge  who  will  have  the  task  of
    resolving the relevant factual issues I direct:

    1)   That the appellant's representatives use best endeavours to obtain
         a witness statement from Mrs [C]  specifying  where  she  has  been
         living since mid-2017  and  what  are  her  current  intentions  as
         regards caring for SJ were the appellant to be deported.  (The more
         she can document as regards her living situation and travels in and
         out of the UK the better).

    2)   That the respondent  produce  a  short  statement  clarifying  who
         precisely they consider would be responsible for the care of SJ  if
         the appellant is deported and why it is considered that the care of
         such person(s) would not have an effect that was  unduly  harsh  on
         SJ.

10.  To summarise:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Row).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 28 February 2019
              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
