
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26234/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th March 2018                           |On 5th April 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE EDIS
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A. L. McGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ERROL ROCHESTER WARD
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. Quereshi, instructed by Pillai & Jones


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Mr Justice EDIS:

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
       (SSHD) against a decision by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Parker
       promulgated on 9th November 2017 (the Decision).  In  it,  the  judge
       allowed Mr. Ward's appeal against the  decision  of  the  SSHD  in  a
       letter of 4th November 2016 to deport him to Jamaica  and  to  refuse
       his human rights claim.

    2. The case concerns the proper approach to s.117C of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which regulates  the  deportation  of
       foreign criminals.  Mr. Ward is a Jamaican national who was

        a. Convicted of attempted robbery on 20th April 2005 at the age  of
           17 and  sentenced  to  a  community  order  with  a  supervision
           requirement of 12 months.

        b. Cautioned for theft on 28th December 2005, now 18.

        c. Sentenced to 7 years' imprisonment after a trial on 17th  August
           2014 for possessing a loaded handgun  with  intent  to  endanger
           life.  This is the  conviction  which  resulted  in  the  SSHD's
           decision and which is the subject matter of this appeal.

    3. The FTT Judge heard oral evidence and made detailed findings of fact.
        Mr. Ward was born on 10th August 1987 and came to  the  UK  on  18th
       December 2000 as a visitor for six months.  On 28th  August  2007  he
       was granted indefinite leave to  remain.   There  had  been  a  short
       period of overstaying before that, but by the date  of  the  decision
       Mr. Ward had been lawfully resident in the  UK  for  9  years  and  8
       months.  He was then 28 years old.  He has family members in the  UK,
       namely his mother and sister.

    4. The Judge found that Mr. Ward had always lived with  his  mother  and
       sister in the UK and  had  never  lived  independently.   He  has  no
       family,  friends  or  property  in  Jamaica  and  has   never   lived
       independently.  He has significant learning difficulties and  a  very
       low IQ, which fell within the range of 52-60.  The judge  had  before
       her a quantity of medical records and opinions which also showed that
       he suffers from a congenital heart defect.

  The offence

    5. The offence of which the respondent was convicted was at the  highest
       end of seriousness.  He was arrested carrying a loaded handgun  while
       travelling through Kilburn in London in a convoy of two cars  with  a
       number of associates.  The criminal purpose  of  the  expedition  was
       never revealed but  it  was  plainly  something  which  required  the
       deployment of a loaded firearm.  In cases of this kind the safety  of
       the public is plainly engaged.  The  judge  when  sentencing  decided
       that the dangerousness provisions of the Criminal  Justice  Act  were
       not engaged and imposed a substantial sentence after a trial.  It is,
       we think, important  in  assessing  this  case  to  record  that  the
       respondent denied the offence but was convicted by  the  jury.   This
       requires a degree of scepticism about what is said by him and on  his
       behalf which is not always apparent from the decision of  the  Judge.
       The sentencing judge accepted that he was not a ring  leader  in  the
       expedition and that he may have been exploited  by  others,  but  the
       conviction meant that the jury was sure that he  had  possessed  that
       firearm with the intention of endangering life.  That was  a  finding
       about his state of mind, and not that of anyone else.  The jury which
       made it had heard from a doctor during the trial.  It means that  the
       jury was sure that his intellectual restrictions did not prevent  him
       from forming an intention to endanger life with the loaded firearm he
       was carrying.  This conviction  was  the  basis  of  the  deportation
       decision, and placed the respondent in a category  where  the  public
       interest required his deportation unless there were  very  compelling
       circumstances over  and  above  those  identified  in  the  statutory
       provision to which we will now turn.

  The statutory framework

    6. The Judge considered the case by reference  to  paragraphs  398,  399
       and 399A of the Immigration Rules, rather than s.117A and 117C of the
       2002 Act, but this is  not  necessarily  a  fatal  error.   It  does,
       however, mean that her decision did not follow precisely  the  scheme
       of the Act which is somewhat different from that of the  Rules.    It
       is the Act which applies to the Tribunal's decision making and  this,
       unlike the Rules, is a source of primary law: see the  discussion  in
       NE-A (Nigeria) v. SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 239.  The provisions are  very
       similar  in  their  effect,  but  they   are   somewhat   differently
       structured.

    7. The relevant regime is contained in Part 5 of the 2002 Act which,  so
       far as relevant, provides:-

           117A. Application of this Part

           (1)    This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
           to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts

           -

                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)    In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                117B,

                and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3)    In subsection (2), 'the public interest  question'  means
           the question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).

           ...

           117C.  Additional  considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
           criminals

           (1)    The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
           interest.

           (2)    The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in  deportation  of
           the criminal.

           (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not  been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or
           Exception 2 applies.

           (4)    Exception 1 applies where -

                (a)    C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                for most of C's life,

                (b)    C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                Kingdom, and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to  be
                deported.

           (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh.

           (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least four years,  the  public
           interest requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described  in  Exceptions  1
           and 2.

           (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
           into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision
           to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the  reason
           for the decision was the  offence  or  offences  for  which  the
           criminal has been convicted.

    8. Mr. Ward had been sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 7 years  and
       so, by s.117C(6) the  public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
       there  are  very  compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
       described in the 2 exceptions.  In the Rules  that  consideration  is
       conducted by deciding whether the case is within rules  399  or  399A
       and, if not then the public interest will only be outweighed by other
       factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and  above
       those described in those rules.  The factors identified in the  Rules
       are the same as those contained in the two exceptions in the Act.

  The approach of the Judge

    9. The Judge's analysis was, as we have said, governed by her use of the
       Rules rather than s.117C, but in essence she decided that

        a.    Mr. Ward had not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
           his life;

        b.    He was socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

        c.    There would be very significant obstacles to his  integration
           into Jamaica.

   10. The Judge did not consider Exception 2, probably because of the  very
       slight difference in phrasing between the Act and the Rules.  The Act
       makes it clear that the necessary "very compelling circumstances" can
       only be found in circumstances  over  and  above  those  in  the  two
       exceptions.  This is the effect  of  the  Rules,  but  perhaps  their
       wording is not quite so clear on the point.  This is relevant because
       Exception 2 concerns family life but only by  reference  to  partners
       and children.  If a foreign criminal in a less serious category  than
       the respondent cannot qualify by this route, it would  be  surprising
       if the relationships of a more serious foreign criminal which are not
       within the statutorily protected  class,  such  as  relationships  of
       adult  children  with  their  parents  or  siblings  could  be  "very
       compelling circumstances".  The "very compelling circumstances"  must
       be  over  and  above  factors  within  both  exceptions.   It  is  of
       importance  that  Parliament  decided  that  a  relationship  with  a
       qualifying partner or child was a factor of weight for those who  had
       been sentenced to terms of less than 4 years, but that those who  had
       been sentenced to more than 4 years  had  to  show  "very  compelling
       circumstances" over and above that.  A relationship of an adult child
       with  a  parent  or  sibling  is  not  within  Exception  2,  because
       Parliament decided that it was, in most cases, of  less  significance
       than  relationships  with  partners  and  children.   It   would   be
       surprising if a relationship which is not within  Exception  2  could
       without more amount to a very compelling circumstance over and  above
       those described within Exception 2.

   11. In her decisions about cultural integration in the UK and significant
       obstacles to reintegration  into  Jamaica,  the  Judge  examined  the
       evidence about Mr. Ward's life in the UK and  future  in  Jamaica  if
       deported, and did so with considerable care.

   12. She noted in respect of his integration in the UK that

           "... I am not satisfied that the commission of criminal offences
           - even serious offences - is sufficient for  a  finding  that  a
           person is not culturally and socially  integrated,  particularly
           in a case such as this where the appellant arrived at the age of
           13 and has spent all his life here ever  since.   The  appellant
           finished his education in the United Kingdom.  He has  not  been
           able to secure employment owing to his learning difficulties and
           lack of  educational  qualifications,  but  he  has  lived  here
           throughout with his  mother  and  sister.   He  has  very  close
           relationships with them and knows people in the local community.
             He  has  participated  in  schemes  designed  to  improve  the
           employment prospects of those with learning  disabilities.   The
           appellant has no ties in Jamaica and I  am  satisfied  that  the
           appellant is socially and culturally integrated into the  United
           Kingdom."

   13. In relation to the significant obstacles to Mr. Ward's  reintegration
       in Jamaica she said  that  he  had  no  family  there  and  would  be
       returning to a country which he had left at the age of 13.  She  said
       that  he  had  always  depended  on  others  and  had   never   lived
       independently.  His mother does everything for him.  He can make  his
       own breakfast and work the television and  the  CD  player.   He  has
       difficulties reading and writing and has very limited numeracy.   She
       analysed  a  series  of  reports  about  him  from  various  experts,
       including a learning  disability  specialist  practitioner  from  HMP
       Wormwood Scrubs who said that he was not  capable  of  living  alone,
       vulnerable to bullying and said

           "I cannot see if he will be able to manage if deported as he  is
           completely dependent on his mum for all his personal and  social
           care needs and would not last very  long  in  a  country  he  is
           unfamiliar with."

   14. Concerns about Mr. Ward's safety in prison had been expressed because
       he was unwilling to talk to anyone about any threats  to  him  except
       his mother and a plan was developed  to  monitor  his  communications
       with his mother so that the staff could learn what was worrying  him.
       The Judge pointed out that his mother will not be there  in  Jamaica.
       She concluded

           "I am not satisfied that the appellant would  be  able  to  live
           independently in the  United  Kingdom  without  support  and  it
           follows that he would be unable to do so in Jamaica.  ...  I  am
           not satisfied that the appellant would be able  to  access  this
           help [from the NGOs and agencies which may provide  support  and
           assistance in Jamaica].  His inability to  read  means  that  he
           would not be able to read the report.  Further, he is unable  to
           advocate for himself and has relied upon  adult  intermediaries,
           generally his mother, to access help here.  It is common  ground
           that there is no-one in Jamaica who could help or  support  him.
           I am satisfied that  there  are  significant  obstacles  to  the
           appellant's integration into Jamaica."

   15. The task of the judge, having made those findings, was now to  remind
       herself that in order to avoid the deportation of the  respondent  it
       was necessary to find very compelling reasons over  and  above  them.
       We do not believe that this means that it is necessary to ignore  all
       the evidence which supported those conclusions, and only to  consider
       what other material there is which might amount to such reasons.   No
       doubt the existence of very significant obstacles to  integration  in
       Jamaica is not a merely  binary  question.   It  may  be  that  in  a
       particular case those obstacles may not just be very significant, but
       may actually mean  that  it  will  be  impossible  for  a  person  to
       integrate into Jamaica.  The necessary  exercise,  however,  requires
       the court to acknowledge that the statutory scheme which requires the
       deportation of foreign criminals who have been sentenced to  four  or
       more years in prison even though they face very significant obstacles
       to integrating in the country to which they are to be deported.  This
       is the effect  of  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in   NA
       (Pakistan) v Home Secretary [2016] EWCA Civ 662, [2017]  1  WLR  207.
       The  Court  concluded  at  [29]  that  a  foreign   criminal   facing
       deportation is not "altogether disentitled from seeking  to  rely  on
       matters falling within the scope of the  circumstances  described  in
       Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking  to  contend  that  'there  are  very
       compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above   those   described   in
       Exceptions 1 and 2'". The position is rather that:

           "... a foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon  such  matters,
           but he would need to be able to point to features of his case of
           a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paragraphs 399 or
           399A of  the  2014  rules),  or  features  falling  outside  the
           circumstances  described   in   those   exceptions   and   those
           paragraphs, which made his claim based on article  8  especially
           strong".

   16. "Very significant obstacles" is nevertheless a substantial  threshold
       and to it is to be added the fact  that  the  statutory  scheme  also
       applies to those who are socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
       United Kingdom.  The statutory scheme thus contemplates  the  removal
       on policy and safety grounds of those who will suffer really  serious
       adverse  consequences  as  a  result.   What  may  amount  to   "very
       compelling reasons" over and above this  starting  point  will  be  a
       matter for judgment in each case, but that judgment  is  made  within
       that statutory context.

   17. The Rules, but not  the  amended  ss117A-C  of  the  2002  Act,  were
       considered in Ali v Home Secretary [2016] UKSC 60, [2016] 1 WLR 4799.
         Lord Reed JSC, with whom the other members  of  the  Court  agreed,
       explained the effect of the Rules at [38].  His observations must now
       be read with the qualification that the tribunal is now required  not
       merely to have proper regard to the policy of the SSHD  as  reflected
       in the Rules, but to apply the law as enacted by Parliament.  He said
       this at [38]:

           "The implication of the new rules is  that  paragraphs  399  and
           399A  identify  particular  categories  of  case  in  which  the
           Secretary of State accepts  that  the  public  interest  in  the
           deportation of the offender is outweighed  under  article  8  by
           countervailing factors. Cases not covered by those  rules  (that
           is to say, foreign offenders who have received sentences  of  at
           least four years, or who have received sentences of  between  12
           months and four years but whose private or family life does  not
           meet the requirements of paragraphs 399 and 399A) will be  dealt
           with on the basis that great weight should generally be given to
           the public interest in the deportation of  such  offenders,  but
           that it can be outweighed, applying a proportionality  test,  by
           very compelling circumstances: in other words, by a very  strong
           claim indeed, as Laws LJ put it in the SS (Nigeria) case [2014]
           1 WLR 998 . The  countervailing  considerations  must  be  very
           compelling in order to outweigh the general public  interest  in
           the deportation of such offenders, as assessed by Parliament and
           the Secretary of State."

   18. Lord Reed said this at [46]:

           "... in particular, that a custodial sentence of four  years  or
           more represents such a  serious  level  of  offending  that  the
           public interest in  the  offender's  deportation  almost  always
           outweighs countervailing considerations  of  private  or  family
           life; that great weight should generally be given to the  public
           interest in the  deportation  of  a  foreign  offender  who  has
           received a custodial sentence of more than 12 months; and  that,
           where the circumstances do not fall  within  paragraphs  399  or
           399A, the public interest in the deportation of  such  offenders
           can generally be outweighed only by countervailing factors which
           are very compelling, as explained in paras 37-38 above."

   19. Where those circumstances are said to include the  rehabilitation  of
       the foreign criminal since the offending, the  Court  of  Appeal  has
       given guidance.  In OH (Serbia) v Home Secretary [2008] EWCA Civ 694,
       [2009] INLR 109 , Wilson LJ (as he then was)  derived  at  [15]  the
       following propositions  from  earlier  case-law.   Once  again,  this
       describes the position before the enactment of s.117A and 117C of the
       2002 Act:

           "(a)   The risk of  reoffending  is  one  facet  of  the  public
           interest but, in the case of very serious crimes, not  the  most
           important facet.

           (b)    Another important facet is  the  need  to  deter  foreign
           nationals from committing serious  crimes  by  leading  them  to
           understand  that,  whatever   the   other   circumstances,   one
           consequence of them may well be deportation.

           (c)    A further important facet is the role  of  a  deportation
           order as an expression of society's revulsion at serious  crimes
           and in building public confidence in the  treatment  of  foreign
           citizens who have committed serious  crimes.   [In Ali  v  Home
           Secretary, Lord Wilson JSC said at [70] that  he  now  regretted
           this  reference  to  society's  "revulsion"  (that   being,   he
           considered, "too emotive a concept to figure in this analysis"),
           but he adhered to the view that he was "entitled to refer to the
           importance of public confidence in our  determination  of  these
           issues"].

           (d)    Primary responsibility for  the  public  interest,  whose
           view of it is likely to be wider and better informed  than  that
           of  a  tribunal,  resides  in  the  [Secretary  of  State]   and
           accordingly a tribunal hearing an appeal against a  decision  to
           deport should not only consider for itself all the facets of the
           public interest but should weigh, as a  linked  but  independent
           feature, the approach to  them  adopted  by  the  [Secretary  of
           State] in the context of the facts of  the  case.  Speaking  for
           myself, I would not however describe the tribunal's duty in this
           regard as being higher than 'to weigh' this feature."

   20. In Taylor v Home Secretary [2015] EWCA Civ 845. Moore-Bick LJ,  with
       whom McCombe and Vos LJJ agreed, said at [21]:

           "I would certainly  not  wish  to  diminish  the  importance  of
           rehabilitation in itself, but the cases in which it can  make  a
           significant contribution to establishing the compelling  reasons
           sufficient to outweigh the public interest  in  deportation  are
           likely to be rare. The fact that rehabilitation has begun but is
           as yet incomplete has been held in general not to be a  relevant
           factor: see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256 and PF (Nigeria) v Secretary of
           State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 596 . Moreover, as
           was recognised in SU (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for  the
           Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 427, rehabilitation is  relevant
           primarily to the reduction in the risk of  re-offending.  It  is
           less relevant to the  other  factors  which  contribute  to  the
           public interest in deportation."

   21. We would add that rehabilitation is  not  an  absolute  standard,  or
       guarantee.  A person may make great  efforts  at  rehabilitation  but
       experience shows that there very frequently remains at least  a  risk
       of further offending.  The risk of re-offending is  not  extinguished
       but reduced.  That is  a  further  reason  why  tribunals  should  be
       careful before allowing evidence of rehabilitation  to  displace  the
       clear statutory presumption in favour of  deportation  of  those  who
       have been sentenced to four years or more in prison.

  The approach of the judge to "very compelling circumstances"

   22. The judge identified Mr. Ward's learning disabilities  as  being  the
       factor which might amount to very  compelling  circumstances  because
       they created "a high degree of dependency on his  mother  and,  to  a
       lesser extent, his sister."  The judge found that he would be at real
       risk if returned to Jamaica, saying

           "The appellant's learning difficulties are key in this  decision
           as they are  the  reason  that  the  appellant  would  encounter
           significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Jamaica  but   more
           fundamentally would,  I  find,  struggle  to  survive.   He  has
           nowhere to live and nobody top support him.  I am not  satisfied
           that he would be capable of finding gainful employment or living
           independently.  His size and learning  disabilities  render  him
           liable to bullying and abuse.  He is a vulnerable  person.   His
           mother fears that if left in Jamaica he would not last  long  on
           the  streets.   Having  regard  to  the   evidence   about   the
           appellant's   inability   to   live   independently   and    his
           vulnerabilities I do not believe that the  appellant's  mother's
           fears are exaggerated."

   23. The judge then reminded herself of the public interest in deportation
       and said  the  risk  of  re-offending  was  a  "significant  matter".
       Although no clear finding on the level of risk was  made,  the  judge
       referred to a number of pieces of evidence which suggested  that  the
       risk may have reduced.  This came from Mr.  Ward  himself,  and  from
       various  people  to  whom  he  had  spoken  while  in  prison.    The
       Disabilities Specialist Practitioner referred to above reported  that
       she felt that while in Wormwood Scrubs Mr. Ward  had  "developed  and
       matured into a sensible and more aware  individual".   In  her  final
       paragraph she appeared to accept the "low risk of reoffending in  the
       recent OASys report", and to regard that as decisive in  relation  to
       the public interest in deportation.  She had earlier  accurately  set
       out what that report actually said.  She said

           "The appellant was assessed, in the OASys report, as being at  a
           low risk of reoffending.  The risk of serious harm in the  event
           of re-offending was assessed as "low" as far as children,  known
           adults, and staff were concerned but "high" in  respect  of  the
           public.   I  understand  this  latter   categorisation   to   be
           significantly  based  upon  the  serious  nature  of  the  index
           offence."

  Discussion and decision

   24. There is a clear tension between the  findings  of  the  judge  about
       vulnerability and rehabilitation.  On the one hand  Mr.  Ward  is  so
       vulnerable  and  easily  led  that  he  will  not  be  able  to  live
       independently in Jamaica or the United Kingdom.  This,  she  said  at
       [68], "has led to him being involved in offences in  the  past".   On
       the other, he has developed and matured so that he will not fall into
       crime again as a result of the influence of others.  That tension  is
       not addressed or resolved in the judgment.

   25. Further, and in any event, the judge appears to  us  to  have  fallen
       into error by failing to apply the guidance summarised  at  [19]  and
       [20] above.  Rehabilitation is treated by the judge as  the  complete
       answer to the public interest in deportation, whereas it is  actually
       irrelevant  to  significant  features  of  the  public  interest   as
       identified above.

   26. Finally, it appears to us that she may have accepted the evidence  of
       Mr. Ward that the offence of possession of the firearm with intent to
       endanger life may have been committed because of threats  to  himself
       and his family by his associates (whom he  said  he  did  not  know).
       There is nothing in the sentencing remarks to support  this  and  Mr.
       Ward was convicted after  a  trial.   He  ran  a  defence  which  was
       rejected.  It may not, as the judge said, follow  automatically  that
       his account of duress was rejected by the jury  but  the  possibility
       that it may not have been should only properly be contemplated  after
       careful  scrutiny  of  the  proceedings  in  the  Crown  Court.   The
       sentencing judge accepted that he may have  been  "exploited  by  one
       other or others" which is very different from a finding that  he  may
       have been pressurised by threats of violence into behaving as he did.
        That finding by the sentencing judge was a judicial determination of
       fact for the purposes of sentence and should only be displaced  by  a
       tribunal acting judicially by clear  and  acceptable  evidence.   The
       assessment of the seriousness  of  the  offence  is  central  to  the
       decision in two ways: (1) it goes  to  its  seriousness  and  to  the
       public interest in deportation  by  virtue  of  the  clear  terms  of
       s.117C(2) to which the judge did not refer; (2) it  directly  affects
       the risk to the public of offending  in  the  future.   It  might  be
       though that it is very unlikely that any  group  of  criminals  would
       recruit an accomplice to carry their gun who was unknown to  them  by
       threatening his mother.  That such circumstances  might  be  repeated
       more than once in a lifetime may seem very improbable and so, if that
       was the motive for the offence, the risk may indeed be low.   On  the
       other hand,  if  he  decided  to  join  in  voluntarily  because  his
       associates knew of his willingness to please and  exploited  it  that
       would suggest that the risk may be quite high.

   27. In the same context,  the  judge  recorded,  and  presumably  did  so
       because she placed some weight on it, the  opinion  of  the  Offender
       Manager that the offence did not involve any "direct  victim  and  it
       was unclear if anyone was  targeted."   Mr.  Ward  was  convicted  of
       intending to endanger life with the loaded handgun he  was  carrying.
       Neither he nor any accomplice ever divulged the true  reason  why  he
       was doing this which is why the identity of  the  person  or  persons
       whose life was to be endangered is unclear.  This makes his  position
       worse not better.

   28. For these reasons we consider  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
       public interest in deportation  was  flawed.   She  placed  too  much
       weight on rehabilitation and in any  event  reached  her  conclusions
       about it on a flawed understanding of the findings of the Crown Court
       and  without  adequate  regard  to  her  own   findings   about   the
       vulnerability of Mr. Ward to abuse and manipulation by others.

   29. That being so, we have concluded that there was an error  of  law  in
       the determination which must be set aside.  The appeal of the SSHD is
       allowed.

   30.  The  question  remains,  however,  whether  the   judge's   findings
       summarised in the  passage  quoted  at  [22]  above  amount  to  very
       compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   those   identified   in
       Exceptions 1 and 2 in s.117C of the 2002 Act.  This is  not  an  easy
       question.  There is no  challenge  to  the  findings  on  which  this
       conclusion was based and it resolves really into a very short  point:
       Mr. Ward's learning difficulties and consequent dependency on  others
       are the "very significant obstacles" to integration in Jamaica.   For
       a 30 year old single man the  lack  of  family  support  or  ties  in
       Jamaica would not otherwise  count  for  anything  in  the  balancing
       exercise required by the 2002 Act.  As explained above, the statutory
       scheme expressly contemplates that foreign criminals will be deported
       even when they will suffer significant hardship.  s.117C(2)  requires
       the tribunal to have regard to the seriousness of  the  offence.   In
       the present case, that is very high.  Even for this offender, who was
       not the ringleader and who may have  been  exploited  by  others,  it
       warranted a term of imprisonment of 7 years.   It  involved  a  group
       travelling for a criminal purpose on the streets  of  London  with  a
       loaded handgun.  The Crown alleged and proved against  this  offender
       that he intended to endanger life.

   31. Although we share the difficulty of the judge at  a  human  level  in
       contemplating the deportation of Mr. Ward, it appears to us that  our
       public duty as imposed on us by the 2002  Act  in  its  present  form
       requires us to dismiss  his  appeal.   This  offence  is  simply  too
       serious to allow the personal hardship to Mr. Ward  to  outweigh  the
       public interest.  This includes, as we explain above, the  importance
       in retaining public confidence in the determination of these  issues.
       We  are  fully  aware  of  the  consequences  of  this  decision,  in
       particular for Mr. Ward's mother and sister,  as  well  as  for  him.
       After the most anxious consideration, nevertheless we have  concluded
       that we must allow the appeal and  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
       judge.  We remake the determination  adopting  the  findings  of  the
       judge except where we have  already  indicated  otherwise.   For  the
       reasons set out above we dismiss the appeal of Erroll Rochester Ward.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.   The  appeal  against  the
decision of the Secretary of State by Erroll Rochester Ward is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Edis





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal of Erroll Rochester Ward  and  therefore  there
can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Mr Justice Edis
