
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26532/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th October 2018                           |On 9th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                  mrs Hettiachchige Dona Rita Tillekeratne
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, instructed by City Heights Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  3rd
    September 2016 refusing her application for  leave  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled  in  the  UK.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron   in   a   decision
    promulgated on 15th March 2018.  The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    13th August 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant applied  for  leave
    to remain as a spouse. The Respondent refused the  application  on  the
    basis that the Appellant had not satisfied the maintenance requirements
    of the Immigration Rules as set out  at  page  4  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter.  The main issue raised there was that the Appellant had
    not provided twelve months' bank statements highlighting the  Sponsor's
    salary being deposited into the appropriate bank account.

 3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on 1st December 2016.
     In her Notice of Appeal she indicated that  she  wished  to  have  the
    appeal determined by way of an oral hearing.   On  18th  December  2017
    City Heights Solicitors sent  a  fax  to  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber at Taylor House indicating that the firm had been instructed by
    the Appellant, advising that she wished to have the  appeal  considered
    on the papers and attaching a bundle of documents for consideration  by
    the Tribunal.

 4. On 2nd March 2018 the appeal  was  listed  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Cameron.   Judge  Cameron  noted  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    represented and did not attend the hearing and went on to determine the
    appeal on the basis of the documents before him.  The  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 14 that no documents had been provided by  the  Appellant  in
    support of the appeal.  The judge went on to  consider  the  appeal  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules and dismissed the appeal.

 5. It is suggested in the Grounds of appeal that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should set aside the  decision  in  accordance  with  Rule  32  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  appears  not  to  have
    exercised that power.

 6. There are two Grounds of Appeal put forward.  It is  firstly  contended
    that the judge erred in failing to consider the documents submitted  by
    the Appellant in connection with the  appeal.   The  second  Ground  of
    Appeal contends that the judge erred in failing to give proper  reasons
    for his findings.

 7. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on the basis
    that it is arguable that the documents submitted by the Appellant  were
    not before the judge when he prepared the decision and that this  is  a
    procedural error which, through  no  fault  of  the  judge,  can  be  a
    material error of law.

 8. Along with the application for permission to appeal there is a copy  of
    a fax log dated 18th December 2017.  Mr Tufan accepted that this  is  a
    fax report in relation to documents sent by the Appellant's  solicitors
    on 18th December 2017.  Mr  Tufan  also  accepted  that  the  documents
    submitted on 18th December 2017 were not before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge.

 9. It is clear from the judge's decision that  these  documents  were  not
    before him at the  time  therefore  I  find  that  a  procedural  error
    occurred when these  documents  were  not  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge.   This  procedural  error  is  material  in  that  the
    documents  submitted  were  capable  of  going  to  the  issues  to  be
    determined.  In light of this procedural material error I set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The effect of the procedural error is such that the Appellant  has  not
    had the opportunity to put her case to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    nature and extent of the fact-finding  required  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined afresh.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and I set it aside.

12. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 31st October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal remains outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal  the  issue
of a fee award is to be determined by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  who  is
considering the appeal again.


Signed                              Date: 31st October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
