
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/26848/2016
                                                               HU/26850/2016
                                                               HU/26853/2016
                                                               HU/26854/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 December 2018                   |On 08 February 2019                  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                R O & Others
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because  the  case  involves  child  welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is
appropriate to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A. Olujinmi of Quintessence Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first appellant is the mother of  three  dependent  children.  She
      appealed the respondent's decision dated 22 November 2016 to refuse  a
      human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint-Jones ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
      appeal in a decision promulgated on 15 March 2018. For the purpose  of
      the appeal before the Upper Tribunal it is not necessary  to  set  out
      the judge's findings or the  grounds  of  appeal  because  Ms  Everett
      accepted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
      conduct an evaluative assessment of the best interests of the children
      with reference to relevant evidence. The decision  is  set  aside  and
      will be remade by the Upper Tribunal.

Decision and reasons

Background

3.    The appellant is a Nigerian citizen who entered the UK on  21  October
      2008 with entry  clearance  as  the  dependent  spouse  of  a  Tier  4
      (General) student. The oldest child, "A", was two and a half years old
      on arrival in the UK. The middle child, "B", was just  over  one  year
      old on arrival in the UK. Both children had been continuously resident
      in the UK for a period  of  over  seven  years  at  the  date  of  the
      respondent's decision. At the date  of  the  hearing  they  have  been
      continuously resident for a period of just over 10 years. The evidence
      indicates that the appellant gave birth to a stillborn child in  2011.
      The youngest child, "C", was born in the UK in July 2013 and has  been
      continuously resident in the UK for a period of five and a half years.



4.    The respondent's summary of the appellant's immigration  history  does
      not make clear when the initial  grant  of  leave  to  enter  expired.
      However, information  contained  in  the  form  for  the  most  recent
      application indicates that it was likely to be in  or  around  October
      2009.  The appellant says that her ex-husband took responsibility  for
      making  the  applications  to  extend  their  leave  to  remain.   The
      respondent records that an application for further leave to remain was
      made on 06 July 2012, which was refused with no right of appeal on  23
      August 2013.

5.    The appellant's account, which is supported by a detailed social  work
      report prepared in support of family proceedings, is that she and  the
      children were subject to violence and abuse by her ex-husband  over  a
      long period of time. In such circumstances it is  plausible  that  her
      husband may have controlled their passports and  taken  responsibility
      for their immigration status. It seems that he took no steps  to  make
      an application to extend their initial leave to enter when it  expired
      in October 2009. The appellant and  the  two  oldest  children  became
      overstayers. It unclear whether the appellant thought that her husband
      had made an application to extend their leave to remain or  was  fully
      aware, at that point, that their leave to remain had expired but could
      do little about it if her husband was as controlling  and  abusive  as
      she says.

6.    The appellant made an application for leave to remain on human  rights
      grounds on 27 November 2014. The evidence indicates that  this  was  a
      period of crisis for the appellant and  the  children.  She  left  her
      husband in July 2014. The family  was  known  to  social  services.  A
      social care assessment was completed in August 2014. The exact  nature
      of the circumstances surrounding the split in 2014 is unclear.

7.    On 22 September 2016 the family court gave  the  appellant  permission
      to disclose a copy of the final order in the family  proceedings,  the
      Cafcass report and the report from the school psychology department to
      the Home Office. The social work report describes "police involvement"
      relating to the appellant's ex-husband and bail conditions  being  set
      to preventing him from having  contact  with  the  appellant  and  the
      children. On 04 November  2014  the  appellant  presented  herself  to
      social services with the children saying that they were destitute  and
      needed support.  The  history  provided  in  the  social  work  report
      indicates, at that point, the appellant was provided  with  assistance
      to seek legal advice regarding her immigration status in the UK.  This
      is what seems to have prompted the application for leave to remain  on
      human rights grounds made on 27 November  2014.  The  application  was
      refused without a right of appeal on 28 January 2015.

8.    In a final order made on 29 January  2016  the  family  court  ordered
      that the children should live with their mother and that there  should
      be no contact between the father  and  the  children.  The  court  was
      satisfied that the father subjected the appellant and the  two  oldest
      children to physical abuse and that he posed a risk of  harm  to  both
      mother and children. The appellant made the  current  application  for
      leave to remain on human rights grounds on 23 July 2016. Another order
      of the family court shows  that  the  marriage  was  dissolved  on  13
      January 2017.

Best interests of the children

9.    In assessing the best interests of the  children,  I  have  considered
      the principles outlined in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC4,  Zoumbas
      v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and others  v  SSHD  [2014]
      EWCA  Civ  874.  The  best  interests  of  children  are   a   primary
      consideration, but not the only consideration.

10.   The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
      of children who are in the United Kingdom. I  take  into  account  the
      statutory guidance "UKBA Every Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
      (November 2009), which gives further detail about the duties  owed  to
      children  under  section  55.  In   the   guidance,   the   respondent
      acknowledges the importance of international human rights  instruments
      including the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child  (UNCRC).  The
      guidance goes on to confirm: "The UK Border  Agency  must  fulfil  the
      requirements of these  instruments  in  relation  to  children  whilst
      exercising its functions as expressed in UK domestic  legislation  and
      policies." The UNCRC sets out rights  including  a  child's  right  to
      survival and development, the right to know and be cared for by his or
      her parents, the right not  to  be  separated  from  parents  and  the
      enjoyment of the highest attainable standards of  living,  health  and
      education without discrimination. The UNCRC also recognises the common
      responsibility of both parents for the upbringing and development of a
      child.

11.   All three children are Nigerian citizens who  do  not  have  leave  to
      remain in the UK. A and B have lived in the UK for a continuous period
      of 10 years. They entered the  UK  as  very  young  children  and  are
      unlikely to have any meaningful memories of life in Nigeria. They have
      spent an important formative period in the UK. The evidence shows that
      their early years were marred by domestic violence  towards  them  and
      their mother. The social work report prepared in 2015  indicates  that
      both children feared their father and did not want to see  him  again.
      Certainly, the evidence shows  that  the  appellant  was  sufficiently
      frightened of her ex-husband that they moved some distance to  another
      town. In 2016 she felt the need to change the children's names by deed
      poll. These steps reflect the appellant's fear of her ex-husband.

12.   The children's mother also expressed fears about returning to  Nigeria
      because she thought that her ex-husband's family might try to take the
      children away from her. The claim has not been  put  on  a  protection
      basis and there is little evidence to support such a  fear  albeit  it
      may well be genuinely  held.  Her  witness  statement  provides  scant
      information about how she might support herself and  the  children  if
      she returned to Nigeria.  No  information  is  highlighted  about  the
      appellant's level of education or past work history.

13.   The social work report makes clear that the  children  were  subjected
      to "significant emotional harm" due to domestic violence and were also
      subject to a "degree of physical harm". The  social  worker  concluded
      that all three children  required  consistency,  emotional  stability,
      appropriate home conditions and regular social interaction. The social
      worker had no concerns about the appellant's ability to care  for  the
      children albeit it seems that she receives assistance and support from
      social services. In an annexed report of a counsellor who was seeing B
      at the time, the counsellor reported  that  the  child  was  concerned
      about "feeling safe". Both A and B expressed fears about seeing  their
      father again.

14.   A letter from a social worker in the Children's Assessment Team  dated
      10 March 2016 supported an application for accommodation  and  support
      under the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. In her opinion  it  was  in
      the best interests of the children to remain in the  same  town  where
      they had settled after the appellant left her  husband.  The  children
      were said to be settled  in  the  area  and  had  made  links  in  the
      community. The social worker also felt that it  was  in  the  family's
      best interests to be granted leave to remain. Although no reasons were
      given to explain why, it is reasonable to infer  from  what  she  said
      that it was in the interests of the children  to  maintain  continuity
      and stability.

15.   The youngest child, C, was born in the  UK  and  has  known  no  other
      life. It seems that he was spared the worst of the domestic abuse  due
      to his young age. He has lived in the UK for a  continuous  period  of
      five  years  and  is  likely  to  be  starting  school.  Little  other
      information is provided about his circumstances.

16.    Little  up  to  date  information  is  provided  about  the   current
      circumstances of the children. Given the  fact  that  social  services
      were satisfied that the appellant could  provide  them  with  adequate
      care it is reasonable to infer that they have been able to settle into
      life in their new home after the trauma and upheavals of the situation
      they faced when living with their father. The children have enjoyed  a
      period of four years in which they are likely to have established some
      equilibrium.

17.   The only up to date evidence relates to the situation of  A,  who  has
      now been diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Correspondence
      from local health care and special needs professionals  from  November
      2018 confirms the diagnosis.  The  nurse  practitioner  in  the  local
      community paediatric team confirms  that  A  has  complex  needs  that
      require close monitoring within  a  Community  Medical  Team.  He  has
      restrictive and  repetitive  behaviours  that  affect  his  day-to-day
      functioning. This means  that  he  needs  to  have  a  consistent  and
      predicable routine and environment to function. He struggles with  any
      new social setting. He required  comprehensive  support  to  make  the
      transition to secondary school. Any change in his environment could be
      detrimental to his physical and mental health.

18.   The respondent recognises that a child who has been  resident  in  the
      UK for a continuous period of seven years will have established strong
      ties and  this  factor  must  be  given  significant  weight:  see  MA
      (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  705.  In  this  case,  A  has  been
      resident in the UK for a considerably longer period than seven  years.
      He is a child with special needs who has suffered traumatic events  in
      the past as a result of domestic abuse. The need  for  continuity  and
      stability  is  more  important  for  a  child  with  such  needs.  Any
      disruption from the settled life he has established in the UK  is  not
      likely  to  be  in  his  best  interests.  Social  work  professionals
      supported this view in the past.

19.   I am  satisfied  that  the  family  history  is  such  that  continued
      stability is of the utmost importance for the three children  involved
      in this case. I am satisfied that any further upheaval from a  settled
      life in the UK to live in a country that they are likely to find alien
      is not in their best interests. I conclude that  it  is  in  the  best
      interests of the children, and quite clearly in the best interests  of
      the eldest child, to remain in the UK in the care of their mother.



Conclusions

20.   Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 makes it unlawful for a  public
      authority to act in a way  that  it  incompatible  with  a  Convention
      right. This duty is placed on the Secretary of State as well as courts
      and tribunals. The requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  and  the
      statutory provisions are said to reflect the respondent's position  on
      Article  8  of  the  European  Convention.  However,  the  complicated
      provisions relating to private and family life bear little resemblance
      to the approach taken by the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  when
      conducting a balancing exercise under Article 8. The Strasbourg  court
      conducts a holistic assessment of all the relevant circumstances of  a
      case  weighing  the  individual's  circumstances  against  the  public
      interest  considerations  without  artificially  separating  different
      aspects of a claim. I am bound to assess the appeal with reference  to
      the immigration rules and relevant statutory provisions, but  it  must
      always be remembered that those provisions are intended to give effect
      to, and are said to be  compatible  with,  the  underlying  principles
      enshrined in Article 8 of the European Convention.

21.   The appellant does not meet  the  private  life  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules. She  falls  far  short  of  the  20-year  residence
      requirement contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of  the  immigration
      rules. It is  not  arguable  that  she  would  face  very  significant
      obstacles to integration in Nigeria  given  that  she  is  a  Nigerian
      citizen and spent over thirty years of her life there before coming to
      the UK. She does not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).
      She does not meet the requirements of Appendix FM of  the  immigration
      rules for leave to remain as the sole carer for the  children  because
      none of the children are British citizens or settled in the UK.

22.   At the date of the application for leave to remain A and  B  had  been
      resident in the UK for a continuous period of seven years. At the date
      of the hearing they have now been resident for a  period  of  over  10
      years. The two oldest  children  are  'qualifying  children'  for  the
      purpose of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  immigration  rules  and
      section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
      ("the NIAA 2002").

23.   The test of whether it is 'reasonable' to expect a child who has  been
      continuously resident in the UK for a continuous period of seven years
      is used in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) (in so far as  it  relates  to  the
      children) and section 117B(6) (in so far as it relates to the mother).
      In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 the Supreme Court found that the
      assessment of 'reasonableness' is directed  to  the  position  of  the
      child without reference to  the  misconduct  of  his  or  her  parents
      although what is reasonable must be considered  in  the  'real  world'
      context in which the children find themselves.

24.   The appellant and her children are not British citizens and  have  had
      no leave to remain since 2009. Weight should be given  to  the  public
      interest in maintaining an effective system  of  immigration  control.
      The appellant remained in the UK without leave since 2009 and does not
      meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules.  Although  it  seems
      likely that she knew she was remaining  without  leave,  the  evidence
      indicates that there were mitigating circumstances. The appellant  was
      in an abusive relationship in which her husband controlled all aspects
      of her life. Her ability to take steps to  regularise  the  status  of
      herself and the children was limited. After she left  her  husband  in
      July  2014  she  sought  legal  advice  and  made  an  application  to
      regularise her status. There is no evidence of immigration offences at
      the more serious end of the scale e.g. fraud, deception, absconding or
      criminal offences.

25.   Little evidence is  produced  of  the  appellant's  ties  to  the  UK.
      Section 117B of the NIAA 2002 makes clear that little  weight  can  be
      placed on a  private  life  established  when  a  person's  status  is
      precarious.

26.   The case is focussed on the interests of the children.  The  appellant
      is the sole carer of three children who have spent most of their lives
      in the UK. The  oldest  two  children  are  not  likely  to  have  any
      meaningful memories or knowledge of life in Nigeria given their  young
      age when they entered the UK. The youngest child was born  in  the  UK
      and knows no other life. It is not disputed that the appellant  has  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship with the children or that
      two of the children are  'qualifying  children'  for  the  purpose  of
      section 276ADE(1)(iv) and section 117B(6) NIAA 2002.

27.         In MA (Pakistan) Lord Justice Elias emphasised that  significant
      weight should be given to the interests of a  child,  especially  with
      reference to the respondent's published policy guidance: at that  time
      the Immigration Directorate Instructions  "Appendix  FM  Section  1.0b
      Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes"
      (August 2015). The latest version of  the  same  policy  is  dated  22
      February 2018. It continues to state that 'significant weight'  should
      be given to the fact that a child has been  continuously  resident  in
      the UK for a period of at least seven years. The respondent recognises
      that in that time a child is likely to have set down roots and will be
      integrated into life in the UK.

28.   It is trite law that children should not be blamed for the actions  of
      their parents. In this case both parents arrived in the UK with  leave
      to remain but overstayed their  leave  and  continued  to  expand  the
      family in the knowledge that their immigration status was  precarious.
      The cumulative effect of  public  interest  factors  can,  in  certain
      circumstances, outweigh the significant weight that should be given to
      the best interests of the children. However, 'strong reasons' will  be
      needed to remove a family where a child has been resident  in  the  UK
      for a period of seven years or more. The best interests of a child who
      is long settled in the UK are a primary  consideration  that  must  be
      given significant weight.

29.   On the facts of  this  case,  I  conclude  that  the  public  interest
    considerations are not so serious to  outweigh  the  interests  of  the
    children. Having balanced the competing factors,  I  conclude  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect the two oldest children  to  leave  the
    UK. They meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    immigration rules, which is said to reflect the  respondent's  position
    as to where a fair balance is struck under  Article  8.  For  the  same
    reasons, the appellant meets the requirements of section 117B(6), which
    states that the public interest does not require the  person's  removal
    if it would be unreasonable to expect a 'qualifying child' to leave the
    UK. As a dependent child the C must also succeed.

30.   I conclude that  removal  of  the  appellant  in  consequence  of  the
    decision would not strike a fair balance between the weight to be given
    to the public interest (as expressed in the relevant rules, statute and
    policy) and the impact on the individuals involved in this case.

31.   The removal of the appellant from  the  UK  would  be  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The decision is remade and the appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date 07 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan





