
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26993/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 20th September 2018              |On 4th October 2018                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                               mr subba ghaley
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Shepherd instructed N C Brothers & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Nepal whose date of birth  is  22nd  August
    1990, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer of 7th October 2016 to refuse  his  application
    for entry clearance as the adult dependent child  of  his  mother,  the
    Sponsor, who is the widow of his  late  father  who  was  an  ex-Gurkha
    soldier.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands dismissed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 5th June 2018.  The Appellant appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by Judge  Hollingworth  on  12th  July
    2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant's  father  was  a
    Gurkha soldier who died on 11th November 2004.  The Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor applied for entry clearance  in  2009.   It  appears  that  the
    Sponsor was issued with a  settlement  visa  on  23rd  March  2010  and
    entered the UK after that.  The Appellant initially applied to join the
    Sponsor in the UK on 10th February 2014, that application  was  refused
    but an appeal against that was allowed to the extent that it should  be
    reconsidered by the Entry Clearance Officer as the decision was not  in
    accordance with the law.  The reconsidered decision  was  made  on  7th
    October 2016 and it is the subject of this appeal.

 3. At the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal the judge noted at  paragraph
    14 that both sides accepted that the Appellant cannot succeed under the
    Immigration Rules because of the death of his father.  Accordingly  the
    issue was whether  the  refusal  of  the  application  amounted  to  an
    unlawful interference with the rights of the Appellant and  his  mother
    to family life [14].  The judge made findings of  fact  which  are  not
    disputed.   These  are  primarily  set  out  at  paragraph   13.    The
    Appellant's father retired from service in 1982 having served for  over
    fifteen years. The Appellant applied to come to the UK  in  2009  along
    with his mother but his application was refused.  It is noted  that  he
    lives alone in Pokhara and has done  since  April  2009.   He  attended
    university between 2012 and 2015  having  attended  school  in  Pokhara
    before that.  The judge accepted that  the  Sponsor  has  been  sending
    money since 2013 and accepted that, although there was  no  documentary
    evidence of other payments, the Sponsor used  a  system  of  remittance
    payments and money had been sent from  the  Sponsor  to  the  Appellant
    since the Sponsor came to the UK.  The judge accepted that the  Sponsor
    is in  employment  and  there  is  appropriate  accommodation  for  the
    Appellant should he be allowed  to  enter  the  UK.   The  Sponsor  has
    visited Nepal  twice  since  leaving  there  in  2012  and  2016.   The
    Appellant had an accident some time in around 2014 or 2015 which  meant
    that he was bedridden for some time [13].

 4. On the basis of these findings the judge went on  to  consider  whether
    family life exists between the  Appellant  and  his  mother  such  that
    Article 8 would be engaged by this refusal [17].  The  judge  concluded
    on the basis of the evidence that the Appellant and the Sponsor do  not
    have a relationship such that Article 8 would be engaged by the refusal
    [18].  The judge went on to consider the alternative basis whether  the
    decision was proportionate if they did have an ongoing family life. The
    judge took into account the historic injustice and said that he was not
    satisfied that there is evidence to show that  the  Appellant's  father
    "would ever have taken or intended to take his family over  to  the  UK
    particularly taking into account that he had  an  elder  child  by  his
    first marriage who still lives in Nepal.  There is no evidence  of  his
    intention ever to do so".  The judge weighed against the injustice  the
    factors  in  Section  117B  and  concluded  that   the   decision   was
    proportionate.





Error of law

 5. There are two Grounds of Appeal challenging this decision.   The  first
    ground contends that the judge failed to properly apply the decision of
    Rai v ECO [2017] EWCA Civ 320  and  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   It  is
    contended that the judge erred in his finding that there is  no  family
    life between the Appellant and the Sponsor.  It is contended  that  the
    judge erred at paragraph 17 where he focused too much on the separation
    of the Appellant and his mother and the fact that the  Appellant  chose
    to study. It is contended that the decision to  study  elsewhere  would
    not necessarily defeat the Article 8  claim.   In  his  submissions  Mr
    Shepherd did not dispute the factual analysis made  by  the  judge  but
    contended that on the facts found this does not amount to a  separation
    and does not defeat Article 8(1) in light of the other  findings  which
    had been made.  On the other hand Mr Clarke contended that the  grounds
    disclose a misunderstanding in relation to Rai and the  case  law.   He
    contended that the issue of independence and therefore Article 8 family
    life is critical  to  how  the  judge  looks  at  the  facts.   In  his
    submission the judge took into  account  all  relevant  factors  before
    reaching the decision that family life had not been established.

 6. Both parties relied on  the  decision  in  Rai  and  in  particular  to
    paragraphs 38 and 39 of that decision.  At paragraphs  38  and  39  the
    Court of Appeal stated as follows:
       "38. Throughout his findings and conclusions with regard to  article
       8(1), the Upper  Tribunal  judge  concentrated  on  the  appellant's
       parents' decision to leave Nepal and settle in the  United  Kingdom,
       without, I think, focusing on the practical and financial  realities
       entailed in that decision. This  was,  in  my  opinion,  a  mistaken
       approach.
       39. The Upper Tribunal judge referred repeatedly to the  appellant's
       parents having chosen to settle in the United Kingdom,  leaving  the
       appellant in the family home in Nepal.  Each  time  he  did  so,  he
       stressed the fact that this was a decision  they  had  freely  made:
       "... not compulsory but ... voluntarily undertaken  ..."  (paragraph
       20), "... having made the choice to come to  the  [United  Kingdom]"
       (paragraph 21), "... the willingness of the parents  to  leave  ..."
       (paragraph 23), and  "...  their  voluntary  leaving  of  Nepal  and
       leaving the Appellant ..." (paragraph 26). But that, in my view, was
       not to confront the real issue under  article  8(1)  in  this  case,
       which  was  whether,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  appellant   had
       demonstrated that he had a family life with his parents,  which  had
       existed at the time of their  departure  to  settle  in  the  United
       Kingdom and had endured beyond it, notwithstanding their having left
       Nepal when they did."

 7. Essentially the conclusion of the Court of  Appeal  is  that  the  real
    issue under Article 8(1) is whether as a matter of fact  the  Appellant
    had demonstrated that he had a family life with his  mother  which  had
    existed at the time of her departure to settle in  the  United  Kingdom
    and had endured beyond it notwithstanding her having  left  Nepal  when
    they did.

 8. The assessment of a family life between adults  were  set  out  by  the
    Court of Appeal in the case of Kugathas v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 where the court stated at  paragraph
    16 and 17:-
         "16. Nevertheless, there are repeated  dicta  which  point  to  the
         continuing relevance of the passade which I have quoted from S  v
         United Kingdom. In Marckx v Belgium [1979] 2 EHRR 330, a decision
         of the full Court,  at  paragraph  31  the  adjectives  "real"  and
         "normal" were used to characterise family life if it  was  to  come
         within Article 8. In Abdulaziz, Cabales and  Balkandali  v  United
         Kingdom [1985] 7 EHRR 471 paragraph 63, again a decision of  the
         Court, the phrase "committed relationship" was used. In Beldjoudi v
         France [1992] 14 EHRR 801, a decision of the Commission which went
         on to be upheld by the Court, at paragraph 55 the phrase "real  and
         effective family ties" was used.
         17. Mr Gill  says  that  none  of  this  amounts  to  an  absolute
         requirement of dependency. That is clearly right  in  the  economic
         sense. But if dependency is read down as meaning "support", in  the
         personal  sense,  and  if  one   adds,   echoing   the   Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or  "effective"  to  the  word
         "support", then it represents in my view the irreducible minimum of
         what family life implies. It may be that, for a time  in  Germany,
         that minimum was reached, as between the appellant and  his  family
         there; but that time has gone."

 9. Effectively what the Court of Appeal said there is that there should be
    demonstration of real committed or effective support between adults  to
    establish family life.

10. I also note the decision in PT (Sri Lanka) v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ 612 the Court of Appeal  there  considered  the
    issue of Article 8 family life between adults and sets out all  of  the
    relevant jurisprudence.  It is noted in the extract from  the  decision
    in Ghising v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  UKUT
    00160 where, at  paragraph  62,  the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    different outcomes  in  cases  with  superficially  similarly  features
    emphasises that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly  fact-sensitive.
    Each case should be analysed on its own facts to decide whether or  not
    family life exists within the meaning of Article 8(1).

11. The Court of Appeal also referred to the case of Singh v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 where  it  was  noted
    that in the case of adults in the context of immigration control  there
    is no legal or factual presumption as to the existence  or  absence  of
    family life for the purposes of Article 8 and that

         "It all depends on the facts.  The love and  affection  between  an
         adult and his parents or siblings will  not  of  itself  justify  a
         finding of a family life.  There has to be something more.  A young
         adult living with his parents or  siblings  will  normally  have  a
         family life to be respected under Article 8.  A  child  enjoying  a
         family life with his parents does not  suddenly  cease  to  have  a
         family life at midnight as he turns 18 years of age.  On the  other
         hand, a young adult living independently of his  parents  may  well
         not have a family life for the purposes of Article 8."

12. Mr Shepherd submitted that the judge focused unduly on  the  fact  that
    the Appellant lived separately from his mother before she left Nepal as
    well as other factors including the fact that she  did  not  return  to
    Nepal when he had a car accident.  He referred to  the  fact  that  the
    evidence showed that the Sponsor had visited Nepal and  sent  money  to
    her son was relevant and that the judge had failed  to  properly  apply
    the guidance in Rai.

13. It appears to me that the judge took into account  quite  a  number  of
    factors before reaching the decision in relation to Article 8(1).   The
    judge took into account the oral evidence of the Sponsor (which has not
    been challenged) where, as noted at paragraph 5 of  the  decision,  she
    said that the Appellant had been renting a  room  separately  from  the
    Sponsor since April 2009 before she came to the  UK  and  he  had  been
    living separately from her.  The judge referred to this at paragraph 17
    where he said that the evidence  shows  that  the  Appellant  moved  to
    Pokhara in 2009 and that he did so to pursue or continue to pursue  his
    secondary education.  The judge said "I do not accept that he only  did
    so because  she  was  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  they  were
    effectively being split up by  a  decision  made  them".   This  was  a
    conclusion open to the judge on the  evidence.   It  appears  that  the
    Appellant went to Pokhara in 2009 when aged 18 or 19 to  continue  with
    his education.

14. The judge also took  into  account  that  the  Appellant  finished  his
    schooling in 2010 but remained in Pokhara despite working on the family
    home at a time when he could have returned to the family farm which was
    not sold until 2012 but he chose not to do this.  This led the judge to
    conclude that by then he was independent from the family.  In fact  the
    judge noted that the Appellant did not go to university for  two  years
    after finishing school.  This too was a conclusion open to the judge on
    the basis of the evidence.

15. The judge also took into account the fact that the Appellant was  in  a
    car crash in 2014/15 and was incapacitated but managed without a  visit
    or help from his mother or having to return to live  with  any  of  his
    siblings.  The judge took this as further evidence of  the  Appellant's
    independence. Again I consider that this was a conclusion open  to  the
    judge on the basis of that evidence.

16. The judge also considered the evidence of remittances at  paragraph  18
    and, although the judge accepted that the Sponsor sent money since  she
    came to the UK [13], at paragraph 18 the judge found that "the evidence
    tends to show that he may have had some financial assistance  from  her
    but much, if not all, of the money was being sent to pay off  the  loan
    she had taken out to pay for her move to the  United  Kingdom  and  his
    university fees".  It is clear that this too was  an  important  factor
    for the judge in assessing whether the Appellant was independent of his
    mother and the extent to which she was financially supporting him.

17. I find that the judge did exactly what the guidance at paragraph 39  of
    Rai suggests which was to consider the factual  situation  in  deciding
    whether the Appellant had a family life with his mother at the time  of
    her departure to settle in the UK and which had  endured  beyond  that.
    The judge reached conclusions open to him on the evidence  in  relation
    to the existence of family life within Article 8.

18. It was accepted by Mr Shepherd that ground 2 only comes into play if  I
    accepted that there was an error in relation to  ground  1.   I  accept
    that in consideration of proportionality  at  paragraph  19  the  judge
    failed to take account of evidence in the witness statements  from  the
    Appellant and Sponsor which indicates (at paragraph 12 of  her  witness
    statement) that her husband had always intended to settle in the UK and
    at paragraph 4 of the Appellant's witness statement that he  was  given
    to understand from the Sponsor that his father would  have  settled  in
    the UK with all the family after his retirement if he was permitted  to
    do so.  I accept that this was a material  error  in  relation  to  the
    proportionality assessment.  However, given  that  I  have  found  that
    there is no material error in relation to the assessment under  Article
    8(1), any error in relation to the  proportionality  assessment  (which
    was an alternative finding  in  any  event)  is  not  material  to  the
    decision under Article 8.

19. In these circumstances I find that the judge did not make any  material
    error of law in the approach to Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 28th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

