
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26090/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 20th September 2018              |On 4th October 2018                     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                           mr Ronaldo San Agustin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer - manila

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik (Counsel) instructed by Ashfield
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of the Philippines, appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  (ECO)
    dated 26th October 2016 to refuse his application for  entry  clearance
    to the UK under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  an  adult
    dependent relative of his mother who has indefinite leave to remain  in
    the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16th May 2018.  The Appellant  now  appeals  to
    this Tribunal on the basis of permission granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Hollingworth on 1st August 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant was  born  on  15th
    July 1987.  The Sponsor, the Appellant's mother, left  the  Philippines
    in 1990 when the Appellant was about 3 years old to work in  Singapore.
    She left her children with her mother and the children have no  contact
    with their father. She came to the UK in 1997.   The  Appellant  claims
    that he is single and used to live with his  grandmother  in  her  home
    until she  died  and  he  now  lives  there  alone  and  the  house  is
    dilapidated and conditions  are  not  good.   He  says  that  he  needs
    emotional support from his mother.  He claims  to  have  mental  health
    issues.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  oral  and  documentary
    evidence at paragraphs 7  to  13.   The  judge  set  out  the  law  and
    submissions at paragraphs 14 to 19 noting that the decision  under  the
    Rules relates to paragraph E-ECDR2.4 and E-ECDR2.5.  The judge  reached
    his conclusions at paragraphs 20 to 26.   At  paragraph  20  the  judge
    found that the statements of the Appellant and Sponsor were  repetitive
    and prone to exaggeration in areas  such  as  the  frequency  of  daily
    telephone calls and that all calls were  accompanied  by  crying.   The
    judge noted that the Appellant has not lived with his mother  since  he
    was aged 3 and has seen her infrequently for limited  periods  of  time
    since then.  The judge noted that the Appellant's educational  history,
    qualifications and work history have not been mentioned and that  there
    is  no  history  related  to  any  joint  interests,   expeditions   or
    photographs showing any shared experience when they were together.  The
    judge did not accept the Appellant's evidence as to whether  there  was
    family in the Philippines other than his sister and the suggestion that
    and was "far from convinced" that he had an  accurate  picture  of  the
    Appellant's circumstances.

 4. At paragraph 31 the judge said:-

         "The central issue is whether the Appellant as  a  result  of  age,
         illness or disability requires long term personal care  to  perform
         everyday tasks and I find no evidence to sustain this.  He might be
         depressed and he might be on medication which he might  be  erratic
         in taking but the psychiatrist does not say that he  requires  long
         term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks  and  nor  does  the
         Appellant or the Sponsor in their evidence."

 5. The judge considered that the Appellant had failed  to  show  that  any
    care he requires is not available and that  there  is  no  one  in  the
    Philippines who can reasonably provide it or that it is not  affordable
    [23].  The judge concluded that the Appellant had not demonstrated that
    he met the requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The judge went on to consider Article 8 concluding that it had not been
    established that there is family life within the meaning of  Article  8
    [25]. In any event the judge went on to consider additional factors  at
    paragraph 26 before concluding that, whether or  not  there  is  family
    life between  the  Appellant  and  his  mother,  "the  refusal  of  his
    application would not result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
    the Appellant and the Sponsor such that the refusal of the  application
    would not be proportionate".

Error of law

 7. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules for  the  purposes  of
    this appeal are paragraphs E-ECDR2.4 and E-ECDR2.5 of Appendix FM which
    provide that an applicant for entry clearance  as  an  adult  dependent
    relative must, inter alia:-

         "E-ECDR2.4. The applicant ... must as a result of age,  illness  or
         disability require long term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday
         tasks.

         E-ECDR2.5.  The  applicant  ...  must  be  unable,  even  with  the
         practical and financial help of the Sponsor, to obtain the required
         level of care in the country where they are living, because -

          a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

      b) it is not affordable."

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Malik summarised the grounds into four main
    points.  His overall ground was that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    evidence was inadequate.  His first point was that in the assessment of
    paragraph 20, where the judge assessed the evidence of contact  between
    the Appellant and his mother, he failed to take into account  what  the
    Appellant  said  in  his  witness  statement.   Mr  Malik  referred  to
    paragraphs 10, 11 and 22 of  the  witness  statement  which  states  as
    follows:-

         "10. I am single.  I have no children.  I am living on my  own.   I
             used to live with my grandmother in her house  and  last  year
             she died.  Now I am living on my own and I have no job.   Even
             though I live in a very small place  and  it's  a  dilapidated
             house.  Conditions are not good.

         11.  I have been very lonely and I desperately want to be  with  my
             mother.  I went through a great deal following the death of my
             grandmother and  I  have  been  left  in  solitude  and  needs
             emotional support from my closest and my only  family  member,
             my mother.

         12.  My only sister lives in Philippines and she married and  lives
             separately and living in a very far away province.  I have  no
             communication or connection with  her.   She  lives  with  her
             family and she has her own responsibilities and I cannot place
             a burden on her to support by me.

         ...

          22.   The whole reason I made this application is because  I  have
             no one else to look after me.  My mother lives in the UK and I
             have  no  relatives  or  Sponsor  to  care  for  me   in   the
             Philippines.  I am suffering from stress  and  depression  for
             years.  I have been to doctors many times.  Recently,  I  were
             rushed to the hospital as I suddenly felt unwell and had to be
             hospitalised for a few days.  My mother is  extremely  worried
             as she  could  not  be  with  me.   I  have  been  emotionally
             suffering from depression and anxiety due to the complications
             around my situation and I  desperately  need  to  be  with  my
             mother.  I have not had a lot of happiness since we  separated
             and the death of my grandmother."

 9. Mr Malik submitted that there is no reference to this evidence  in  the
    judge's decision.  However it is clear to me that the judge  was  aware
    of the Appellant's evidence as noted at paragraph 9  of  the  decision.
    There the judge recorded that the Appellant has been living in the same
    place where he has lived since he was aged 5 and pointed   out that the
    Appellant made no reference to an inability as a result of age, illness
    or disability to requiring long term personal care to perform  everyday
    tasks. It is clear that the judge was very aware of the requirements of
    the Rules in relation to this matter.   The paragraphs  highlighted  by
    Mr Malik do not establish that the Appellant met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 or E-ECDR.2.5.  In my view the judge was entitled,
    on the basis of the evidence before him, to conclude  at  paragraph  20
    that  he  did  not  have  an  accurate  picture  of   the   Appellant's
    circumstances.  I do not accept the contention that the judge failed to
    take into account all of the evidence.

10. Mr Malik contended that the judge failed to undertake an assessment  of
    E-ECDR2.4 and E-ECDR.2.5. However in my view it is clear that the judge
    took into account all of the evidence before concluding at paragraph 21
    that there was no evidence or insufficient evidence  to  point  to  any
    requirement on the part of the Appellant to long term personal care  to
    perform everyday tasks.  Mr Malik did not point to any evidence in  the
    witness statements or oral evidence to show that  he  does  meet  these
    requirements.

11. At page 54  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  there  is  a  letter  from  a
    psychiatrist dated 22nd July 2017 which states that  the  Appellant  is
    suffering from clinical depression for which  he  receives  medication.
    There is a further letter dated 5th May 2018 from the same psychiatrist
    which again states  that  the  Appellant  is  suffering  from  clinical
    depression and that he does not take his  medication  regularly.   This
    evidence was taken into account by the judge at paragraph 21  and  none
    of this evidence points to the Appellant meeting  the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 as set out above.

12. The judge considered  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.5  at  paragraph  23  of  the
    decision but again Mr Malik was unable to point to any  evidence  which
    demonstrates satisfaction of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5  or  shows  that  any
    required level of care could not be obtained in  the  Philippines.   Mr
    Malik relied on the decision in Osman v ECO  Riyadh  OA/18244/2012  and
    submitted that cultural  factors  should  be  taken  into  account  and
    submitted that an assessment of the required level of care and who  may
    appropriately provide  will  depend  upon  the  circumstances  and  the
    evidence in any given case.  However, in my view in this case there  is
    no evidence about any relevant cultural factors. The judge took account
    of all of the evidence in reaching his conclusion  that  the  Appellant
    did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

13. At the hearing Mr Malik further submitted that in  the  conclusions  at
    paragraph 21 the judge failed to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
    evidence in  his  witness  statement  at  paragraphs  19  and  20.   At
    paragraph 19 the Appellant said:-

         "19. I hate living alone and I miss my mother.  I missed my  mother
             so much I phoned her at least over ten  times  a  day.   I  am
             financially dependent on her and every month she  sends  money
             to me.  She is doing this since she left  Singapore.   She  is
             supporting me financially since 1990.   She  calls  me  almost
             every day and every time she calls we cry and ask her to  take
             me with her.

         20.  I do not have a job or any business in Philippines  and  there
             is no home or permanent  place  to  stay  in  Philippines.   I
             cannot support myself and need the care and attention from  my
             mother.  My mother and I are very  close  and  emotionally  we
             have a strong bond.  Having spent so much time apart I feel it
             is important for us to be reunited and live with  one  another
             and I feel that the exceptional circumstances be considered."

14. Again I do not see how the contents of the  witness  statement  advance
    the Appellant's claim to meet the requirements of paragraphs E-ECDR.2.4
    and 2.5 at all.   Further,  the  judge  dealt  with  this  evidence  at
    paragraph 20 where he considered that the evidence of the Appellant and
    the Sponsor as to the  frequency  of  daily  telephone  calls  and  the
    assertion that they were accompanied by  crying  was  an  exaggeration.
    This was a conclusion open to the judge on the basis  of  the  evidence
    before him.

15. At the hearing Mr Malik further submitted that the judge had  erred  in
    his assessment of Article 8.  He submitted that there  was  a  lack  of
    reasoning as to why the judge found there was no  family  life  between
    the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  given  that  there  was  evidence  of
    emotional and financial dependence and in his submission there was more
    than  normal  emotional  ties  between  them.    The   judge   made   a
    proportionality assessment at paragraph 26 and in Mr Malik's submission
    the judge failed to take account of the skeleton argument which  relied
    upon the case of Singh v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  He pointed out that the issue of whether there is
    family  life  between  the  adults  is  fact-sensitive  assessment  and
    submitted that the judge here failed to  consider  the  facts  in  this
    case.

16. The judge made the findings in relation to family life at paragraph  25
    where the judge said; "I find that whilst he is the son of the  Sponsor
    he is an adult who has lived separate and apart from his  mother  since
    he was 3 and I cannot find on the basis of the evidence that  there  is
    family life within the meaning of Article 8."  The  judge  had  already
    found  at  paragraph  20  that  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor   had
    exaggerated their evidence as to the  nature  of  their  contact.   The
    judge had already found that he did not have an accurate picture of the
    Appellant's circumstances.  On the basis of the evidence before him  it
    was open to the judge to conclude that the Appellant and his mother had
    not established that they had family life within Article 8.

17. In relation to the alternative  findings  as  to  proportionality,  the
    judge considered all of the evidence and all of the factors [26].   The
    judge took into account the fact that the Appellant did  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge also took into account that the Appellant
    had lived all of his life in the  Philippines  and  was  integrated  in
    relation to its culture and language.  Although the judge accepted that
    the Appellant had a mental health issue he said "his mental  health  is
    hardly sufficiently serious and it is perfectly  apparent  that  he  is
    receiving treatment and medication there for it."  The judge went on to
    find that "whether or not there is family life between his  mother  and
    him the refusal of his application would not  result  in  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences for the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  such  that  the
    refusal of the application would not be proportionate."   I  find  that
    this assessment was open to the judge on the basis of the evidence.

18. I find that the grounds have not been  made  out  in  relation  to  the
    judge's decision.  The judge considered all of the evidence and reached
    conclusions open to him on the basis of that evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 28th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

