
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/26326/2016
     HU/26328/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th January 2018 & 7th March 2018         |On 6th April 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Rosa [A]
                                 Claver [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin Home Office Presenting Officer (17th
January 2018)
                                          Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office
Presenting Officer (7th March 2018)
For the Respondents:   Mr Joao [A], Sponsor (in person)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of the Democratic Republic of Congo.  They
    applied for entry clearance as the children of the Sponsor.  The  Entry
    Clearance Officer refused both applications on 20th October 2016.   The
    Appellants appealed against those decisions to the First-tier Tribunal.
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal allowed  those  appeals  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 18th October 2017.  The Secretary of State  now  appeals
    against both of those decisions with permission granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes on 17th November 2017.

 2. In each decision the Entry Clearance  Officer  gave  four  reasons  for
    refusing the  application.   These  were  (i)  that  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that the Sponsor is the father and related as claimed to  the
    Appellants; (ii) that  the  Appellants  have  not  evidenced  that  the
    Sponsor  had  and  has  continuing  control  and  direction  of   their
    upbringing including making the  important  decisions  in  relation  to
    their lives; (iii) that the evidence provided  was  not  sufficient  to
    show that the Appellants would  be  accommodated  adequately  by  their
    Sponsor without recourse to public funds in  accommodation  which  they
    own or occupy exclusively; and (iv) that they had failed to provide  TB
    certificates in accordance with paragraph 320(8A)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the evidence  of  the  Sponsor
    was credible and reliable. The judge found that the evidence shows that
    the Sponsor has had sole responsibility for the Appellants since  2010.
    The judge considered the evidence as to the relationship and found:

         "16. DNA evidence would be conclusive evidence of relationship  but
         the Tribunal does not need to be sure; it only has to be  satisfied
         on the balance of  probabilities.  In  this  case  because  of  the
         quality of the oral evidence and the self  prepared  Bundle  it  is
         satisfied that the Appellants have shown that they are  related  to
         the Sponsor as claimed. When asked the question as to whether  they
         would undergo DNA testing the Sponsor immediately replied yes. This
         was to his credit and was a  spontaneous  answer  to  the  question
         asked."

 4. In the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    contends that the judge failed to  make  findings  on  material  issues
    which were in dispute.  It is contended that the judge made no findings
    on the Sponsor's ability to adequately  maintain  and  accommodate  the
    Appellants without recourse to public funds nor  had  the  judge  dealt
    with the failure of the Appellants  to  provide  a  TB  certificate  as
    requested.  The second ground contends that it  was  not  open  to  the
    judge to find that the Appellants and Sponsor were related  as  claimed
    when this had been put directly in issue by the ECO and the Sponsor had
    failed to adduce DNA  evidence  or  provide  any  explanation  for  his
    failure to do so.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Melvin accepted that the Secretary of State
    had not appeared at the hearing of the First-tier Tribunal and that the
    Sponsor had  appeared  in  person.   He  accepted  that  the  issue  of
    maintenance had not been taken by the Entry Clearance Officer.  However
    he pointed out that the accommodation issue  had  been  raised  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and that this had not been dealt  with  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He accepted that TB certificates are in the
    file and that these have been  stamped  and  issued  by  UK  Visas  and
    Immigration and accepted that  the  issue  about  the  TB  certificates
    therefore falls away.  Mr Melvin  pointed  out  that  the  relationship
    issue was raised by the Entry Clearance Manager and the Entry Clearance
    Officer when considering the application.  He accepted that  the  judge
    found at paragraph 15 that the Sponsor was a wholly  credible  witness.
    He accepted that at paragraph 16, whilst noting that DNA evidence would
    be conclusive evidence of the relationship, the judge reminded  himself
    that  the  Tribunal  has  to  be  satisfied  only  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  Based on the quality  of  the  oral  evidence  and  the
    evidence in the bundle the judge  accepted  that  the  Appellants  have
    shown that they are related to the Sponsor as claimed.  At the  hearing
    before me Mr Melvin accepted that it  was  difficult  to  maintain  any
    criticism of this finding in  light  of  the  judge's  findings  as  to
    credibility.

 6. This left the accommodation issue as the only issue still  in  dispute.
    It is clear to me reading the decision that the judge failed to  engage
    with the issue of  accommodation  as  put  in  question  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

 7. At the hearing the Sponsor accepted that  no  documentary  evidence  of
    accommodation in the form of a tenancy agreement or any other  evidence
    had been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  He said that  he  lives
    in a two-bedroom flat which is privately rented.   He  said  that  when
    they come to the UK his daughter will sleep in one of the bedrooms  and
    that he and his son will sleep in the other bedroom.

 8. Mr Melvin expressed concerns about the oral evidence given in light  of
    the fact that the two children are step-siblings and in light of  their
    age (16 and 17). I agreed that oral evidence from the Sponsor  on  this
    issue was not sufficient to demonstrate that accommodation is available
    to the Appellants within the terms of the Immigration Rules.

 9. In these circumstances I decided to adjourn the hearing and  to  direct
    that the Appellants provide documentary evidence  in  relation  to  the
    accommodation within a period of 28 days.

10. In advance of the resumed  hearing  the  Sponsor  submitted  a  tenancy
    agreement in respect of accommodation into which he had moved  on  22nd
    January 2018. At the resumed hearing on 7th March 2018  I  pointed  out
    to the Sponsor that the tenancy agreement did not given  details  about
    the size of the property and in particular the number  of  bedrooms.  I
    gave the Sponsor time and he contacted the landlord who sent  an  email
    to the Tribunal. In that email the landlord confirmed that the property
    has a reception room, a kitchen, a bathroom, a toilet and two bedrooms.
    Ms  Fijiwala  accepted  on  the  basis  of  this  evidence   that   the
    accommodation provided by the Sponsor is adequate. I agree.

11. Accordingly I preserve the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. I
    set the decision aside only to the extent that it did not deal with the
    issue of accommodation and I remake that part of the decision  deciding
    that the evidence shows that there is adequate accommodation. Therefore
    the Appellants have demonstrated that they meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules. Accordingly the decision to refuse  the  application
    for entry clearance  is  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their
    family life.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds of appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 30th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


Signed                              Date: 30th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

