
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26197/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2019                            |On 04 March 2019              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Mr hamid rabai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Farhat, Solicitor instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is referred to as "the SSHD".   The  Respondent  as  "the
    Claimant".

2.   The Claimant a national of Algeria date  of  birth  11  September  1968
    appealed against the SSHD's decision, dated 9 November 2016, to  refuse
    an application for indefinite leave  to  remain  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Sweet  who,
    on 15 November 2018, allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

3.   Permission to the SSHD was given on 12  December  2018.   The  Claimant
    made an extensive Rule 24 response on 25  January  2019.   The  grounds
    essentially raised two points albeit  expressed  as  three,  the  first
    being the issue of whether or not  the  Claimant  had  resided  in  the
    United Kingdom for twenty years at least at the date of the hearing and
    whether there was in fact a dispute about that matter at all bearing in
    mind it was thought that a Section  120  notice  had  effectively  been
    given at the hearing and the SSHD had consented  to  the  matter  being
    considered.  It is quite clear the point was something of a red herring
    because as a fact under paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (the Rules) it was common ground that  it was  not  until  after  that,
    the Claimant had resided in the United Kingdom for over twenty years.

4.   What was in reality the issue  was  raised  in  the  second  and  third
    grounds namely that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  give
    adequate or sufficient  reasons  why  the  Article  8  ECHR  claim  was
    engaged.  Whether or not in the light of the case  law  the  Judge  had
    correctly addressed the consideration of the Article 8 issues including
    the  public  interest  question  bearing  in  mind  that  part  of  the
    Claimant's conduct in the United Kingdom had been that he admitted,  he
    had obtained false identification purely with a view to being  able  to
    work in the UK.  He could not have done so with his  Algerian  identity
    document of the passport.

5.   The Judge made a number of adverse criticisms  of  the  reliability  of
    the Claimant's evidence which undoubtedly were of some materiality  and
    some weight  in  the  assessment  of  proportionality  and  the  public
    interest question as well.  Regrettably the  Judge's  analysis  of  the
    Article 8 ECHR claim was not sufficient in terms either setting out the
    material considerations that the Judge had regard  to;  let  alone  the
    material facts.

6.   In these circumstances, I find that the Original  Tribunal's  reasoning
    falls far short of that which it is necessary and was not addressed.  I
    do not speculate why the error occurred.   It  is  enough  to  say  the
    Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The matter will have to  be
    remade again specifically addressing the Article 8 ECHR issues.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent to which the matter is to be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made nor is one required.


DIRECTIONS

List for hearing at Hatton Cross.

Not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet.

Time estimate two hours.

No interpreter required.

Four witnesses.

Any further evidence to be served not  later  than  10  clear  working  days
before the substantive hearing unless otherwise directed at a CMRH or  by  a
judge of the First-tier Tribunal


Signed                                  Date 25 February 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey








