

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/26282/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 4 October 2017                        |       On 9 January 2018            |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               M--- P--- T---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms T Murshed, Counsel instructed by A B Mackenzie
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any  matter
likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.  Breach  of
this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of  court.  I  make  this  order
following the example of the First-tier Tribunal because the  respondent  is
vulnerable and any publicity may lead to his harm.

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal (Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McCarthy)  to
allow the appeal of the respondent, hereinafter "the  claimant",  against  a
decision of the Secretary of State on 22 November 2016 to deport him.

I will endeavour to set out below in appropriate detail my understanding  of
the relevant law but by way of introduction I explain  that  Judge  McCarthy
allowed the appeal because the claimant is a 28-year-old  man  described  as
vulnerable who suffers from a degree of autism and  who  has  lived  in  the
United Kingdom since he was about 10 months old.

However, he is also a persistent criminal.  This is not  a  case  where  the
Secretary of State has rushed in to make a deportation order  at  the  first
possible opportunity but has on two occasions  warned  him  that  he  risked
deportation if his behaviour did not improve and the decision to deport  was
only made  after  the  claimant  was  sent  to  prison  for  30  months  for
possessing with intent to supply controlled drugs of Class B, in  this  case
cannabis.  He was also convicted of having a counterfeit currency note  with
dishonest intent and assaulting a police constable,  for  which  matters  he
was given concurrent terms of imprisonment.  Judge McCarthy noted  that  the
respondent commenced deportation action for  the  fourth  time  after  these
convictions.

Mr Wilding, appropriately, built his case on the suitably brief  grounds  of
appeal on which permission was sought but in  extreme  summary  it  was  his
case that the First-tier Tribunal had not considered properly or made  clear
and rational findings concerning the degree of  the  claimant's  integration
into life in the United Kingdom and the difficulties he would  face  in  the
event of his establishing himself in Malaysia.  This is not an appeal  under
the Rules and there might be some room to debate the  extent  to  which  the
consideration of the Rules is relevant.  However the parties agreed, and  it
is plainly correct, that the Tribunal was obliged to consider  Section  117C
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   This  is  a  Section
that establishes as a matter of statute law that the deportation of  foreign
criminals is in the public interest and that the more  serious  the  offence
committed the greater the public interest in deportation.  However,  in  the
case of a person who had not been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of
four years or more, and this is such a case, there are statutory  exceptions
to the requirement of deportation.  Exception 2 is not  relevant  here,  but
Judge McCarthy found that Exception 1 applies.  There are three elements  in
exception 1 and Mr Wilding, correctly, emphasised that they are  cumulative,
not alternative.  They refer to the foreign  criminal  as  "C"  and  Section
117C(4) says that:

  "Exception 1 applies where-

a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of C's life,

b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and

c) there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration  into  the
  country to which C is proposed to be deported."

Clearly the requirements of sub-paragraph (a) are met in this case.   It  is
not in dispute that the claimant was born on 28  January  1989  and  he  was
brought to the United  Kingdom  with  permission  with  his  parents  on  19
November 1989.  It follows that he was less  than  10  months  old  when  he
arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  he  has  lived  there  without   any
substantial absences for holiday or other reasons since then.

It is the Secretary of State's contention  that  the  judge  failed  to  ask
himself properly if the claimant  was  socially  and  culturally  integrated
into the United Kingdom and failed to decide rationally if  there  would  be
very significant obstacles to his integration in Malaysia.

I  consider  the  complaint  first  because  that  is,  I  find,  the   most
straightforward.  The judge said at paragraph 47 of  his  decision  that  he
was satisfied that there were "very significant obstacles to  the  appellant
integrating into  Malaysia".   The  judge  found  that  the  claimant  is  a
vulnerable adult whose vulnerabilities make him unable to cope  on  his  own
and that would severely impact on his ability to  integrate  into  Malaysia.
This finding is  supported  by  evidence  in  particular  from  a  Mr  Peter
Horrocks, an independent social worker and a Dr Rozmin Halari, a  Consultant
Clinical Psychologist.  Together these reports show that  the  claimant  has
been treated for behavioural disorder and that  he  has  "attention  deficit
and hyperactivity" for which medication was  prescribed.   Mr  Ewart  opined
that the claimant  should  have  received  a  formal  statement  of  special
educational needs and that his difficulties with  social  communication  and
interaction  are  suggestive  of  Autistic  Spectrum  Disorder.   Dr  Halari
confirms that the claimant has difficulties with  social  communication  and
interaction and the  GP's  records  refer  to  anxiety,  panic  attacks  and
depression.  It was the expert's opinion that  the  claimant  would  not  be
able to integrate into Malaysian society without  a  significant  degree  of
support.  He is only able to manage to  the  extent  that  he  does  in  the
United Kingdom because of the help he receives  from  his  parents,  sister,
partner and professionals.

The judge was, rightly,  critical  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
letter which minimised the claimant's difficulties saying that she:

  "acknowledged that you have previously  been  prescribed  treatments  for
  perceived mental health issues, that you have previously  been  diagnosed
  with ADHD, depression and you may have possible traits of autism".

The judge described this  as  "hedging  language"  that  was  not  a  proper
analysis of the evidence.  The judge was satisfied  that  the  claimant  has
all of these conditions and I see  no  basis  for  challenging  the  judge's
finding on this point which is explained more fully in paragraph 23  of  his
decision.  Judge McCarthy was not writing a decision for public record.   He
was resolving a dispute between the parties.  I do  not  criticise  him  for
not saying more about the contents of the reports to which he refers,  which
were properly disclosed to the Secretary of State, which have not  been  met
by any alternative expert evidence and which have not been  challenged  with
any force.

As is to be expected in a report by a social worker,  much  of  the  content
repeats the claimant's version of events,  although  Mr  Horrocks  does  not
treat it uncritically.  At paragraph 4.7 of his report  dated  25  September
2015 Mr Horrocks says:

  "As a result [the claimant] does not have the  basic  qualities,  skills,
  knowledge and functioning to live independently, even in the UK  he  will
  require ongoing support and intervention in terms of his daily  life  and
  functioning.  [The claimant] lacks any friendship network  and  his  only
  support network is his immediate family, his mother and father.  They are
  not willing to give up on their son and are prepared to support him on an
  ongoing basis; they recognise that he lacks the skills and  abilities  to
  live independently and that he will remain dependent on their support  on
  an ongoing basis.  They have been through many difficult times with  [the
  claimant], they have seen how he has damaged their  home  and  they  have
  experienced the pain and shame of their son being sent  to  prison.   But
  they recognise that there is no alternative option."

Under the heading "5.0 Conclusions/Recommendations", a part  of  the  report
where Mr Horrocks is clearly expressing his  professional  opinion  and  not
simply repeating instructions he says:

  "5.2   [The claimant] lacks the basic skills to live independently in the
  UK,  including  self-care  skills,   financial   management   and   basic
  communication skills and if he remains in this country, he will  continue
  to be dependent on the support of his parents.  If  he  was  returned  to
  Malaysia that would spell disaster for [the claimant], he has no  support
  network there at all.  The most likely and rapid outcome would be that he
  would end up homeless, living on the streets and foraging for  food.   He
  would be unable to find employment because  he  lacks  the  language  and
  skills.  He is also at high risk offending [(sic) of ending (?)] up in  a
  conflict situation because  of  his  social  communication  difficulties,
  which in turn could lead to violence and serious harm if not death.   The
  most likely outcome if he was  returned  to  Malaysia  is  that  he  will
  experience an untimely end.  A return of [the claimant] to Malaysia would
  also in all likelihood lead to a major deterioration in the mental health
  problems of his girlfriend, [C], she has a history of being considered as
  high risk of self-harm and suicide and the  trauma  caused  by  her  loss
  could lead to a return of this behaviour."

There was an update to that report dated  19  May  2017.   The  more  recent
report shows encouraging signs of  improvement.   The  claimant  appears  to
have benefitted from his time in  prison  in  that  it  has  caused  him  to
reflect on his life and given him opportunities to improve himself.  He  has
found a steady partner who is in the  latter  stages  of  a  pregnancy.   Mr
Horrocks concludes his report at paragraph 4.9.  He says of the claimant:

  "He has a strong support network in his parents,  although  the  enmeshed
  nature  of  their  relationship  with  [the  claimant]   will   lead   to
  difficulties and arguments.  He also has a partner, who  knows  him  well
  and is committed to him and they are in the process  of  having  a  child
  together.  [The claimant] is also committed to  accessing  the  necessary
  support  for  his  mental  health  to  avoid  any  future  problems   and
  difficulties.  [The  claimant]  has  struggled  to  function  in  British
  society, where he has a good understanding of the rules and  expectations
  of society and in an alien society the challenge will be even greater and
  the risks for [the claimant] will be even greater."

The psychologist's report is dated 17 October 2016.  It is  prepared  by  Dr
Rozmin Halari whose main qualifications are  being  a  Chartered  Consultant
Clinical Psychologist and an Honorary  Senior  Lecturer  at  Kings  College,
London.

Dr Halari observes that much of the claimant's criminality has  been  linked
with his inability to understand other people's  intentions  and  behaviour.
At paragraph 127 Dr Halari says:

  "[The  claimant]  struggles  to  understand   people,   initiate   social
  conversation,  understand  other  people's   thoughts,   intentions   and
  behaviours and he is easily led.  With these difficulties [the  claimant]
  would struggle to get a job, seek  support,  find  accommodation  and  he
  would struggle to understand  and  follow  instructions  because  of  his
  neurodevelopment and learning difficulties."

It must be remembered that there is no evidence to  say  that  the  claimant
will have any help in Malaysia.  The relatives are  estranged  and  elderly.
There is no basis for concluding they  would  have  the  inclination,  still
less the skills, necessary to give this disturbed man the  support  that  he
needs.

Unless there are proper reasons for going behind the expert's  reports,  and
as far as I can see none whatsoever were advanced before Judge McCarthy  who
has criticised the Secretary of State for not reading them  properly,  there
is no basis whatsoever for doubting the  lawfulness  of  his  decision  that
there would be "very significant obstacles" to  the  claimant's  integration
into the country to which it is proposed that he would be deported.

Of course, this is not the end of the matter.  The  judge  also  had  to  be
satisfied that the claimant is "socially and culturally  integrated  in  the
United Kingdom".

This is something of a Delphine term in the context of a deportation  appeal
because there will be a  sense  in  which  a  person,  by  reason  of  being
eligible for deportation, can  be  said  not  to  have  been  "socially  and
culturally integrated in the United Kingdom", or at  least  not  into  those
parts of the United Kingdom society that the Secretary of  State  wishes  to
encourage.

Mr Wilding was particularly keen to emphasise that time spent in prison  can
hardly be described as integration in British society.

The  claimant's  criminal  record  is  set  out  conveniently,  if   a   tad
confusingly, under the heading "Immigration History" on  the  top  sheet  of
the Secretary of State's bundle.  That he was made subject of a  three-month
curfew order is to his discredit, but I do not regard that as a  significant
breach of his integration.

In September 2007 he was sent to a young offenders'  institution  for  three
years.   In  November  2010,  he  was  sentenced  to  imprisonment   for   a
dwellinghouse burglary and the sentence was reduced to  eighteen  months  by
the Court of Appeal.   In  August  2014  he  was  sentenced  to  30  months'
imprisonment.  I do not accept that these sentences of  imprisonment,  which
no doubt are considerably longer than the time actually served, prevent  the
claimant being recognised as someone "socially and culturally integrated  in
the United Kingdom".  Indeed, by the time Judge McCarthy  heard  the  appeal
there was evidence that the claimant had shown signs of more  responsibility
and was coping with support in the United  Kingdom.   With  the  benefit  of
hindsight it may have been more helpful if  Judge  McCarthy  had  said  more
about this, but it is quite clear to me that he was entitled to conclude  on
the evidence before him,  as  he  undoubtedly  did,  that  the  claimant  is
socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom.

Judge McCarthy no doubt will have seen  the  claimant's  father's  statement
dated 16 June 2017  where  he  refers  to  the  claimant  being  "thoroughly
integrated to the British way  of  life",  being  able  to  speak  only  the
English language which he speaks fluently, and having  been  educated  there
and adopting its local habits  in  respect  of  food  and  supporting  local
football teams and social life.

Paragraph 55 of Judge McCarthy's decision  is  particularly  pertinent.   He
said:

  "However, the [claimant's] evidence is sufficient to show that it is more
  likely than not that although he has integrated into the UK, this has not
  been without  difficulties.   His  personal  situation  means  there  are
  obstacles that would prevent him integrating into Malaysia.  He can  only
  integrate if he has clear support structures, which he would not have  in
  Malaysia."

The Secretary of State's grounds draw attention  to  the  decision  of  this
Tribunal in Bossade (ss117A-D-interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT  415
(IAC). Whilst it  is  plain  that  the  Act  looks  for  both  "social"  and
"cultural" integration it is not clear what difference the use of these  two
words is intended to  highlight.   Clearly  mere  residence  in  the  United
Kingdom is not sufficient and the longer a person has spent  in  custody  in
the United Kingdom the less chance there is of showing that he  is  socially
and culturally integrated.  However it must be remembered this  claimant  is
a young man who came to the United Kingdom at the age of 10  months.   Apart
from a few short holidays his whole life experience has been in  the  United
Kingdom.  One of the reasons he has found it difficult  to  be  "integrated"
is his mental health problems suggestive of autism.  It cannot  be  the  law
that a person is easier to deport because he is  autistic.   To  the  extent
that the claimant has  managed  to  integrate  anywhere  he  has  integrated
himself into life in the United Kingdom, both socially and  culturally.   As
the  grounds  themselves  recognise  the  evidence  is  that  he   has   now
established a partnership.  It is also right to say that he has  established
some residence without committing further  offences.   The  test  for  being
socially and culturally integrated is in the present tense.  The finding  of
social and cultural integration was permissible.

The grounds complain that there should not have been a  finding  that  there
are very significant obstacles to integration.  The grounds state:

  "In paragraph 43 the  FTTJ  finds  that  family  in  Malaysia  cannot  be
  approached to assist the [claimant].  This fails to address paragraph  84
  of the decision  letter  with  reference  to  the  [claimant's]  father's
  statement that confirms he continues to visit Malaysia, and  friends  and
  relatives there have visited him in the  UK.   Failure  to  resolve  this
  conflict and give clear reasons for any conclusion is an error of law."

Paragraph 84 of the refusal  letter  needs  to  be  considered.   There  the
Secretary of State said:

  "There are some discrepancies between your  father's  accounts  regarding
  contacts and extended family in Malaysia.  In the Social Worker's  report
  of September 2015, he is reported as saying that  he  had  not  told  his
  family in Malaysia of  your  behaviour  or  criminality,  yet  in  his  8
  September 2016 statement, he states that his three sisters in Malaysia do
  not want to be involved  with  you  due  to  your  medical  and  criminal
  history.  He also claims in his 8 September 2016 statement  that  he  has
  continued to visit Malaysia and that he has  had  friends  and  relatives
  that have visited him in the UK - despite simultaneously claiming to have
  been 'semi ostracized' by his family for having a mixed marriage.  It  is
  considered that the evidence submitted with respect to your father having
  continued contact with friends and  relatives  in  Malaysia  is  a  clear
  indication that there are people present in Malaysia  who  could  provide
  support to you on return there.  This is supported by the findings of the
  Upper Tribunal Judge who refused your application for Judicial Review  at
  the paper hearing stage on 7 September 2016, stating: 'The applicant  has
  family members in Malaysia and the claim that he would be unable to  look
  to them for help is speculation'."

All the claimant's father says in his statement which  tends  to  support  a
finding that the claimant could access family support in  Malaysia  is  that
his knowledge of contemporary Malaysia has been  updated  through  relatives
and friends who come to visit the United Kingdom and through his own  visits
to Malaysia.  He makes it plain that on his visits to Malaysia  he  has  had
to stay in a hotel because of the attitude of his family.   He  did  explain
in his statement that as  he  is  now  a  British  citizen  he  has  had  to
relinquish his Malaysian nationality.  He explains rather carefully that  he
could only stay on a short  stay  visa  for  between  two  weeks  and  three
months.  He would not be eligible for  any  of  the  long-term  stay  visas.
Neither would he have the resources to get the necessary  health  insurance.
There may be occasions where a close relative has  such  strong  links  with
the country to which the candidate for deportation would  be  returned  that
he would be in a position to provide useful help.  This appeal  is  about  a
young man who is going to need a lot of help and  the  suggestion  that  his
father could or would provide it depends  on  nothing  more  than  it  being
convenient to the Secretary of State's case.  In  fact  the  evidence  shows
that the claimant's father has considered the possibility with  rather  more
care than is often shown in cases of this kind  and  it  is  clearly  not  a
viable option.

The suggestion  that  the  claimant's  partner  could  return  with  him  is
misconceived.  The Judge did not decide that this was an "Exception 2"  case
but an "Exception 1" case.  Judge McCarthy did give reasons for saying  that
the claimant's partner could not accompany him.   She  has  never  left  the
United Kingdom having had a troubled past and remains close  to  her  mother
in the United Kingdom.

The Judge thought  it  unreasonable  to  expect  her  to  leave  the  United
Kingdom, but also found that there was no reason to accept  that  she  would
be of any use to the claimant in Malaysia.  She does not  know  the  country
and  has  no  experience  of  life  there.   To  see  her  as  an  agent  of
integration, even assuming (and I  see  no  basis  whatsoever  for  such  an
assumption) that she could enter Malaysia lawfully  is  unrealistic  to  the
point of being silly and show no appreciation of her circumstances.

I note the comments made  about  the  facilitated  return  scheme,  but  the
claimant is not a person of ordinary health and robustness.  This  has  been
explained very carefully several times and was clearly in the  Judge's  mind
and the conclusion was open to him.  The Secretary of State  also  suggested
that family members could go in the short term and  assist  in  the  initial
integration.  I do not see why they should.  They want their son  to  remain
in the United Kingdom with them.   I  see  no  reason  whatsoever  why  they
should go to Malaysia for the purpose of making it easier for the  Secretary
of State to deport the claimant.  It would be against their  interests.   It
cannot be assumed that that is something they would do.

More importantly, there no basis in the evidence for  assuming  that  visits
of that kind would be sufficient.  The claimant is a young man  who  has  no
real experience of Malaysia whatsoever  and  no  language  and  considerable
difficulties in adjusting to anything.

In short, if Judge McCarthy's decision can be criticised at all, he  can  be
criticised for not giving more reasons from the many available to him  which
he had plainly considered before making his findings, and  particularly  his
finding that the claimant is socially, culturally integrated in  the  United
Kingdom.  I am satisfied that the decision as a whole is at the  very  least
adequate and has not been undermined by the Secretary of State's grounds  or
Mr Wilding's realistic and measured submissions.

Although it is the claimant's fault that he has  chosen  to  commit  serious
criminal offences, it is not his fault that  he  has  lived  in  the  United
Kingdom since he was a little boy and it is not his fault  that  his  mental
state makes it particularly difficult for him to establish himself  in  what
is in all but name to him a foreign country.

Although statute  law  has  made  it  difficult  for  a  person  subject  to
deportation to establish  a  human  rights  claim,  certain  exceptions  are
recognised and Judge McCarthy clearly found that the circumstances  of  this
case came within one of the exceptions.  That was a decision that  was  open
to him and I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.







Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 22 December 2017              |
|Judge                                |                                     |









