
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber   Appeal Number: HU/26491/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 11th September 2018          |On 24th October 2018           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   Ms K J

                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr Z Raza, instructed by Marks and Marks Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First Tier Tribunal that is Ms J as the  appellant
    and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal a determination
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain,  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal, on human rights grounds, against a decision of the Secretary of
    State dated 22nd September 2016.

 3. The respondent's decision refused the application dated 16th  May  2016
    for leave to remain on the basis of the appellant's family and  private
    life in the  UK  under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    appellant did not meet the eligibility requirements because her husband
    notified the Home Office that she had left  her  husband  on  22nd  May
    2016.  She was no longer in a relationship.  Further, no  evidence  was
    provided with regard the financial requirements.  Her  application  was
    also refused under paragraph 276ADE. It was  not  accepted  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to her integration  into  Pakistan.
    She had spent the majority of her life in Pakistan  (she  was  born  in
    1990) and she only entered the UK on 11th August 2013.  She had  stated
    on her application form that she retained social and cultural  ties  in
    Pakistan and her parents and family still lived there.  There were thus
    no compelling circumstances to warrant further leave.

 4. Judge Chamberlain in a decision promulgated on  3rd  April  2018  made,
    inter alia, the following findings when allowing the appeal

    ''While the appellant applied under the partner route, I find that  her
    relationship has broken down, and that the reason for the breakdown  is
    the domestic violence she suffered at the hands of her husband. I  find
    that she was also mistreated and abused by her mother in law. [11]

    Although the appellant  did  not  apply  under  the  domestic  violence
    concession, I  find  that  the  behaviour  of  her  husband  meets  the
    government definition of domestic violence  set  out  in  the  skeleton
    argument. I find that were  she  to  apply  now,  she  would  meet  the
    requirements of E-DVILR.1.3. of Appendix FM. [12]

    ...

    On 22 May 2016 the  appellant  was  forced  out  of  the  marital  home
    following an argument. She was insulted and abused by her sister-in-law
    and then her mother-in-law kicked her out. She contacted  her  brothers
    and asked them to collect her. [16]

    The appellant was not cross-examined on the abuse she received from her
    husband or his family ... [17]

    ...

    Taking into account  all  of  the  evidence,  I  find  the  appellant's
    marriage broke down due to domestic violence. [19]

    ...

    Further, I find that the appellant's family in Pakistan do not  approve
    of the fact that she not returned to her husband ... [20]

    The appellant was asked in cross-examination  why  the  elders  of  the
    family get together and sort out the problem, given that  she  and  her
    husband are paternal and maternal first cousins ... [24]

    I find that the appellant would  be  returning  as  a  lone  woman  who
    suffered domestic violence and who is at risk of 'honour' violence. She
    is perceived to have transgressed society by leaving her marriage.  She
    would not  have  any  family  support  or  any  male  ''protector''  or
    "guardian''... [31]

Application for Permission to Appeal


 5. The application for permission to appeal contended that the  first-tier
    Tribunal Judge found the appellant met the requirements of E-DVILR.1.3.
    of Appendix FM, [12], and accepted the appellant had  been  subject  to
    domestic violence.  That matter had not been before  the  Secretary  of
    State to make a decision. It was submitted that the judge had acted  as
    a primary decision-maker on the point and allowed the  appeal  on  that
    basis.  In preventing due process to be followed the judge had erred in
    law.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge erred as the decision did not  suggest  that  the  respondent
    consented to this course of action.

The Hearing


 7. At the hearing, Mr Raza accepted that it was the new  matter,  but  the
    issue of 'new matter' was not challenged by the respondent at the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.  I was referred to the skeleton argument  placed
    by Mr Raza before First-tier Tribunal, which  noted  the  issues  being
    raised (a)  whether  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration within Pakistan  (b)  whether  there  were  any
    exceptional and compelling  circumstances  (c)  'was  the  appellant  a
    victim of domestic violence - this is material to both a  and  b'.   Mr
    Raza submitted that the Presenting Officer was aware of the  issue  and
    proceeded and that there was implicit consent.  I was also referred  to
    the Guidance on Rights of Appeal Version 7 published on 30th July 2018.

 8. Mr Avery submitted that the Presenting Officer ran the case  and  dealt
    with it on the basis of the decision made by the  Secretary  of  State,
    which was not on the basis of domestic violence.  The  application  for
    leave to remain was made on the basis  of  her  relationship  with  her
    husband and not on the basis of separation or domestic  violence.  This
    was clearly a new matter and permission had not been granted. That  was
    evident from the decision, and a careful reading of the decision.   The
    judge's record of cross examination showed that the presenting  officer
    approached the case without making a decision on the new matter.

Conclusions

 9. Section 85 of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended) sets out with reference to matters to be considered on  appeal
    as follows:

    ''85 Matters to be considered


         (1)      An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall be
         treated by [the Tribunal] as including an appeal against any
         decision in respect of which the appellant has a right of appeal
         under section 82(1).


         (2)      If an appellant under section 82(1) makes a statement
         under section 120 , [the Tribunal] shall consider any matter raised
         in the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind
         listed in [section 84] against the decision appealed against.


         (3)      Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under section
         120 whether the statement was made before or after the appeal was
         commenced.


         (4)      On an appeal under [section 82(1)] against a decision [the
         Tribunal] may consider [...] any matter which [it] thinks relevant
         to the substance of the decision, including [...] a matter arising
         after the date of the decision.


         (5)      But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the
         Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to do so.


         (6)      A matter is a "new matter" if-


             (a) it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
             section 84, and


             (b) the Secretary of State has not previously considered the
             matter in the context of-


                  (i)  the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or


                  (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120."


10. Mahmud (S. 85 NIAA 2002  -  'new  matters')  [2017]  UKUT  00488  (IAC)
    (promulgated on 14th August 2017) sets out that whether something is or
    is not a 'new matter' goes  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal.  Further, the tribunal must therefore determine the issue, as
    to whether something is a new matter,  for  itself.  A  matter  is  the
    factual substance of the claim and should be

       'factually distinct from that previously raised by an  appellant,  as
       opposed to further or better evidence of an existing matter'

11. In this instance and prior to the hearing, domestic  violence  had  not
    been raised.  Indeed, Mr Raza  conceded  that  the  issue  of  domestic
    violence was indeed a new matter. It was his case that the tribunal had
    implicitly accepted that it was  indeed  a  new  matter  and  proceeded
    accordingly.   However, the 'Rights of Appeal' guidance put  before  me
    makes clear, at page 27, that

       ''Even if the new matter is not identified until shortly before or at
       the hearing, if it can be considered and a decision reached  quickly,
       that should be done.  If the new matter cannot be  considered  before
       the appeal hearing, for example because the PO needs to check whether
       a document is genuine and there is insufficient time to do so, the PO
       should inform the Tribunal that a new matter has been raised and that
       the SSHD does not consent to it being considered by the Tribunal''.

12. An application based on domestic violence is a  specific  and  distinct
    application from that under the partner route and in this  instance  no
    primary decision had been made by the Secretary of State on that basis.
     It was indeed  a  new  matter.   Although  the  question  of  domestic
    violence  was  raised  during  the  hearing,  and  obliquely   in   the
    appellant's skeleton argument,  the  questioning  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer demonstrates that the approach taken  was  that  the
    relationship may be resumed.  That is clear  from  the  line  taken  in
    cross examination  (as  identified  above).  Nothing  in  the  skeleton
    argument of Mr Raza obviously identified domestic violence  as  a  'new
    matter'.  The Home Office did not proceed on that basis.

13. The guidance confirms that 'a decision' [on the  question  of  the  new
    matter] should be reached quickly.  In other words,  there  must  be  a
    clear decision by the Home Office on the 'new matter'.

14. There is no record of any decision made by the Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer. It was not for the Tribunal to merely proceed on the basis  of
    'implicit' consent of the respondent.  The  Tribunal  and  the  parties
    appeared to proceed on the  basis  of  misunderstanding.  The  Tribunal
    should  have  clearly  identified  the  fact  of  the   'new   matter',
    specifically raised it as a 'new matter' and put it to  the  Presenting
    Officer so that a decision could be made and formally recorded. Nothing
    in the decision suggests that this  approach  was  taken  which  was  a
    procedural error.  The error applies equally to appeals on human rights
    grounds.  The Tribunal acted as the primary decision maker and  without
    jurisdiction.  The approach of the  Tribunal  undermines  the  findings
    made.  That was an error of law.

15. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be  made,  specifically  following  the  consent  or
    otherwise on the new matter, the matter should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction

The Secretary of State is on notice to decide whether consent  is  given  to
the  Tribunal  considering  the  'new  matter'  of  domestic  violence.  The
decision should be filed and served at least 14 days prior  to  the  resumed
substantive hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because of the sensitive nature of the appeal.



Signed           Helen Rimington             Date  12th September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



