
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/27002/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Priory Courts    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2019                      |On 22 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MERZA RAHAT ULLAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Hussain, Counsel, Trent Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson, promulgated on 28 February 2018, in which
    he allowed Mr. Ullah's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
    to refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to Mr. Ullah as the
    Appellant, and to the Secretary of State as the Respondent, reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

(i)  it was arguable that although the Respondent had conceded at the
hearing that there had not been shown that the Appellant had submitted a
TOEIC certificate from ETS in a previous application to the Respondent of
31/01/2014, that contrary to the Judge's assessment, that matter was not
the only determining matter under App FM, and that nevertheless there had
remained at large the Respondent's assertion of the use of deception, the
obtaining of the said language certificate by the use of a proxy test
taker;

(ii) arguably the Judge erred when appearing to conflate the conceded issue
of the certificate having been sent with the previous 2014 application with
the App FM requirement, in play, para S-LTR.1.6., when arguably in real
terms that suitability provision under the Rules was altogether wider i.e:
The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to the public good
because of their conduct (including convictions which do not fall within
paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.) character, association or other reasons,
make it undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK;

(iii)    and accordingly, when concluding that the Appellant had met the
requirements of the Rules for leave to remain as a partner, that the Judge
arguably erred in omitting to address a material matter in the appeal
and/or provide an adequacy of reasoning overall under Art 8."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.

 5. In submissions, Mr. Hussain accepted that the decision involved the
    making of an error of law given that the Judge had failed to deal with
    how the Appellant had obtained his TOEIC certificate.  He accepted that
    the Judge, in considering whether S-LTR.1.6 applied, should have also
    considered whether the certificate had been obtained by deception.
    However, he argued that this error was not material with reference to
    the cases of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, and JG (s117B(6): "reasonable
    to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC).

Error of Law

 6. It was accepted by Mr. Hussain on behalf the Appellant that the Judge
    should have considered whether the Appellant had obtained the test by
    deception.  Ms. Simbi, the Respondent's representative at the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing, had accepted that the evidence before the
    Tribunal did not show that the disputed TOEIC certificate had been
    provided with an application made to the Respondent.  However, I find
    that this was not the end of the suitability issue given the reasons
    set out by the Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter, on which
    Ms. Simbi relied.

 7. The reasons for refusal letter states that the Respondent was satisfied
    that the TOEIC certificate was "fraudulently obtained".  In the fifth
    paragraph on page 3 the Respondent stated:

         "In fraudulently obtaining a TOEIC certificate in the manner
         outlined above, you willingly participated in what was clearly an
         organised and serious attempt, given the complexity of the test
         centre itself, to defraud the SSHD and others.  In doing so, you
         displayed a flagrant disregard for the public interest, according
         to which migrants are required to have a certain level of English
         language ability in order to facilitate social integration and
         cohesion, as well as to reduce the likelihood of them being a
         burden on the taxpayer."

 8. The Respondent's case was not limited to the issue of whether the
    certificate had been submitted in an application, but included the
    manner in which the certificate had been obtained.  I find that the
    Judge failed to deal with this issue, which is relevant to the
    assessment of the suitability requirements in Appendix FM.  I find that
    this is an error of law.

 9. However, I find that the error is not material.  At [4] the Judge
    states that the Appellant was the father of a British child.  At [10]
    the Judge states:

         "But the marriage is accepted by the Respondent and the
         relationship to his son born in January 2016 is established by DNA
         evidence so if it had been necessary to consider the circumstances
         outside Appendix FM of the rules the appeal would also have been
         allowed because Mr Ullah meets the requirements of Section 117B(6)
         which is a complete answer to the balancing exercise between the
         rights to a family life and the public interest in maintaining
         effective immigration control (MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705)."

10. I have carefully considered the case of JG.  The headnote states:

         "Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002 requires a court or tribunal to hypothesise that the child  in
         question would leave the United Kingdom, even if this is not likely
         to be the case, and ask whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect
         the child to do so."

11. It was accepted by Mr. Mills that, as the caselaw stood, his submission
    that it was a material error was not so strong.  However, he submitted
    that the Respondent's position was that, prior to asking the question
    of whether it would be reasonable to expect a child to leave the United
    Kingdom, the Tribunal had to ask whether there was actually any
    prospect of the child leaving.  He submitted that the Respondent's
    position was that, having first asked the question whether or not there
    was any prospect of a child leaving, if the answer was that there was
    not, which he submitted that it would be in the Appellant's case, there
    was then no need for a Tribunal to proceed to consider the
    reasonableness issue.

12. However, while this may be the Respondent's position, and while it was
    submitted that the issue was due to come before the Court of Appeal
    soon, as it stands, this is not what the caselaw says.  JG fully
    considered the Respondent's position with reference to the IDI, and
    gave careful consideration to KO (Nigeria).  JG held that a Tribunal is
    required to hypothesise whether the child would leave the United
    Kingdom "even if this is not likely to be the case".  I find that, in
    the case of a British child, it would not be reasonable to expect him
    or her to leave the United Kingdom, and indeed it was not submitted by
    Mr. Mills that it would be reasonable for the Appellant's child to
    leave the United Kingdom.  I therefore find that there is no material
    error in the Judge's decision.  He allowed the appeal on human rights
    grounds, having made a finding at [10] that section 117B(6) applied in
    the Appellant's case.

13. I therefore find that, although the decision involves the making of an
    error of law in failing to consider fully the Respondent's case in
    relation to the suitability requirements under Appendix FM, this error
    is not material given the application of section 117B(6) to the
    Appellant's case.

Decision

14. The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law,
    and I do not set it aside.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   Date 20 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
