
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/27645/2016
                                                               HU/27646/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 29 January 2018                  |On: 26 February 2018                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Suk Bahadur Pun
                               Hem Bahadur Pun
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr E Raw, counsel, instructed by Howe & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the entry clearance  officer  and  to
    the respondents as the claimants.

 2. The claimants are nationals of Nepal, born on 24 May 1973  and  1  July
    1982 respectively. They were aged 43 and 34 at the date of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision. Their appeals  against  the  entry  clearance
    officer's decision dated 22 November 2016 refusing  their  applications
    for entry clearance to join their  mother,  the  sponsor,  a  "widower"
    (sic) of their late father, an ex-Gurhka soldier, was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A M S Green, on human rights grounds. The  decision
    was promulgated on 23 October 2017.

 3. The entry  clearance  officer  appeals  with  permission  against  that
    decision. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parkes  granted  permission  on  4
    December 2017.

 4. Judge Green had regard to the witness statement  of  the  sponsor:  Her
    late husband was discharged from the British Army in 1969. There was no
    Gurkha settlement policy then. He also said he was discharged in  1982.
    Although this caused him confusion it was not material to the  decision
    when he was discharged, given the timings  for  Gurkhas  to  settle  in
    response to the historic injustice.

 5. The sponsor claimed that she feels sure that  her  late  husband  would
    have applied to settle in the UK with her. He never lived in the UK but
    died in 2005.

 6. The sponsor had four children  including  the  claimants.  One  of  his
    daughters lives in Nepal, away from the claimants, and the other  lives
    in Hong Kong; she is married.

 7. The claimants share a house. The sponsor asserted  that  they  are  now
    totally dependent on  her  for  their  maintenance  and  live  off  her
    pension. She has been to Nepal.

 8. In her oral evidence she said that the claimants live  in  a  two  room
    house. Her daughter who lives in Hong Kong also  sends  them  money  to
    assist with the building costs. The claimants  built  the  house.  They
    lived off her pension as well as occasional money  which  her  daughter
    sends them. She did not think that the claimants could survive  without
    her support. She thought they might get some work on a farm or  washing
    dishes.

 9. In cross-examination she stated that when she came to the  UK  in  2011
    she had not applied for them to join her as she  did  not  have  enough
    money. She had paid for their applications. She had  financial  support
    from a local group of people who collected money on her behalf.

10. She has a daughter in Nepal who was not  in  the  application.  She  is
    married and no longer lived in the home village. Her youngest  daughter
    lives in Hong Kong and sends money to the claimant.

11. She was taken to travel receipts in the claimants' bundles. The  travel
    dates did not show the year. They were return flights to Kathmandu. She
    did not know when she travelled. She could not remember "because she is
    an old woman" [8iv]. She thought she went to Hong Kong in 2016  to  see
    her daughter.

12. Both claimants are learning to drive. She was  not  sure  why,  but  it
    could be to enable them to work as drivers but she had  no  idea.  They
    earned a little money by helping on a farm and  dancing.  She  had  not
    sent them money from the  UK  to  Nepal  although  her  daughter  would
    sometimes send them money.

13. She was asked about the phone call record in the bundle at  A35.  There
    are telephone calls shown for the period 1 April 2017 to  22  September
    2017. She had no idea why she did not produce evidence earlier  than  1
    April 2017. Some of the calls are to India as well as the UK. There are
    several to Hong Kong.

14. During cross examination it was put to her that she had two  sons  aged
    43 and 34 who had lived in Nepal for six years without her. When  asked
    why she could not continue in this way  she  said  that  everything  is
    expensive in Nepal. She lived alone and they had no  job.  She  suffers
    from blood pressure problems. The claimants were not  married  and  she
    could support them before marriage. If they came here it would be  much
    easier for her. They could get work and marry [8vii].

15. The Judge noted at [14] that he was dealing with two adult children  of
    an ex- Gurkha. He referred to the decision in Rai  v  ECO  (New  Delhi)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320. He was guided by Ghising and the decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Gurung and Others [2013] EWCA  Civ  8  at  [14].  If
    Article 8 is engaged and but for  the  historic  wrong,  the  appellant
    would have been settled in  the  UK  long  ago,  this  will  ordinarily
    determine the outcome of the Article 8  proportionality  assessment  in
    the appellant's favour where matters relied on consist  solely  of  the
    public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy [14].

16. The Judge noted that the claimants are adults who are not married. They
    live together in the same house. The  claimants  enjoy  their  mother's
    pension which they supplement with occasional sums  remitted  by  their
    sister living in Hong Kong. The pension and money paid for their  house
    to be built. He accepted that the claimants supplemented  their  income
    with occasional  earnings  from  farm  work  and  dancing  as  well  as
    dishwashing. They are learning to drive but it is  not  clear  why  and
    what they intend to do once they pass their driving tests.

17. The Judge "believed" that the claimants have shown that they  live  and
    have a financial dependency on the sponsor that goes  beyond  "to  some
    extent" as referred to in JB (India) v ECO [2009]  EWCA  Civ  234.  The
    Court of Appeal stated that financial dependence "to some extent" on  a
    parent did not demonstrate the existence of strong family ties  between
    adult children and the parent, nor did weekly telephone calls  evidence
    anything more than the normal ties of affection between  a  parent  and
    her adult children.

18. Judge Green concluded that they are almost entirely dependent on  their
    mother's pension and could manage without it [15].  (Mr  Raw  submitted
    that clearly the Judge intended to find  that  they  could  not  manage
    without it).

19. He accepted that she had lived with them until 2011 when  she  came  to
    the UK. She did not have enough money to sponsor an  application  then.
    Since then, she has provided financial support and visited her sons  in
    Nepal and is in regular telephone contact with them. He also heard  why
    she wants her sons to be with her. She wants them to help  her  as  she
    gets older and her health deteriorates. That would be  easier  if  they
    were with her. She wants them to marry and  develop  their  own  family
    life. [16]

20. He found what the sponsor said to be relevant. Account must be taken of
    the parent's need for the children  and  the  totality  of  the  family
    relationships must be considered. He referred to ZB (Pakistan)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 834.

21. He accordingly accepted that the claimants have established  that  they
    enjoy family life with the sponsor. The claimants are close  relatives,
    who are brothers and the sponsor's sons. The decision  interferes  with
    their family life because it prevents family reunion between mother and
    sons.

22. He had regard to Shamin  Bux  [2002]  UKIAT  02212.  The  Judge  should
    consider whether there had been an  unjustified  lack  of  respect  for
    private and family life and  the focus should be  on  whether,  in  the
    light of the positive  obligations  on  the  UK  to  facilitate  family
    reunion,  there  has  been  a  failure  to  act   in   the   particular
    circumstances of the case. He referred to Mostafa (Article  8  -  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 where it  was  held  that  the  decision  in
    Shamin is to be followed and that the obligation imposed by  Article  8
    is to promote the family life of those affected by the decision [17].

23. The Judge concluded that there was no reason  to  doubt  the  sponsor's
    evidence that had it been possible for her husband to settle  after  he
    had completed his service he would have wanted to settle within the  UK
    with his wife and children long ago. He could not do  so  on  discharge
    but died before the policy came into  force  to  redress  the  historic
    injustice. The claimants did not have a poor immigration history.

24. He stated 'In conclusion there is family life,  the  (claimants)  would
    have settled in this country long ago but for  historic  injustice  and
    this determines (their) Article 8 proportionality assessment  in  their
    favour' [18].  He  accordingly  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

25. Ms Holmes relied on the grounds of appeal (apart from  ground  3).  She
    submitted that the nub of the appeal is whether it had been open to the
    Judge to find that there was family life. There were no clear  findings
    as to why he reached the conclusion other than to point  to  the  blood
    relationship, the regular recent telephone contact  and  the  sponsor's
    desire to be with her children. Given that they  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, it is open  to  the  sponsor  to
    enjoy any family life with her sons in Nepal.

26. However, it would appear that her desire to be  with  them  is  not  so
    great. It appeared that the claimants are living a life independent  of
    their mother. They are mature, healthy men who have been  living  apart
    from the sponsor for six years. They have their own adult  lives  which
    include occasional work and make their own lifestyle decisions such  as
    learning to drive. Accordingly she submitted that Article 8(1)  is  not
    engaged in this case.

27. The reference to the sponsor's pension "only goes so  far."  This  does
    not result in a dependency beyond the  normal  familial  relationships.
    Apart from reliance on her pension, Ms Holmes submitted that the  "ties
    are not great." She submitted that in the  circumstances  the  decision
    should be re-made and their appeals dismissed.

28. On behalf of the claimants, Mr Raw referred to the  ECO's  grounds.  He
    noted the  blood  relationships  and  telephone  calls.  However,  this
    overlooked the fact that the relationship continues. He referred to the
    sponsor's visits to Nepal as well as telephone  calls  made  [8.iv  and
    vi].

29. He referred to paragraph [15] where the Judge noted that the  claimants
    rely on their mother for financial support. They "enjoy their  mother's
    pension." The totality of the evidence must be looked at. The claimants
    and their  mother  lived  together  until  2011.  He  referred  to  the
    subsequent telephone calls and travel by the sponsor.

30. Mr Raw submitted that they are not living  independent  lives.  It  was
    noted that the sponsor wanted her sons to be with her, particularly  as
    she gets older and her health deteriorates.

31. He referred to [42] of Rai, supra. The question is whether  the  family
    life with them subsisted when she left Nepal and was  still  subsisting
    at the date of hearing.  He frankly acknowledged that there has been no
    evidence as to the sponsor's pension or the amount. It was also  stated
    that the claimant's sister in Hong  Kong  gives  them  money  as  well.
    Another sister remains in Nepal.

32. He submitted with regard to the proportionality of  the  decision  that
    although  there  has  been  a  four  year  gap,  the  relationship  has
    continued. He noted that the sponsor was unable to sign her  statement.
    She is illiterate. He accepts that she gave vague evidence.

33. He referred to the decision of Lord Justice Bateson at [60] in Rai. The
    Tribunal alone is the judge of the facts and as noted by Baroness  Hale
    in AH (Sudan) v SSHD [2007] UKHL 49 the Tribunal alone is the judge  of
    the facts when the decision should be  respected  unless  it  is  quite
    clear that they have misdirected themselves.

34. Mr  Raw  noted  that  at  [61]  of  Rai  there  is  no  requirement  of
    'exceptionality'.  This  all  depends  on  the  facts;  there  must  be
    something more than love and affection between an adult and his parents
    or siblings which will not itself justify a finding of family life.

35. In reply, Ms Holmes submitted  that  this  is  not  a  "hand  in  glove
    situation." The evidence is one sided. It has come  from  the  sponsor.
    However, there was insufficient evidence demonstrating  that  something
    more existed than normal emotional ties between adult claimants and the
    sponsor.




    Assessment

36. The claimants did not make any statement in support of  their  appeals.
    The only statement came from their  mother.  There  was  also  evidence
    relating to the sponsor's pension credit in the UK and a  statement  of
    the  sponsor's  bank  account  in  Nepal  between  September  2016  and
    September 2017.

37. In her witness statement, the sponsor "submitted"  that  her  sons  are
    totally dependent on her. They are dependent on her emotionally.  Apart
    from those assertions however no further evidence has been provided  as
    to the nature and extent of the relationship between  the  sponsor  and
    her sons. No explanation has been given as to why  the  claimants  have
    not produced any evidence at  all  regarding  the  asserted  dependency
    between them and their mother.

38. The sponsor stated in evidence that she wants  them  to  be  with  her,
    particularly to help her as she gets older and her health deteriorates.



39. The only evidence provided by  the  sponsor  relating  to  any  medical
    matter was  a cancer screening programme sent to her on  7  July  2015.
    She was informed that the result of the bowel cancer  screening  showed
    that she was normal.

40. There was no further evidence  provided  or  relied  on  regarding  any
    health issue. The sponsor did not assert that she is suffering from any
    medical or other  problem  or  that  she  has  any  significant  health
    problems. A letter from her GP dated 8 July 2015 informed her that  the
    doctor would like to see her to discuss a recent blood test. However no
    further evidence apart from that letter has been provided.

41. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had regard to the  decision  of  the  ECO
    Sierra Leone v Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ 1511. Lord Justice Sales  affirmed
    (and the other Lord Justices agreed) that Kugathas  remains  good  law.
    In order for family life within the meaning of Article 8(1) to be found
    to exist, there must be  something  more  than  normal  emotional  ties
    [22]..

42. The evidence produced referred to their use  of  her  pension  and  her
    relatively recent telephone contact  with  the  claimants.  No  further
    evidence  regarding  the  nature,   quality   and   extent   of   their
    relationships was produced or relied on.

43. The claimants were 43 and 34 years old at the date of the hearing. They
    had lived for six years without the sponsor. Although she claimed  that
    she suffered from blood pressure problems, no evidence  regarding  that
    or any health problem was provided.  When  asked  why  they  could  not
    continue to live in Nepal as before, the sponsor stated that everything
    was very expensive in Nepal. She had lived alone  and  had  no  job  [8
    (vii)].

44. There was also evidence that the claimants had learned  to  drive.  The
    sponsor stated that she was not sure why but it could be to enable them
    to work as drivers. They had earned money by helping  on  a  farm  "and
    dancing." The sponsor did not send any money to them from the  UK.  Her
    daughter, however, "would sometimes send them money" [8].

45. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any clear  finding  or  give
    any cogent reasons for his conclusion that there is family life between
    the claimants  and  the  sponsor,  apart  from  having  regard  to  the
    relationship, the recent telephone contact between them  and  the  fact
    that they enjoy their mother's pension, which they then supplement with
    remittances from their sister in Hong Kong. He also accepted  that  the
    claimants supplement their income with occasional  earnings  from  farm
    work, dancing and "dish washing."

46. It was on that basis that the Judge "believed" that the  claimants  had
    shown a level of financial dependency going  beyond  "some  extent"  as
    referred to in  the  decision  of  JB.   However,  there  has  been  no
    assessment of the nature and extent of the emotional connection between
    them.

47. I accordingly  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error on a point of law.

48. I re-make the decision. I take into account the evidence  produced  and
    relied on in their appeal, which I have set out.

49. The claimants are 43 and 34 years old. They have lived in Nepal for six
    years without their mother. Although there may be emotional  ties  felt
    on both sides, there is nothing to indicate that these  go  beyond  the
    normal emotional ties experienced by family members.

50. I have had regard to their activities in Nepal as referred to by  their
    mother. They have their own lives which involves  occasional  work  and
    making decisions such as learning to drive. There has been no  evidence
    suggesting that they have any health problems. The sponsor has  visited
    Nepal albeit that she was unaware of the dates.

51. The  evidence  as  a  whole  however  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
    relationship between them goes beyond normal emotional ties.

52. I accordingly find, on the basis of the evidence before  the  Tribunal,
    that it has not been shown that family life exists for the  purpose  of
    Article 8.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. I set it aside and remake the decision allowing  the
    entry clearance officer's appeal.

    No anonymity order made.




    Signed   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


    Dated 20 February 2018
