






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/27714/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 February 2019                          |On 27 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                        TEJUMOLA ZAINAB CASSIMORELOPE
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. E. Pipi of counsel, instructed by Devine
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. She entered the United  Kingdom
    in 2009 on a passport which was not her own. Her son was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom on 4 February 2016 and he  was  issued  with  a  British
    passport on 17 February 2016. She applied for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on 22 March 2016 on the basis that her son was a British
    citizen. However, his British passport was revoked on 1  November  2016
    and her application for leave to remain  was  refused  on  13  December
    2016. She appealed against this decision and First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie dismissed her appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  13  April
    2018. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birrell  granted  her  permission  to
    appeal on 13 July 2018.
2.   The error of law hearing came before me  on  3  September  2018  and  I
    adjourned the hearing and made a number of directions.
3.   The Appellant's appeal hearing was initially set down for  3  September
    2018 and on that date the Home Office Presenting Officer, Ms  Fijiwala,
    conceded that the Respondent may have made an error in so far as it had
    not taken into account the divorce certificate issued to the  Appellant
    by the Judiciary Department of Ibaden South-East Local Government on 11
    August 2015.  The Home Office also stated that she would undertake  the
    necessary enquiries about the validity of the divorce certificate.  The
    Appellant was also directed to file  and  serve  any  further  evidence
    relating to her divorce.  On 14 November 2018, she filed a letter  from
    Ibadan South-East Local Government, dated 21 November 2018, which  said
    that the divorce certificate was genuine and attached a certified  copy
    of the certificate. On 14 December 2018, she also filed  and  served  a
    Cellmark DNA Test Report, dated 12 July 2016, which confirmed that  her
    son was related to [OB], as claimed.
4.   At the adjourned hearing  on  17  December  2018,  the  Respondent  was
    represented by Ms J. Isherwood and she explained that he had  not  been
    able to  comply  with  the  directions  as  the  previous  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer was now on  maternity  leave.   She  also  explained
    that, as the Respondent's IT system had malfunctioned  last  week,  she
    had not been able to access the evidence provided by the  Appellant  in
    order to assess it. Therefore, the hearing was adjourned for  a  second
    occasion and further directions were  made.  On  21  January  2019,  Ms
    Isherwood emailed the Upper Tribunal stating that  the  Respondent  had
    not been able to verify the Appellant's divorce certificate.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING
5.   Counsel for the Appellant submitted that it did not matter whether  the
    Appellant was married or not, as section 1 of the  British  Nationality
    Act 1981 stated that a person was a British citizen if one  of  his  or
    her parents was a British citizen or settled in the United  Kingdom  at
    the time of his or  her  birth.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    responded by referring to other  relevant  provisions  in  the  British
    Nationality Act 1981. The Home Office Presenting Officer also clarified
    her email, stating that the Respondent did not submit that the  divorce
    certificate relied upon by the Appellant was not valid or authentic. He
    had simply not had to time or resources to verify it.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
6.   The  Appellant's  son's  birth  certificate,  which  was  issued  on  8
    February 2016, names [OB] as his father and the Appellant accepts  that
    she was not married to [OB] at time of her son's birth or subsequently.
    Section 1(1) of the British Nationality Act 1981 does state that:
         "A person born in the United Kingdom after commencement...shall  be
         a British citizen if at the time of the birth his father or  mother
         is
             (a)  A British citizen; or
             (b)  settled in the United Kingdom".
7.   At the time  of  the  Appellant's  son's  birth,  [OB]  was  a  British
    citizen, as is evidenced by his passport.
8.   But the Appellant still had to show that as  she  was  not  married  to
    him, he qualified as her son's "father" for  the  purposes  of  section
    50(9A) of the British Nationality Act 1983, which states that:
         "(9A) For the purposes of this Act a child's father is-
         (1)  the husband, at the time of the child's birth, of the woman
         who gives birth to the child, or
         (2)  a person who is treated as the father of the child under
         section 28 of the Human Fertilisation and    Embryology Act 1990
         (father) or
         (3)  where neither (1) or (2) apply, any person who satisfies
         prescribed requirements as to proof of paternity."
9.   For the purposes of sub-section (3), regulation 2 of The British
    Nationality (Proof of Paternity) Regulations 2006 states that:
         "The following requirements are prescribed as to proof of paternity
         for the purposes of section 50(9A) of the British Nationality Act
         1981-
             (a)  the person is named as the father of the child in a birth
             certificate issued within one year of the date of the child's
             birth; or
             (b)  a person satisfies the Secretary of State that he is the
             father of the child. For the purposes of (b), the Secretary of
             State may have regard to any evidence including DNA test
             reports and court orders".
10.  In this case, [OB] was named as the father on the Appellant's father's
    birth certificate within one year of his birth. In addition, on 20
    December 2016, Fairview Solicitors had forwarded a copy of a Cellmark
    DNA Test Report, dated 20 December 2016, which confirmed that [OB] was
    the Appellant's son's biological father. (This report had been provided
    to Fairview Solicitors on 11 July 2016 but had not been sent to the
    Respondent with the application for leave. I have presumed that this
    was because they had chosen to rely on the fact that her son had been
    issued with a British passport.) The Respondent now accepts that this
    is sufficient proof of paternity. Therefore, [OB] is the Appellant's
    son's father and her son is a British citizen by reason of his birth,
    unless his mother was married to her previous husband at the time of
    his birth.
11.  By the time of the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie,
    HM Passport Office had written to [OB] stating that it had come to
    light that the Appellant was married to someone else and stating that
    the Appellant's son's passport had been revoked on the basis that he
    had no entitlement to such a document. At the appeal hearing, counsel
    for the Appellant tried to draw a distinction between entitlement to
    British citizenship, which derives from the British Nationality Act
    1981, and the issuing of a passport to provide evidence of such
    citizenship. However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie did not accept
    that there was such a distinction. Instead, in paragraph 10 of his
    decision, he found that "in my understanding of the decision of the
    Secretary of State, the withdrawal of the passport is predicated on the
    withdrawal of citizenship".  In paragraph 11 of his decision he added:
         "I have not had the benefit of fully researched argument ... I do
         not consider it necessary, for present purposes, to reach a
         definitive opinion on whether the actions of the Secretary of State
         in purporting to withdraw the child's citizenship are legally
         valid. I say this because the position as of the date of this
         decision is that citizenship has been withdrawn".
12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie did not refer himself to the text
    of the British Nationality Act 1981, which indicated that if his mother
    was not married at the time of his birth, he acquired British
    citizenship at birth. He also failed to take into account the letter HM
    Passport Office, dated 1 November 2016, that clearly stated that
    "British citizenship is a matter of law and therefore not one which HM
    Passport Office has any discretion on".
13.  I accept that the Respondent does have the power to deprive a person
    of British citizenship under section 40(3) of the British Nationality
    Act 1981 if he "is satisfied that the registration or naturalisation
    was obtained by means of -
         (a)  fraud;
         (b)  false representation, or;
         (c)  concealment of a material fact".
14.  But there is no indication that this has happened. The only action has
    been that undertaken by HM Passport Office to withdraw his British
    passport. This action did not impact on whether or not the Appellant's
    son is a British citizen.
15.  For all of these reasons First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie erred in
    law when he found that the Appellant's son was no longer a British
    citizen because his British passport had been revoked.
16.  In addition, First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie relied on the
    assertion in the letter from HM Passport Office that the Appellant was
    married to her previous husband at the time of her son's birth. This
    allegation was not particularised or accompanied by any evidence, First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devittie also failed to give any weight to the fact
    that there was a certified true copy from the Judiciary Department of
    Ibadan South-East Local Government, dated 11 August 2015, that
    indicated that the Appellant had been divorced by her former husband on
    that same day.
17.  When considering the authenticity of this document, First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie should have considered the totality of the
    evidence, as found in paragraph 35 of Ahmed (Documents
    unreliable/forged) Pakistan* [2002] UKIAT 00439 where the Upper
    Tribunal said that:
         "In almost all cases it would be an error to concentrate on whether
         a document is a forgery.  In most cases where forgery is alleged it
         will be of no great importance whether this is or is not made out
         to the required higher civil standard.  In all cases where there is
         a material document it should be assessed in the same way as any
         other piece of evidence. A document should not be viewed in
         isolation.  The decision maker should look at the evidence as a
         whole or in the round (which is the same thing)".
18.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to undertake this exercise but
    merely relied on an assertion made in a letter from HM Passport Office.
    This amounted to a further error of law.
19.  The Home Office Presenting Officer relied on the fact that in
    paragraph 15 of his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie also
    found that:
         "Even if it were the case that the Appellant's child is a British
         citizen, my assessment of proportionality, for the reasons I have
         mentioned in relation to the adverse immigration history of the
         Appellant, would mean that the balance would sway against the
         Appellant ... [and] it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant
         and her child to leave the United Kingdom, even if her child is a
         qualifying child on account of his citizenship".
20.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie did record the immigration history
    provided by the Appellant in paragraph 4 of his decision. He also
    referred to some of her oral evidence in paragraph 5 of his decision.
    From paragraph 6 he also considered whether she was entitled to leave
    to remain. However, in paragraph 12 of his decision, when considering
    the Appellant's son's best interests, he went no further than noting
    that he was barely two years old and was of an age when there would be
    very little difficulty in him adjusting to life in his new environment.


21.  He did not remind himself of the weight to be given, in the
    alternative, to British citizenship or the fact that a child should not
    be held responsible for a parent's poor immigration and criminal
    history.
22.  Therefore, it is arguable that the proportionality assessment was not
    lawful.
23.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie did
    make errors of law in his decision.

Decision
(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.
(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie is set aside.
(3)  The appeal is remitted to Taylor House for a de novo hearing  before  a
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal   Judges
    Devittie or Birrell.

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

Signed   Date 21 February 2019

