
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/27095/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 March 2018                     |On 21 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                               SANTOSHI TAMANG
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - New Delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Nnamani (counsel) instructed by Howe & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.     I have considered whether any parties require the protection  of
    an anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


    2.     This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly promulgated on 18  September  2017,  which
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal  to
    grant entry clearance to settle in the UK as the dependent daughter  of
    a former Gurkha soldier.


    Background


    3.     The Appellant was born on 02 April 1986 and  is  a  national  of
    Nepal. On 4 October 2016 the appellant applied for entry  clearance  to
    settle in the UK as the dependent daughter of a former Gurkha  soldier.
    On 18 November 2016 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The appellant's father was born on 26  February  1944.  He
    served in the Gurkhas from 2 January 1962 until 31 August 1971.  On  16
    March 2011 he and his wife (the appellant's mother) were granted  entry
    clearance so that they could settle in the UK. The  appellant's  father
    entered the UK on 3 March 2011. Her mother entered the UK on 5 November
    2011. Her parents have lived together in the UK since then.


    The Judge's Decision


    4.     The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farrelly ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the
    Respondent's decision.


    5.     Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  24  January  2018  Judge
    Hollingworth granted permission to appeal, stating

         "It is arguable that the Judge has fallen into error by intermixing
         a consideration of whether the elements required  for  family  life
         had been established with those factors relating to the  capability
         of the appellant to lead an independent life. At  paragraph  24  of
         the decision the Judge referred to the appellant being an adult who
         can develop her  own  life.  The  Judge  has  not  found  that  the
         appellant has so developed her own life in such a way  that  family
         life has been excluded between the appellant and her parents  given
         the period of time which has elapsed. The Judge has referred to the
         question being whether family life exists  within  the  meaning  of
         article 8. The Judge referred to  the  appellant's  older  siblings
         clearly forming a life of their own with their respective partners.
         The appellant was unmarried. The Judge had no doubt  the  appellant
         has a close attachment with her parents. It is  arguable  that  the
         Judge has attached undue weight to the fact of physical  separation
         between the appellant and  her  parents  for  over  six  years.  At
         paragraph 23 the Judge has  stated  within  the  normal  course  of
         events the  appellant  would,  like  her  siblings,  form  her  own
         independent family life. The Judge's conclusion that  although  the
         appellant was not married was that the appellant now  has  her  own
         independent life.  The  essence  of  the  case  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant in this context was that the appellant was unemployed and
         needed financial support for her essential needs. The Judge was not
         satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  not  economically   sustain
         herself. It is arguable that the economic capacity of the appellant
         as at the date of the hearing before the Judge  detracts  from  the
         matrix of factors  relating  to  economic  dependency  advanced  on
         behalf of the appellant. It is arguable that the Judge  has  fallen
         into  error  in  not  setting  out  more  extensively  reasons  for
         rejecting the evidence  of  financial  dependency  which  had  been
         advanced. It is arguable that the Judge has not attached sufficient
         weight to the factors bearing upon the appellant  and  her  parents
         being separated in the light of  the  history  of  refusal.  It  is
         arguable that the Judge has attached  insufficient  weight  to  the
         visits made by the appellant's parents. It  is  arguable  that  the
         Judge should have embarked upon a  proportionality  exercise  given
         the cumulative weight of factors arguably present on the  basis  of
         the available evidence in relation to the establishment  of  family
         life."

    The hearing


    6. (a) Ms Nnamani, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal.  She
    told me that the grounds of appeal can be grouped under  two  headings.
    The first is whether the Judge made an error in considering whether  or
    not family life exists for the appellant with her parents.  The  second
    ground of appeal is whether the Judge adequately explained why  he  did
    not accept that the appellant remains financially  dependent  upon  her
    parents.


    (b)    Ms Nnamani explained that the factual background in this case is
    that the appellant is an unmarried adult who lived with her parents and
    siblings and Nepal. Her three younger siblings have remained in the  UK
    and have been granted indefinite leave to remain so that they can  live
    with their parents in the UK. One of her sisters in the UK  is  married
    and has a family of her own. Ms Nnamani told me  that  the  appellant's
    parents delayed coming to the UK because they did not want to leave the
    appellant behind in Nepal. She reminded me that the appellant has  made
    previous applications and that in 2016 she  unsuccessfully  appealed  a
    refusal of entry clearance.


    (c)    Ms Nnamani took me to [20] of the decision where the Judge finds
    that the appellant has financial support from her parents. She told  me
    that the Judge's error, found between [20] and [24] of the decision, is
    that the Judge finds  that  the  appellant  is  capable  of  developing
    independent life in the future. She told me that the Judge's  error  is
    that he makes findings which are prospective rather than findings which
    focus on the facts at the date of the decision. Ms Nnamani told me that
    a number of the Judges findings suggest article 8  family  life  exists
    between the appellant and her parents and also the  appellant  and  her
    siblings in the UK


    (d)    Ms Nnamani told me that  the  Judge  finds  that  there  was  no
    intention that the parents and the appellant should separate, and  that
    they lived together in Nepal; the appellant intended to come to the  UK
    with her parents; that  the  appellant  is  unmarried  and  financially
    dependent  on  parents;  and  that  the  appellant  was  in   full-time
    education. Ms Nnamani then referred me to Rai v  ECO  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    320; Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal  [2012]  UKUT
    160; R (Gurung) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 289;  and  PT  (Sri  Lanka)  v  ECO
    [206] EWCA Civ 612.  She told me that, on the facts as the Judge  found
    them to be, article 8 family life exists for this appellant -  so  that
    the Judge's conclusion is wrong in law.


    (e)    Ms Nnamani told me that the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to
    financial dependency are inadequate. She told me that  the  Judge  does
    not adequately explain why he finds that the appellant's  parents  only
    make a contribution to  her  finances  rather  than  finding  that  the
    appellant is financially dependent upon her father. She urged me to set
    the decision aside and to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to
    be heard of new.


    7.(a)  For the respondent, Mr Clarke took me through the same case  law
    and told me that the Judge's decision  is  well  within  the  range  of
    reasonable decisions available to the Judge. Mr Clarke took me  to  the
    decision in the appellant's earlier appeal, promulgated on 31 May 2016.
     He told me that the decision contains a  finding  that  there  was  no
    financial dependency between the appellant and her parents between 2011
    and 2015. That 2016 decision also has a finding (at [49]) the article 8
    ECHR is not engaged in respect of either family  or  private  life.  He
    told me that that must be the Judge's starting position.


    (b)    Mr Clarke told me that the Judge's findings are entirely in line
    with the caselaw relied on by both parties to this appeal (in  relation
    to whether or not article 8 family life can exist between adult  family
    members). He told me that at [23] the Judge clearly finds that  article
    8 family life does not exist for this appellant with her  parents,  and
    that  that  finding  is  entirely  consistent  with   the   established
    jurisprudence. He told me  that  the  finding  comes  from  a  flawless
    assessment of the facts in this case. In reality, he said, there is  no
    new evidence to displace the findings in the  decision  promulgated  on
    2016.


    (c)    Mr Clarke urged me to  dismiss  the  appeal  and  to  allow  the
    decision to stand.


    Analysis


    8.     Between [1] and [5] of the  decision  the  Judge  sets  out  the
    background to this case. Between [12] and [19] the Judge discusses  the
    relevant law. The Judge's findings of fact are found between  [20]  and
    [24].


    9.     In a succinct and focused decision, the Judge finds that  family
    life does not exist between the appellant and her  parents.  The  Judge
    finds that there are natural bonds of love and  affection  between  the
    appellant and her parents. The Judge finds that the appellant's parents
    have limited funds but still send money to the  appellant  and  are  in
    regular telephone contact. The Judge finds that the appellant's parents
    are concerned about the appellant's well-being. The Judge confirms  (at
    [22]) that he has evidence about the  importance  of  family  life  and
    respect for elders in  Nepalese  society.  The  Judge  finds  that  the
    appellant is unmarried and has a close attachment to her parents.


    10.    It is at  least  implicit  in  the  Judge's  findings  that  the
    appellant lived with her parents before her parents came to the UK.  At
    [21] the Judge finds that the appellant and  her  parents  were  driven
    apart (so that their separation is not voluntary). At  [22]  the  Judge
    finds that the appellant's older siblings have remained  in  Nepal  and
    have developed  their  own  independent  lives  with  their  respective
    partners, but draws  a  distinction  between  them  and  the  appellant
    because the appellant is still unmarried.


    11.    Having made those findings, which form the  component  parts  of
    article 8 family life, the Judge says that the appellant can, like  her
    older siblings, form her own independent family life. Despite  reaching
    findings which point towards the existence of article 8 family life, at
    [23] the Judge says that he is not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is
    financially dependent upon her parents & at [24] the Judge  finds  that
    there is no emotional dependency between the appellant and her parents,
    distinguishing emotional dependency from the natural bonds of love  and
    affection.


    12.     Although  the  Judge  writes   his   decision   with   manifest
    sensitivity, his findings are incomplete. The majority of  the  Judge's
    findings are findings which point towards the existence  of  article  8
    family life, notwithstanding the appellant's date of birth. The Judge's
    findings at [23] and [24] are that in  the  future  the  appellant  can
    establish independence. The Judge does not reach a conclusion about the
    appellant's facts and circumstances at the date of hearing.  The  Judge
    does not address the question of historic injustice. The Judge does not
    adequately  explain  why  he  finds  that  the  appellant  is   neither
    emotionally nor financially dependent on her father.


    13.    In Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)
    [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) it was held that (i) In finding that the weight
    to be accorded to the historic wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was
    not to be regarded as less than that to be accorded the historic  wrong
    suffered by British Overseas citizens, the Court of  Appeal  in  Gurung
    and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha or BOC
    cases, the effect of the historic wrong  is  to  reverse  or  otherwise
    alter the burden of proof that applies  in  Article  8  proportionality
    assessments;  (ii)  When  an  Appellant  has  shown   that   there   is
    family/private life and the decision made by the Respondent amounts  to
    an interference with it, the burden lies with the  Respondent  to  show
    that a decision to remove is proportionate (although  Appellants  will,
    in practice, bear the responsibility of  adducing  evidence  that  lies
    within their remit and about which  the  Respondent  may  be  unaware);
    (iii) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others was not the  burden
    of proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a  proportionality
    assessment. The Court held that, as in the case of BOCs,  the  historic
    wrong suffered by Gurkha  ex-servicemen  should  be  given  substantial
    weight; (iv) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8  is  engaged
    and, but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have been  settled
    in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome  of  the
    Article 8 proportionality assessment in an  Appellant's  favour,  where
    the matters relied on by the SSHD/ ECO consist  solely  of  the  public
    interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy; (v) It can therefore
    be seen that Appellants in Gurkha (and BOC) cases will not  necessarily
    succeed, even though (a) their family life engages  Article  8(1);  and
    (b) the evidence shows they would have come to the United Kingdom  with
    their father, but for the injustice  that  prevented  the  latter  from
    settling here earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters over and
    above the public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy,
    which argue in favour of removal or the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter,
    these matters must be given appropriate weight in the  balance  in  the
    Respondent's favour. Thus, a bad immigration  history  and/or  criminal
    behaviour may still be sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful  factors
    bearing on the Appellant's side of the balance.


    14.    In Patel, Modha and Odedara v ECO (Mumbai) (2010)  EWCA  Civ  17
    the Court of Appeal recognised that one could set out to compensate for
    a historical wrong, but one could not  reverse  the  passage  of  time.
    Where children had grown up and embarked on lives  of  their  own,  the
    bonds which constituted family  life  would  no  longer  be  there  and
    Article 8 would have no purchase.  However, what  might  constitute  an
    extant family life fell well  short  of  what  constituted  dependency.
    Many adult children might still have a family life with parents settled
    in the UK, not by leave or  by  force  of  circumstance,  but  by  long
    delayed right. That was what gave  the  historical  wrong  a  potential
    relevance to Article 8 claims.  That did not make the ECHR a  mechanism
    for turning back the clock,  but  it  did  make  the  historical  wrong
    potentially relevant to the application of Article 8(2).   If,  by  the
    time the adult children sought entry they were no longer  part  of  the
    family life of the BOC who had finally secured citizenship in  the  UK,
    the threshold of Article 8 would not be crossed and the proportionality
    of excluding them would not be an  issue.   If  they  came  within  the
    protection of Article 8(1) however, the balance of factors  determining
    proportionality for the purposes of Article 8(2) would be influenced by
    the historical wrong, perhaps decisively.


    15.    In PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry Clearance Officer, Chennai [2016] EWCA
    Civ 612 it was held that some tribunals appeared to have read  Kugathas
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31 as establishing a rebuttable presumption against any
    relationship between an adult child and his parents or  siblings  being
    sufficient to engage Article 8. That was not correct. Kugathas required
    a fact-sensitive approach, and should be understood in the light of the
    subsequent case law summarised in  Ghising  (family  life  -  adults  -
    Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC) and Singh  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630.
    There was no legal or  factual  presumption  as  to  the  existence  or
    absence of family life for the purposes of Article 8 nor was there  any
    requirement of exceptionality. It all depended on the facts.  The  line
    of case-law was again considered in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer,  New
    Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320 (in the context of the adult son of a  former
    Gurkha soldier).


    16.    The Judge's decision contains material errors  of  law.  Between
    [20] and [24] the Judge describes the  component  parts  of  article  8
    family life. His finding that article 8 is not  engaged  cannot  stand.
    The Judge does not consider historic injustice as a crucial element  in
    the overall proportionality exercise. The Judge erroneously finds  that
    article 8 family life is not established, and so he does not carry  out
    a proportionality assessment. These are all material errors of  law.  I
    therefore set the decision aside.


    17.    Although I have set the  decision  aside,  there  is  sufficient
    material available to me today  to  enable  me  to  substitute  my  own
    decision.


    The Facts


    18.    The facts of this case are that the appellant's  father  is  her
    sponsor. He served in the brigade of Gurkhas from 2 January 1962  until
    31st of  August  1971.  On  discharge  his  service  was  described  as
    exemplary.


    19.    The appellant has  seven  siblings.  3  have  married  and  have
    started their own families in Nepal. The appellant's  younger  siblings
    have all been granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.  The
    appellant's father and mother were granted leave to  enter  the  UK  in
    2011. The appellant's  father  came  to  the  UK  in  March  2011.  The
    appellant's mother remained in Nepal until November 2011  so  that  the
    appellant would not be left alone. The appellant's mother did not  come
    to the UK until arrangements were made for the appellants accommodation
    and continuing education.


    20.    The appellant's parents have visited the appellant  in  Nepal  a
    number of times since 2011. Each month  the  appellant's  parents  send
    money to the appellant for maintenance,  accommodation  and  education.
    Every day there is telephone contact  between  the  appellant  and  her
    parents.


    21.    Since 2011 the appellant and her parents had been  investigating
    ways in which the appellant  can  re-join  her  parents  and  her  four
    younger siblings in the UK. The appellant has studied  since  2011  and
    has graduated with a BSC.  She  is  now  studying  towards  a  Master's
    degree.


    22.    The appellant is dependent on her parents  for  maintenance  and
    accommodation. She does not work  and  does  not  have  an  independent
    source  of  income.  She  is  fully  supported  by  her  parents.   The
    appellant's  parents  telephone  her  several  times  each  week.   The
    appellant's parents have made  repeated  visits  to  Nepal  since  2011
    solely so that they can see the appellant. The appellant is single  and
    has no dependents. The appellant wants to come to the UK  so  that  she
    can live with her parents. The appellant's parents want  the  appellant
    to come and live with them. They have adequate  accommodation  for  the
    appellant.


    23.    If it had been possible for the appellant's father to enter  the
    UK on discharge from the army, he would have come to the UK  then,  and
    he would have brought his entire family with him. The prospect of entry
    to the UK only opened up to the appellant when annex K  was  introduced
    to the rules in 2015.


    24.    The appellant's mother is so worried about  the  appellant  that
    she is considering leaving the UK to live with the appellant in Nepal.


    The Immigration Rules


    25.    The respondent refused this application  after  considering  the
    Immigration Directorate Instructions, chapter 15, section 2A,  annex  K
    which came into force  in  January  2015.  The  respondent  focused  on
    sections 9(5) and 9(8).


    26.    Section 9(5) of annex  K  relates  to  emotional  and  financial
    dependence. On the facts as I find them to be  the  appellant  is  both
    emotionally and financially dependent upon her father, who is a  former
    Gurkha. The appellant therefore meets the requirements of section  9(5)
    of annex K.


    27.    Section 9(8) says

         'The applicant has not been living apart from the former Gurkha for
         more than two years on the date of application, and has never lived
         apart from the sponsor for more than two years at  a  time,  unless
         this was by reason of education or something similar (such that the
         family unit was maintained, albeit the applicant lived away)'

    28.    Although it is argued for the appellant  that  the  family  unit
    remains the same because of the close links between the  appellant  and
    her parents and because of the patriarchal nature of Nepalese  society,
    the cold fact is that the appellant has lived apart  from  her  parents
    since 2011. At the date of application, the appellant  and  her  father
    were in separate households and had been for five years.


    29.    The appellant cannot meet the requirements of  annex  K  of  the
    immigration rules solely because 4 years before she had the prospect of
    applying for entry clearance her parents were granted  leave  to  enter
    the UK.  The appellant cannot meet the terms of either appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules.


    Article 8 ECHR


    30.    In Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 it  was  made  clear
    that (even in a deport case) the Rules are not a  complete  code.  Lord
    Reed at paragraphs  47  to  50  endorsed  the  structured  approach  to
    proportionality (to be found in Razgar) and said "what has  now  become
    the established  method  of  analysis  can  therefore  continue  to  be
    followed..."


    31.    I have to determine the following separate questions:

         (i) Does family life, private life, home  or  correspondence  exist
         within the meaning of Article 8


         (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered  with




         (iii) If so, was the interference in accordance with the law


         (iv) If  so,  was  the  interference  in  pursuit  of  one  of  the
         legitimate aims set out in Article 8(2); and


         (v) If so, is the interference proportionate to the pursuit of  the
         legitimate aim?

    32.    Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control
    is in the public interest. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  (IAC)
    the Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right  to  a
    grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2)  or  (3),  whatever  the
    degree of his fluency in English, or  the  strength  of  his  financial
    resources. In Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)
    it was held that the public interest in firm immigration control is not
    diluted by the consideration that  a  person  pursuing  a  claim  under
    Article 8 ECHR has at no time been a financial burden on the  state  or
    is self-sufficient  or  is  likely  to  remain  so  indefinitely.   The
    significance of these factors is that where they are  not  present  the
    public interest is fortified.


    33.    I  remind  myself  of  what  is  said  in   Ghising  and  others
    (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC),  in
    Patel, Modha and Odedara v ECO (Mumbai) (2010) EWCA Civ 17, in PT  (Sri
    Lanka) v Entry Clearance Officer, Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ 612   and  in
    Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320  (set  out
    at [13] to [15] above).


    34.    On the facts as I  find  them  to  be  the  appellant  is  still
    entirely dependent upon her parents, both emotionally and  financially.
    The appellant's parents provide her accommodation and her  income.  The
    appellant's parents visit her regularly in Nepal, and there is  regular
    telephone and Internet contact between the appellant and  her  parents.
    On the facts as I find them to be, earlier applications have been  made
    to enable this appellant to settle in the UK with her parents.  On  the
    facts as I find them to be, it is because of an acknowledged historical
    injustice that this  appellant  is  not  living  with  her  parents.  I
    therefore find that family life within the meaning of article 8 of  the
    1950 convention exists.


    35.    As I find that article 8 family life exists, the burden of proof
    moves to the respondent.  Section  117B  of  the  2002  tells  me  that
    immigration control is in the public interest, but that is not all that
    there is to assessment of proportionality. The appellant does not speak
    English and is not financially independent, those are factors  which  I
    must weigh against the appellant. Against those I weigh the  historical
    injustice as discussed in Ghising and others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic
    wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC) & Gurung and others [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 8.


    36.    Ghising  and  others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)
    [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC)  tells me that

         "... where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and, but  for  the
         historic wrong, the Appellant would have been  settled  in  the  UK
         long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article
         8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,  where  the
         matters relied on by the SSHD/ ECO consist  solely  of  the  public
         interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy"

    37.    On the facts as I find them  to  be  the  appellant  would  have
    settled in the UK with her parents as a  child  were  it  not  for  the
    historical injustice which is recognised by both the respondent and the
    courts. The respondent's decision renders  the  appellant  a  secondary
    victim to that injustice. When I consider all of these  matters  I  can
    only find that the respondent's decision is a  disproportionate  breach
    of the right to respect for family life.   I  find  that  the  Decision
    appealed against causes the United Kingdom to be in breach of  the  law
    or its obligations under the 1950 Convention.


    38.    The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.


    CONCLUSION


    39.    The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  18
    September 2017 is tainted by a material error of law.  I set it aside.


    40.    I substitute my own decision.


    41.    The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.




    Signed Paul Doyle  Date 19 March 2018
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


