
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/27415/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2018                         |On 30 October 2018         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 ABIBAT [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Absent (Daniel Aramide, solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms V Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hussain promulgated on  16  May  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.


Background


3. The Appellant, born on [ ~ ] 1978, is a  Nigerian  national  who  entered
the UK as a visitor on March 2003. On 19 May  2016  the  appellant  made  an
application for leave to remain in  the  UK.  The  respondent  refused  that
application on 1 December 2016.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  M  B  Hussain  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 15  August  2018
Judge Grimmet granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      It is arguable that the Judge erred in failing to fully  consider  the
      position of the child born to the appellant in the UK over seven years
      ago even though he was not party to the appeal.

The Hearing

5. The appellant did not appear and she was not represented. Tribunal  staff
telephoned  the  appellant's  solicitor  who  said  that  he  continues   to
represent the appellant but has no instructions from the appellant  to  move
the appeal. The appellant's solicitor declined to withdraw from  acting  but
said that he will not come to this Upper  Tribunal  hearing.  As  a  result,
nobody moved the grounds of appeal.

6. (a) Ms Kiss, for the respondent  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain a material error of law. She  took  me  to  [20]  and  [21]  of  the
decision and reminded me that the appellant's oldest child is  not  a  party
to this appeal. She told me that the Judge was  correct  to  note  that  the
appellant's child chose not to appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
the respondent's decision to refuse his application.

(b) Ms Kiss told me that the Judge's findings of fact are  a  reflection  of
the  paucity  of  evidence  placed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
appellant lodged a 31 page bundle, which includes her 10  paragraph  witness
statement. Ms Kiss told me that the appellant's oral evidence is  summarised
between [9] and [14] of the decision, and that the appellant did  not  offer
evidence concerning the welfare of any of her children, nor  was  it  argued
that the respondent's decision runs counter to the  best  interests  of  the
children. It was not argued that  it  is  not  reasonable  for  any  of  the
appellant's children to return to Nigeria.

(c) Ms Kiss asked me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis.

7. At [20]  the  Judge  correctly  records  that  the  appellant's  original
application was accompanied by an application from the appellant's son,  and
the appellant's son did not appeal the respondent's decision  in  his  case.
At [20] the Judge discusses the importance of considering  paragraph  276ADE
of the rules when a child has been in the UK  for  more  than  seven  years,
then, at [21], the Judge says

      In this case, I am unable to take that approach because the appellants
      minor child, born in October 2008, is not an appellant.  Since  he  is
      not an appellant, I am not in a position to assess whether or  not  he
      will meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE(iv).  I  therefore
      assess the appellant's claim under that paragraph.

8. The Judge  has  taken  too  narrow  a  view.  The  wording  of  paragraph
276ADE(1) of the rules sets out test that an "applicant" must  satisfy.  The
appellant's child is not an appellant and the decision  in  the  appellant's
child's application is not now under scrutiny, but  it  is  clear  from  the
Judge's decision that he was well aware that the  appellant's  oldest  child
was born in October 2008 in the UK and  has  only  ever  lived  in  the  UK.
Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 obliges  the
Judge to consider the best interests of the  appellant's  children.  Section
117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002  requires  the
Judge to consider whether or not it is unreasonable for a  qualifying  child
to return to his parents' country of origin.

9.  In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;   onward
appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) the Tribunal held that duties to  have  regard
as a primary consideration to the best interests of  a  child  are  so  well
established that a judge should take the point for  him  or  herself  as  an
obvious point to be considered, where the  issue  arises  on  the  evidence,
irrespective of whether the appellants or the advocates have done so.

10. The decision contains a material error of law. I set it aside. There  is
no good reason why I should not substitute my own decision.

The Immigration Rules

11. The appellant's witness statement does not address the interests of  the
children at all. The appellant produces her  children's  birth  certificates
and a  school  report.  The  appellant  does  not  suggest  in  her  witness
statement that it is in her children's best interests that they stay in  the
UK. The Judge's record of proceedings indicates that the appellant  gave  no
oral evidence at all about the children.

12. In submissions to the First-tier Tribunal,  counsel  for  the  appellant
specifically relied on the oral and written evidence, and  stated  that  the
appellant's oldest child was nine years old at the date of hearing  and  was
not familiar with life in Nigeria. Counsel for the appellant said  that  the
appellant should not be separated from her children, and that  both  of  the
appellant's children  were  born  in  the  UK.  Those  submissions  have  no
evidential foundation.

13. The application for permission to appeal and the grant of permission  to
appeal focused entirely on consideration of the appellant's  oldest  child's
interests. There is no criticism of the Judge's findings in relation to  the
appellant herself.

The Immigration Rules

14. The appellant's application was made under the 10-year parent route.  To
succeed the appellant would have to meet the requirements of  E-LTRPT2.2  of
the rules.  On  the  appellant's  own  evidence,  she  does  not  have  sole
responsibility for her children, because she  lives  with  her  partner  who
shares parental responsibility with her. As a  result,  the  appellant  does
not meet the eligibility requirements,  and  paragraph  EX.1  of  the  rules
cannot be considered.

15. Because of her age and the length of time that the appellant  has  been
in the UK the appellant cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276
ADE(1)(i) to (v) of the immigration rules. There is a dearth of evidence of
significant obstacles to integration.

16. In SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 it was held  that  the  concept  of
integration into a country was a broad one.  It  was  not  confined  to  the
mere ability to find a job or  sustain  life  whilst  living  in  the  other
country.  It would usually be sufficient for a court or tribunal  to  direct
itself  in  the  terms  Parliament  had  chosen  to  use.    The   idea   of
"integration" called for a broad  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  as  to
whether  the  individual  would  be  enough  of  an  insider  in  terms   of
understanding how life in the society in that other country was  carried  on
and a capacity to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable  opportunity
to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day  basis  in  that
society and to build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of  human
relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's  private  and  family
life.

17. In Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling  circumstances
test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) it was held that mere hardship, mere difficulty,
mere hurdles, mere upheaval and mere inconvenience, even where  multiplied,
are unlikely to  satisfy  the  test  of  "very  significant  obstacles"  in
paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.  In Parveen v SSHD [2018]  EWCA
Civ 932 Underhill LJ commented on that observation "I have to say that I do
not find that a very useful gloss on the words of  the  rule.  It  is  fair
enough to observe that the words "very significant" connote  an  "elevated"
threshold, and I have no difficulty with the observation that the test will
not be met by "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But  I  am  not  sure  that
saying that "mere" hardship or difficulty or hurdles, even  if  multiplied,
will not "generally" suffice adds anything of substance. The  task  of  the
Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any given case is simply to  assess
the obstacles to integration relied on, whether characterised  as  hardship
or difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether they regard  them  as
"very significant"".

18. The appellant's evidence, at its highest, is  that  removal  will  bring
about upheaval and inconvenience. On that  evidence,  the  appellant  cannot
meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  rules.   The
appellant fails to discharge the  burden  of  proving  that  she  meets  the
requirements of the immigration rules.

19. I am mindful of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
Act 2009, and the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC 4.   I  remind
myself  of  the  cases  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
children; onward appeals), [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW [2015] CSIH 36.  It  is
well settled that it is in the interests of  young  children  to  stay  with
their parents.

20. Paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules says

      276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
      remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
      of application, the applicant:
           (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
           Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in
           Appendix FM; and
           (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and
           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
           the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
           imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
           applicant to leave the UK; or
           (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
           at least half of his life living continuously in the UK
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
           has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
           country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
           UK.
21. In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  and  Another  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  the
child's best interest were to remain in UK, but that was not sufficient  for
the appellant in that case to succeed. In this case  there  is  no  reliable
evidence of where the interests  of  the  appellants  children  lie.  Azimi-
Moayed and others (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals),  [2013]
UKUT 00197 and PW [2015] CSIH 36 tell me that it is in the interests of the
children to remain with their parents. Both the appellant  and  her  partner
are Nigerian nationals. The respondent has no intention of  separating  this
family. My starting position is that it is in  the  best  interests  of  the
appellant's children to remain with the appellant and her partner. There  is
no evidence to suggest that  the  children's  best  interests  lie  anywhere
else.

22. The test for considering the appellant's children's interest both  under
paragraph  276ADE  of  the  immigration   rules   and   as   part   of   the
proportionality exercise influenced by section 117B of the  2002  Act  is  a
test of  reasonableness.  The  determinative  question  in  this  appeal  is
whether it is  unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant's  oldest  child  (a
qualifying child) to leave the UK and return to Nigeria.

23. There is no evidence produced for the appellant  either  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal or to the Upper Tribunal to indicate that it  is  unreasonable
for the appellant's oldest child to accompany the appellant to Nigeria.  All
that is advanced is that the appellant's oldest child has lived  in  the  UK
for  (now)  10  years.  That  evidence,  standing  entirely  alone,  is  not
sufficient to demonstrate that it is unreasonable to expect  the  qualifying
child to return to Nigeria.

24. In the simplest of terms, the appellant cannot  succeed  because  it  is
not argued that it is in the best interests of her  children  to  remain  in
the UK and it is not argued that it is unreasonable to expect either of  her
children to accompany her to Nigeria. It cannot be presumed, simply  because
one  of  the  appellant's  children  is  a  qualifying  child,  that  it  is
unreasonable for the child to return to Nigeria. The test of  reasonableness
was not addressed by the appellant. The appellant  does  not  discharge  the
burden of proving that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) is met.

25. On the facts as I  find  them  to  be  the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
requirements of either appendix FM or paragraph 276 ADE of  the  immigration
rules.

Article 8 ECHR

26. I consider article 8 ECHR grounds  of  appeal  outside  the  immigration
rules. The respondent's decision cannot be a breach of the right to  respect
for family life because it is the respondent's  intention  to  keep  all  of
this family together. The respondent's decision is that the  appellant,  her
partner and their two children  can  return  to  Nigeria.  The  respondent's
decision does not force separation on the appellant's family, so it  is  not
a breach of article 8 family life.

27. S.117B(6) of the 2002  Act  is  in  two  parts  which  are  conjunctive.
Section 117B(6)(a) weighs in favour of  the  Appellant  because  it  is  not
disputed that she has a genuine and subsisting paternal relationship with  a
qualifying child. It is Section 117B(6)(b) which is  determinative  of  this
case.

28. The test of reasonableness was  not  addressed  by  the  appellant.  The
appellant cannot therefore benefit from  section  117B(6)  of  the  2002Act.
There is no reliable evidence which could support a finding that it  is  not
reasonable for either of  the  appellant's  children  to  accompany  her  to
Nigeria.

29. When I consider all of the evidence presented in this case I still  know
little about the appellant's  home,  her  habits  and  activities  of  daily
living, her significant friendships, any integration  into  UK  society,  or
any contribution to her local community. There is no  reliable  evidence  of
the component parts of private life within the meaning of article 8  of  the
1950 convention before me. The appellant fails to  establish  that  she  has
created article 8 private life within the UK.

30. Even if I am wrong, and the appellant has established article 8  private
life in the UK, I can only give little weight to that private  live  because
it was  established  when  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  and
throughout the time when the appellant's immigration status  is  precarious.
The appellant has not lead evidence to address the  test  of  reasonableness
in s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act, even though her oldest child is  a  qualifying
child, so that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in  the
public interest. The public interests outweighs any article 8  private  life
the appellant may have because of the operation of s.117B of the 2002 Act.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision promulgated on 16 May 2018 is tainted by  a
material error of law. I set it aside.

I substitute my own decision.

The appellant's appeal is dismissed on article 8 ECHR grounds.





Signed
                       Date 19 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle







