
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/27771/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 29 November 2018                  |On 22 January 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 Sidali [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dougan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S T Fox, promulgated on 26 April  2018,  dismissing  his
    human rights claim on 20 September 2016.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  16  November  2009  and
    claimed asylum.  That claim was refused and his appeal  dismissed.   He
    did not, however, leave the United Kingdom and in 2012 met his  partner
    at a mosque in London.  They were married there in an Islamic  ceremony
    on 23 September 2013; they then moved to Belfast.  The couple attempted
    to legalise their marriage in a civil ceremony  but  it  did  not  take
    place on the date scheduled, 10 December 2014, on the basis that  there
    was an accusation that there was a sham marriage.   The  appellant  was
    detained and then eventually removed to Algeria on 15 April 2015.   The
    couple's first  child  was  born  in  April  2015  shortly  before  the
    appellant was removed.  In September 2015 the  appellant  was  smuggled
    back into the United Kingdom with the assistance of an  agent  and  has
    remained here since.

 3. The appellant's partner is a citizen of Somalia.   She  has  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom having previously been recognised
    as a refugee.  She is in receipt  of  Disability  Living  Allowance  on
    account of the gunshot injuries she sustained whilst in Somalia.

 4. As the couple's second child was born after  his  mother  had  acquired
    indefinite leave to remain, he is a British citizen from birth.

 5. The respondent refused the application on the basis that the appellant:-



      i) not meet the requirements under Appendix FM as his partner was  not
         a British citizen nor was she present and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom and so did not meet E-LTRP.1.2  although  it  was  accepted
         that this might change in the future;

     ii) did not meet paragraph EX.1 as no evidence has been produced  there
         were insurmountable obstacles which would mean there would be  very
         significant difficulties in the appellant or his partner continuing
         their family life together outside the UK in Algeria and  that  the
         child did not meet the requirement of paragraph EX.1(a) as  he  was
         not a British citizen and had not lived continuously in the  United
         Kingdom for seven years and in any event it would be reasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the United Kingdom;

    iii) did not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
         Immigration Rules  as  he  had  not  shown  that  there  were  very
         significant obstacles to his integration into life in Algeria;

     iv) had not shown that there were exceptional circumstances,  it  being
         noted that he had commenced a relationship in the knowledge he  had
         no  immigration  status  in  the  United  Kingdom,  no   legitimate
         expectation to remain  here  indefinitely,  and  that  all  parties
         should have been aware from the beginning that  family  life  might
         not be able to continue in the United Kingdom; and, that  the  best
         interests of a child and  his  parents  facing  removal  were  best
         served by that child remaining with the parents and  being  removed
         with them and that it was reasonable to expect the child to  return
         to Algeria with him.

 6. It is of note that by the time of the appeal the factual situation  had
    changed.  The appellant's partner had by then acquired indefinite leave
    to remain and a younger child had since been born  who  was  a  British
    citizen by birth.

 7. The judge found that:-

      i) the appellant had a very poor immigration history,  was  likely  to
         become a drain on the public purse owing to his inability to secure
         employment and had sought to  ignore  and  navigate  the  laws  and
         Immigration Rules of the United Kingdom to his own advantage [13];

     ii) there  were  grounds  for  considering  that  the  purpose  of  the
         relationship with his partner was a device and/or vehicle  employed
         by him to enhance his claim to remain in the United Kingdom at  all
         costs [14];

    iii) appellant's previous asylum claim had  been  fabricated  indicating
         that his credibility was in issue [15];

     iv) what the appellant and his partner  considered  to  be  exceptional
         circumstances or insurmountable  obstacles  to  living  in  Algeria
         amounted to an unsupported assertion that  the  wife  and  children
         could not gain Algerian nationality, the evidence consisting solely
         of the appellant stating that he telephoned  the  Algerian  Embassy
         and had received a  negative  response  [19];  accordingly  in  the
         absence of evidence, was not satisfied that paragraph EX.1 was  met
         [20];

      v) the children were in good health [27]; that it was incumbent on the
         parents to identify something that  amounts  to  an  insurmountable
         obstacle to exceptional circumstances so as to engage their Article
         8 rights [27]; a simple assertion by the parents  that  they  could
         not go to Algeria without  proper  explanation  or  evidence  being
         insufficient [27];

     vi) the eldest child had experience of living life without  his  father
         and the youngest child was too young to enjoy  this  experience  to
         any meaningful degree [28]  and  that  the  father  could  maintain
         contact with the wife and family by "modern means of communication"
         [29];

    vii) there was nothing to suggest the appellant's wife was  in  anything
         other than robust good health [30] and the help he gives round  the
         house with housework and looking after the children did not  amount
         to exceptional circumstances or an  insurmountable  obstacle.   The
         children could remain with the mother in the United Kingdom  whilst
         the  appellant  returns  to  Algeria.   The  appellant's  behaviour
         "clearly demonstrates that his sole  and  exclusive  agenda  is  to
         remain in the United Kingdom at all costs";

   viii) removal is proportionate.

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) in not considering whether paragraph EX.1  applied,  it  not  being
         reasonable to expect the child who is a British  citizen  to  leave
         the United Kingdom and reside in Algeria and whilst the wife  might
         be able to renew her travel document, this would not permit her  to
         reside in Algeria not least as she has no passport and, she was  in
         receipt of Disability Living Allowance, a fact which had  not  been
         in dispute nor indeed had the fact that she  had  received  gunshot
         wounds in Somalia;

     ii) in failing properly to apply Article  8  Section  117  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in concluding  that  the  appellant
         did not speak English; and, whilst accepting the family should  not
         be separated, fails to note that the  wife  should  be  allowed  to
         continue to enjoy the grant of refugee status and indefinite  leave
         to remain as she could not reside in Nigeria, not having  a  Somali
         passport and not yet qualifying for British citizenship;

    iii) in concluding that the eldest child had lived apart from his father
         when this was not the case; the father had returned when the  child
         was 5 days old.

 9. There are, as Mr Dougan submitted and Mr Duffy accepted,  a  number  of
    problems with the judge's analysis of paragraph EX.1.   The  assessment
    of issues does  not  follow  any  logical  order  and  it  is  somewhat
    surprising that the judge should commence with an analysis  of  Section
    117 as though it was somehow an analogy to Section 8 of the 2004 Act.

10. Further, the birth of the second child, acquisition of indefinite leave
    to remain by the appellant's wife and the British  citizenship  of  the
    children all arose after the date of decision.  It does  not,  however,
    appear to have occurred to the judge or  indeed  either  representative
    before him, that any of these three events might amount to a new matter
    for the purposes of section 85 of the 2002 Act.

11. In assessing whether the requirements of paragraph EX.1  were  met  the
    judge did not take into account the position of the children  which  is
    covered by paragraph EX.1(a).  He addressed himself only to the matters
    raised in the refusal letter, there being at that time only  one  child
    who was not at that point a British citizen.  That was undoubtedly  the
    correct position at the date  of  decision  and  would  have  been  the
    correct approach if the Secretary of State had  concluded  that  a  new
    matter had arisen and had refused to allow this to be considered.   But
    the judge did not do so; he clearly elsewhere  in  the  decision  takes
    into account the citizenship of the children yet did not take this into
    account in his assessment at EX.1.  There is an inconsistency here.

12. Whilst, as Mr Duffy submitted, had the findings been  only  that  there
    would be no insurmountable obstacles in respect of the  wife,  that  is
    entirely  sustainable  given  the  lack  of  evidence  to  support  the
    assertions that the wife and children could not go to live in Algeria.

13. The judge did, however, go on to consider the position of children  but
    not through the lens of EX.1.  The judge did  not  address  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the children to go to  live  in  Algeria.
    But, the sole basis on which it is said it would not be reasonable  for
    the children to go and live in Algeria is the difficulty  of  going  to
    live there in terms of practicalities,  that  is  passports  and  entry
    clearance.  No evidence was provided to show that there  would  be  any
    difficulty of the family going to live in Algeria.  Indeed, the witness
    statements  from  the  appellant  and  his  wife  make  no  mention  of
    difficulties in relocating, or about  the  children's  best  interests.
    Nothing is said about the children or why it would not be reasonable to
    expect the family unit to go to live in Algeria.

14. It was for the appellant to make out his case.  He did not do so and so
    far as the judge erred in his approach to assessing the children's best
    interests, as noted above there was little or no evidence  put  to  him
    about any difficulties they would face if they left the United  Kingdom
    or in living in  Algeria.   The  simple  fact  that  they  are  British
    citizens is not determinative; it is frequently the case  that  parents
    take their British children to live overseas.

15. Similarly, there was no reliable evidence  that  the  appellant's  wife
    could not, in the near future, obtain a travel document so that she and
    the children could go to live in Algeria. That  she  has  a  disability
    which entitles her to benefits in the United Kingdom is not  sufficient
    evidence that there would be insurmountable obstacles to her living  in
    Algeria.

16. Viewing the decision and the evidence as a whole, the  assessment  that
    there are no insurmountable obstacles was one manifestly  open  to  the
    judge, given the lack of evidence and there is nothing to show that the
    passports could not have been obtained for the wife and  children.   It
    cannot therefore be said that any error in his approach was material.

17. Having properly concluded that EX.1 was not met, and  there  not  being
    any errors with respect to there being immaterial  given  the  lack  of
    evidence, it cannot be said that the higher test applicable  where  the
    Rules are not met, would be applicable in this case.   Again,  although
    Section 117B would apply, and the judge did  err  with  regard  to  the
    application of whether or not the appellant spoke English, this  is  of
    little weight.  At best it would have been neutral that  the  appellant
    spoke English but there are a  considerable  number  of  other  factors
    which would militate against him, not least of which is his immigration
    history and the fact that he is dependent on public funds and that  his
    family life with his partner arose at a time in his life whilst to  say
    the least precarious.

18. Insofar as that the judge erred in suggesting that the family could  be
    separated, this was clearly based on erroneous findings of fact  as  to
    the length of time that the appellant had spent with the child, this is
    of no assistance to the appellant.  This was a finding reached  in  the
    alternative.  The fact remains that there is simply no evidential basis
    on which it could have been concluded that requiring the family  to  go
    to live in Algeria was unreasonable and still less that there were very
    compelling circumstances such that, despite  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration   Rules   not   being   met,   removal   would   still   be
    disproportionate.  There is simply no  evidential  basis  for  such  an
    assertion.

19. Accordingly, for these reasons, I conclude that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law
    capable of affecting the outcome.


    Summary of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                       Date:  14 January 2019

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

