
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/27694/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 | Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 September 2018                 | On 25 March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                SHAKEELA [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                    Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Akhtar, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Freer, promulgated on 28 March 2018, dismissing her  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent dated 7 December 2016. By that decision  the
    respondent refused to grant the appellant leave to remain as the spouse
    of a person settled in the United Kingdom.





Background

 2. To put this case in context, it falls within the category of cases that
    are commonly known as "ETS cases". The respondent  concluded  that  the
    appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good due
    to cheating by using a proxy to take an English language test  and,  by
    her failure to declare in the application that she received  a  caution
    on 3 September 2012 in relation to using an automated scanning  machine
    when paying for goods.

 3. The background to the appellant's immigration history  is  as  follows.
    The appellant entered the UK lawfully as a student on 5 April 2011. She
    had leave in  that  capacity  through  successful  applications/and  an
    appeal until 24 August  2014.  The  appellant's  last  application  for
    further leave to remain as a student was however refused on 7 September
    2015 and her appeal against that decision was unsuccessful before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lingham. The appellant's  appeal  rights  had  been
    exhausted by 10 November 2016.

 4. On 27 October 2016 the appellant applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse of a settled person. The appellant's spouse is a British citizen
    and  they  have  three  children.  In  refusing  this  application  the
    respondent made reference to the appellant's previous use  of  a  TOEIC
    English language certificate issued by ETS which was said to have  been
    fraudulently obtained.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision and the appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer ("the judge"). The judge heard evidence
    from the appellant and her husband. The judge was clearly not impressed
    by the evidence [48]. She observed that  the  appellant  "sounded  very
    rehearsed" and noted that she had "a lot of help" from the interpreter,
    which should not have been needed had her account been true. While  the
    judge gave some allowance for the fact that the appellant was "probably
    tired from looking after three children with a  working  husband",  her
    evidence clearly struck a cord with the judge who was left "struck by a
    strong air of  helplessness  and  worry"  [48].  The  judge  noted  the
    appellant's failure to understand direction from her own representative
    during  the  course  of  her  evidence  when  invited  to  examine  the
    documentary evidence. The judge noted this  was  not  indicative  of  a
    "seasoned student at degree level with  good  understanding  of  spoken
    English" [49] and of a student who "claimed to be studying  numbers  of
    degree courses at the same time" [50] and, noted the trajectory of  her
    studies in business and education did not relate to her  activities  in
    the UK. The judge further noted that various paragraphs of her  witness
    statement were careless in expression.

6.    The judge noted the chronology of  the  appellant's  claimed  academic
    achievements in Pakistan and did not accept the  appellant  could  have
    completed two Bachelor degrees at different campuses in 2003. The judge
    concluded having taken into account  the  background  evidence  of  the
    endemic nature of document fraud in Pakistan  that  the  appellant  had
    produced unreliable documentation in order to enter the UK as a student
    [58] to [62]. The judge further found that she could place no  reliance
    on the IELTS certificate of 2014 and the CAS  letters  as  evidence  of
    English language ability at [63] to [65].

7.    The judge recorded that she had directed  the  Presenting  Officer  to
    obtain copies of two previous appeal  decisions  promulgated  by  Judge
    Hodgkinson  and  Judge  Lingham  in  2014  and  2016  respectively  and
    concluded that the appellant's failure to disclose them demonstrated  a
    lack of candour. Judge Hodgkinson allowed the  appellant's  application
    for further leave as a student in 2014. It does not appear that an  ETS
    allegation of fraud was made before him. Such an allegation was however
    made before Judge Lingham. While the appeal  was  dismissed  under  the
    Rules, Judge Lingham  concluded  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to
    discharge  the  evidential  burden  and  accordingly  found  that   the
    allegation of deception had not been made out.

8.    The judge then proceeded to consider the relevant  factors  identified
    by the case-law in such cases and,  whilst  noting  that  most  of  the
    respondent's evidence was generic, the appellant had not given a wholly
    satisfactory account as to why and how she  took  the  test;  concluded
    that she had plenty to gain  from  being  dishonest,  she  had  stopped
    studying and not used her accomplishments, had  started  a  family  and
    gained entitlements to Child  Benefit  and  Tax  Credits,  she  had  no
    professional reputation to lose, her character was unknown, she did not
    do well in cross-examination, she was inarticulate, her proficiency  in
    English was far short of excellent, she could not  follow  instructions
    during evidence and her academic achievements were dubious.  The  judge
    did not believe  the  appellant  wanted  to  finish  her  Master's  and
    concluded that she wanted to be a  full-time  mother  of  three  and  a
    housewife. For substantially these  reasons  the  judge  concluded  the
    appellant's innocent explanation was to be rejected.

9.    The judge proceeded to consider the appellant's human rights  contrary
    to Article 8 of the ECHR and concluded that it was reasonable to expect
    the children and husband to leave  the  UK  and  go  to  Pakistan.  The
    appellant had entered the UK under false pretences and her  status  had
    been precarious throughout. The judge referred to her earlier  findings
    and concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances  that  would
    warrant a grant of leave outside of the immigration rules. Accordingly,
    the appeal was dismissed.

10.   Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant on  the  basis  that
    it was arguable the judge erred in her assessment of the  evidence  and
    that she set too higher a standard in examining the question of whether
    an innocent explanation had been put forward.

Discussion

11.   The representatives both made submissions which I have  considered.  I
    have concluded that while the judge clearly endeavoured to analyse  the
    evidence in a balanced way, that she erred in law.

 12.  Miss Isherwood said everything she could say to oppose the appeal  and
    submitted that whilst some of the "phraseology" used by the  judge  was
    "inappropriate",  she  contended  the  findings  challenged  were   not
    material. While I agree with her in relation to some of the grounds,  I
    am troubled by other considerations that are  intrinsically  linked  to
    the judge's adverse conclusions.

13.   That is not to say that I accept all that was said  by  Mr  Akhtar  in
    his amplification of the grounds of  appeal.  There  is  no  merit  for
    instance in the submission that the ETS  issue  was  settled  by  Judge
    Lingham and the respondent was thus not entitled to raise it before the
    judge. First, there are procedural difficulties with this submission as
    Mr Akhtar, who did not represent the appellant  below,  was  unable  to
    confirm whether this was argued  before  the  judge.  Nevertheless,  it
    seems  clear  from  the  judge's  summary   of   the   representatives'
    submissions that it was not. Second, Miss Isherwood rightly pointed out
    that further evidence was adduced before the judge that was not  before
    Judge Lingham. There was nothing  inappropriate  or  unlawful  in  that
    approach. As the Tribunal recognised in SM Qadir there may be cases  in
    the future where a "new ingredient" may come to pass.  I  am  satisfied
    that the additional evidence adduced before the judge,  which  included
    expert evidence, fell into this category. The judge in reliance on  the
    further evidence was entitled to conclude that  the  evidential  burden
    had been discharged and that it passed to the appellant to  provide  an
    innocent explanation.

14.   Nor do I accept that the judge's conclusion that she was "not  content
    to accept that the  oral  evidence  is  impressive  in  any  way"  [48]
    demonstrates that she applied a higher standard of  proof.  While  this
    conclusion could have been expressed differently, I  am  not  satisfied
    that in so doing  this  indicates  the  judge  was  applying  a  higher
    standard of proof. It is  apparent  from  a  holistic  reading  of  the
    decision that the judge appropriately directed herself in law  and  was
    aware of the relevant case-law and applied it accordingly.

15.   However, while the judge took many factors into account, I agree  with
    Mr Akhtar that there are difficulties with the  judge's  assessment  of
    the evidence in other respects. The first is at [66]  where  the  judge
    refers to a lack of candour by the appellant having been shown  by  the
    failure to produce the previous determinations of Judge Hodgkinson  and
    Judge Lingham and exhibit them in the appeal bundle. That I find is  an
    error because the previous decisions  favoured  the  appellant  in  its
    findings and so there was no reason to believe that the  non-disclosure
    was deliberate or that the appellant was fully responsible for what was
    included in the bundle by her then representatives. In  describing  the
    failure as a "lack of candour" by the appellant it is difficult not  to
    conclude that this had no adverse impact on the  judge's  view  of  the
    appellant's character and her assessment of the evidence. It  is  clear
    in my judgement that it did.

16.   I also accept the submission of Mr Akhtar that  there  was  unfairness
    in the judge's approach to the evidence  of  the  appellant's  overseas
    academic qualifications. While the judge gave reasons for rejecting the
    reliability of that evidence and was particularly concerned  about  the
    various dates on the certificates  to  such  an  extent  that  she  was
    satisfied  that  there  had  probably  been   "academic   qualification
    cheating", I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  sufficient
    opportunity to deal with judge's concerns which significantly  informed
    her assessment of  credibility.  The  reliability  of  the  appellant's
    academic qualifications did not form part of the  respondent's  refusal
    and  whilst  the  appellant  was  cross-examined  briefly   about   the
    certificates at [29] it was not suggested to her  that  the  respondent
    challenged the reliability of the  certificates  and  nor  was  such  a
    challenge raised in submissions or indeed  by  the  judge  of  her  own
    motion at the hearing. I am thus satisfied that the appellant  was  not
    given an adequate opportunity to address the many  concerns  raised  by
    the judge and given that this subject matter formed a considerable part
    of the judge's reasoning, I am satisfied that there was  unfairness  in
    the approach adopted which impacted significantly on the assessment  of
    credibility.

17.   Thus, in summary, whilst I acknowledge that the judge  gave  a  number
    of reasons for her adverse findings,  I  cannot  safely  conclude  that
    these findings  were  not  infected  by  irrelevant  considerations  or
    unfairness. These matters in my judgement cannot  readily  be  divorced
    from other adverse findings that the judge was clearly entitled to make
    on the  evidence.  I  am  satisfied  that  these  errors  affected  the
    assessment of credibility and in turn the question  of  proportionality
    and are material.

18.   In my conclusion, and for the reasons given above,  I  find  that  the
    judge erred in law and as a consequence, I  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

19.   I now turn to what I should do next.  Both parties sought to  persuade
    me that the correct approach should be to  remit  this  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh. I see no reason  why  that
    should not be the appropriate order. I therefore remit  the  matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for reconsideration afresh.  The appeal  is  to
    be heard by a judge other than  Judge  Hodgkinson,  Judge  Lingham  and
    Judge Freer.


Signed:

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Bagral
                 Date 10 March 2019

