
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/27621/2016
     HU/27689/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 September 2018                    |On 15 November 2018                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A H
                                     A Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Nicholson, instructed by Bolton Citizens Advice
Bureau


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge L  Mensah,
    promulgated on 20 November 2017,  allowing  appeals  against  decisions
    made on 16 November 2016 to refuse them entry clearance to  the  United
    Kingdom under the refugee  family  reunion  provisions,  in  particular
    paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The respondents' mother fled Pakistan on account of  domestic  violence
    she suffered there at the hands of  the  respondents'  father  and  was
    recognised as a refugee as a result.  That status was granted following
    an appeal.

 3. The appellant refused the application on the  basis  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that they  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  352D(i)  or
    352D(iii) noting that there was no evidence that they were  related  to
    the sponsor (their mother) as stated and no evidence to show that  they
    do not reside with their father and other siblings in Pakistan.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the  respondents'  mother  who  explained
    that the respondents live with her husband and, as they are  boys,  not
    as badly treated as  the  girls  who  had  been  forced  to  marry  the
    husband's nephews; that she had limited contact with them but was  able
    to make the application because the children spent time with her mother
    and cousin; and, that the  father  had  consented  to  the  application
    because she believed that it now suited him to  agree  to  this  as  he
    wished to remarry.  The judge also took note of the DNA test confirming
    that the respondents are the biological sons of the sponsor.

 5. The judge directed herself that the fact that an appellant may  or  may
    not show they meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  at  the
    date of application is only a  factor  [14]  and  she  must  take  into
    account Section 117B of the 2002 Act in assessing the public  interest.
    She accepted that the respondents lived with the sponsor and the father
    in a family unit before they came to the United Kingdom; that they were
    related as claimed; and that the only question remained as  to  whether
    they had formed a separate family unit with their father [15].

 6. The judge directed herself in line with BM and AL (352D(iv); meaning of
    "family unit") Colombia [2007] UKAIT 00055 concluding that there was no
    doubt the children living in a home where the mother  is  subjected  to
    violence and life-threatening battery are themselves being subjected to
    an abusive environment which is damaging to them as well  as  to  their
    mother.  She concluded they had not formed a separate  family  unit  in
    the sense envisaged following BM and AL.

 7. The judge concluded:-

      1) it was not for her to second guess whether the father would prevent
         them joining  the  sponsor  or  has  given  consent,  the  personal
         preferences of those being involved not being determinative [18];

      2) the respondents met all the requirements of the Rules at  the  date
         of decision and that, applying Section 117B, there being no need to
         maintain effective immigration control because the respondents  met
         the requirements of the Rules, that the decision was proportionate,
         there being clear evidence of exceptional circumstances.

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in failing to  have  regard  to  all  the  relevant
    issues in assessing the children's best interests pursuant  to  section
    55 and had failed to determine a relevant issue and had  further  erred
    in the finding without proper  reasons  that  the  respondents'  father
    wants nothing to do with  them.   Accordingly,  the  finding  that  the
    children had not led an independent life was infected, the finding that
    they  had  been  subject  to  an  abusive  environment   being   widely
    speculative.

 9. On 24 April 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge E B Grant granted permission
    noting:-

    3.   The refusal was on the basis the [respondents] have not shown they
         do not reside with their father and other siblings in Pakistan  and
         relied on 352(i) and (iii).  The judge  made  no  determination  of
         whether this is correct and arguably erred in  law  in  failing  to
         make findings on the refusal so as to carry out a proper  balancing
         exercise under A8.  There was no evidence from the appellants about
         their circumstances and no evidence from their father  despite  the
         fact he cooperated in the entry clearance  application  process  by
         providing his DNA for the DNA tests.

    4.   The judge arguably erred in law  in  making  speculative  findings
         about the family's circumstances of the  two  appellants  when  she
         allowed in the A8 appeal.

    5.   Although not raised in the grounds there was fresh evidence before
         FTTJ Mensah not before Judge Thorne which arguably  undermines  the
         sponsor's case she fled as a victim of domestic violence.  To  make
         out her case to be a refugee before Judge Thorne has had to  accept
         that the letter of support from her husband [S A] for her visit  to
         the United Kingdom to visit another daughter was  a  forgery.   The
         sponsor's allegedly abusive husband who allegedly did not cooperate
         with her visit to the United Kingdom because he  allegedly  he  did
         not know about it, is very  obviously  cooperative  and  supportive
         because he has provided his DNA for the appellants' DNA test."

10. Although this is a human rights appeal, it arises from a  consideration
    of the Immigration Rules, and thus whether or not the  requirements  of
    paragraph 352D of the Immigration  Rules  are  met  is  an  appropriate
    question for the judge to consider first before going  on  to  consider
    article 8.

11. The appellant's grounds are not well drafted. They do  not  follow  the
    proper logical basis followed by the judge in considering  whether  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules are met,  and  then,  considering
    whether the  refusal  of  Entry  Clearance  is  proportionate.   It  is
    therefore best to consider ground 3 - the challenge to the  Immigration
    Rules findings first.

12. So far as is relevant, paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules provides
    as follows:-

    352D.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to  enter
           or remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain  with
           the parent  who  currently  has  refugee  status  are  that  the
           applicant:

           (i)    is the child of a parent who currently has refugee status
                granted under the Immigration Rules in the  United  Kingdom;
                and

           (ii)   is under the age of 18; and

           (iii)  is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and  is
                not a civil partner,  and  has  not  formed  an  independent
                family unit; and

           (iv)   was part of the family unit of the person granted  asylum
                at the time that the person granted asylum left the  country
                of their habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and

13. In ground 3, the appellant challenged the finding that the  respondents
    had not led an independent life.

14. The judge was manifestly entitled to conclude that the requirements  of
    paragraph 352D(i) was met  by  the  DNA  test  results.   That  is  not
    challenged.  There is no  suggestion  that  either  child  was  at  the
    relevant date under 18 nor is it suggested that they were not  part  of
    the family unit of the person granted  asylum  at  the  time  that  the
    person left the country of origin; nor is it suggested that they should
    be otherwise excluded. None of those findings are challenged.

15. The focus of the appeal is therefore paragraph 352D(iii) which sets out
    four situations in which an applicant who would otherwise  qualify  for
    entry clearance cannot succeed.

16. It is not suggested that either respondent was married or was  a  civil
    partner, but the appellant's case set out in the  refusal  notice  does
    not expressly address whether it is suggested that either  are  leading
    an independent life, rather it is  implied  that  they  should  not  be
    residing with their father and other siblings which, on one reading  at
    least, is directly contrary to the requirement that they should not  be
    living an independent life in order to qualify.  The  submissions  made
    to Judge Mensah appear to be that as they  were  now  living  with  the
    father they had "formed an independent (emphasis added) family unit".

17. The facts in BM and AL were very different.  There, the mother  of  the
    children had never been married to the sponsor father, had never  lived
    with him and indeed the children had only lived with their  mother  and
    grandmother in Colombia.  In any  event  the  issue  in  the  case  was
    whether the children had formed part of the same family unit  prior  to
    the parent fleeing which  is  not  in  doubt  here.    It  is  of  some
    assistance in noting that there has been a change in that the mother no
    longer forms part of that family unit but of more  assistance  in  this
    case are the  parallel  decisions  NM  (Leading  an  independent  life)
    Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT 00051 and MI  (paragraph  298(iii):  "independent
    life") Pakistan  [2007]  UKAIT  00052.   The  headnote  in  the  former
    provides:-

         "Where a child (who may be over 18) is  seeking  limited  leave  to
         remain as the child of a parent with limited  leave,  in  order  to
         establish that he is not 'leading an independent life' he must  not
         have formed through choice a separate (and  therefore  independent)
         social unit from his parents' family unit  whether  alone  or  with
         others.  A child who, for example, chooses to live away  from  home
         may be  'leading  an  independent  life'  despite  some  continuing
         financial and/or emotional dependence upon his parents."

    The use of "has formed" requires a positive act  on  the  part  of  the
    person in question; the question is thus whether either respondent  has
    acted to form a family unit separate from the family unit in  which  he
    lived previously. It is evident from  the  decisions  with  respect  to
    independent family or independent life that this  is  a  unit  separate
    from the parents.

18. On the basis of the evidence before her, and on a  proper  analysis  of
    the relevant Immigration Rule, the judge was  accordingly  entitled  to
    conclude that the respondents remained within an existing family  unit,
    and had not formed an independent family unit. Indeed, given that it is
    the appellant's case that the respondents continue to live  with  their
    father, and that he supports them, it is contradictory to suggest  that
    they have formed independent lives or an independent family unit.

19. I now turn to grounds 1 and 2.  Having  properly  and  for  sustainable
    reasons concluded that the respondents had met the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules, the judge acted correctly in considering whether  in
    those circumstances, refusal of entry clearance was proportionate. What
    she did not do was bear in  mind  that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  a
    statement of the Secretary of State's position as to where the  balance
    of public interest and the right to respect for private and family life
    lies which in turn includes an assessment of where in general the  best
    interests of a child lie and in that way, the duty imposed  by  section
    55 is met. How that is achieved  can  be  seen  in  the  provisions  in
    paragraph 297 in relation to sole responsibility and in  the  reference
    to serious and compelling family or other considerations; and,  in  the
    need for there to be suitable arrangements for the child's care.

20. It is also of note  that  an  article  8  was  not  considered  by  the
    appellant in the initial decision,  nor  was  there  a  best  interests
    assessment carried out.

21. What the appellant argues is that despite having met  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules as at the date of decision and  now,  that  is
    insufficient; there must also be a consideration of the best  interests
    of the children over and above that provided  for  in  the  Immigration
    Rules he drafted and which take the best interests into account. It is,
    in effect, a submission that it is not enough for  the  respondents  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, but  that  a  grant  of
    entry clearance must be in their best interests.

22. The "section 55 assessment" referred to in ground 1 is one carried  out
    by the Secretary of State. Section 55 of the 2009 Act  does  not  place
    obligations directly on the First-tier Tribunal. and does not apply  to
    children who are outside the United Kingdom - see T (s.55 BCIA  2009  -
    entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483(IAC) albeit  that  the  best
    interests are to be considered particularly where there is a cause  for
    concern.

23. Further, contrary to what  is  averred  in  the  grounds  at  [1],  the
    reference to best interests at  [22]  was  not  seen  as  an  important
    feature. It is at best an aside, and it is manifest in the decision  at
    [18] that the requirements of the rules  being  met  was  a  much  more
    important factor. The references to best interests arise only after the
    judge misdirected herself that in assessing the proportionality of  the
    decision there had  to  be  exceptional  circumstances.   That  is  not
    material as in so doing she wrongly started the balancing exercise with
    the scales weighted very much in the Secretary  of  State's  favour  in
    terms of  the  public  interest  which  is  not  applicable  where  the
    Immigration Rules are met.

24. As the respondents point out, the assertion made by  the  appellant  is
    that rather than live with their mother in Pakistan, is in effect  that
    it would be in the children's best interests to remain with the  father
    who had abused their mother in the past. It was open to  the  judge  on
    the evidence to conclude that the household in which they had all lived
    was an abusive home. That is not speculative;  this  experienced  judge
    was entitled to conclude on the evidence that this would have  affected
    the children.

25. Contrary to what is  averred  in  the  grounds,  there  was  sufficient
    evidence from the sponsor on which the judge was entitled to  make  the
    impugned  findings;  what  is  averred  in  the  grounds  at   [2]   is
    speculative.

26. It is of further note that all that will occur here is a grant of entry
    clearance; it allows the children to travel to and reside  lawfully  in
    the United Kingdom. It does not necessarily follow that this will occur
    against the father's wishes if, as was found, they live with  him,  and
    he is aware of the application.

27. The judge thus misdirected herself (albeit not materially in this case)
    in asking herself  whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  to
    warrant allowing the appeal under Article 8, yet not appreciating  that
    having met the requirements of the Immigration Rules is in itself is  a
    weighty matter.    The judge should not have gone on  to  consider  EX1
    and Appendix FM which are irrelevant.  There was no  need  for  her  to
    then consider unjustifiably harsh consequences.

28. The only basis on which consideration of the children's best  interests
    could have been taken into account were it not accurately reflected  in
    the Immigration Rules would be in assessing proportionality.  Again, no
    rationale is provided by the Secretary of State as to why  this  should
    be considered where the requirements of the Immigration Rules are  met.
    This is  not  a  situation  where,  unlike  in  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules, issues of sole responsibility  lie,  and  while  the
    best interests of the children are a factor to be taken into account in
    assessing proportionality, it is not at all clear how the Secretary  of
    State could argue that, despite the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules  being  met,  that  a  refusal  to  issue  entry  clearance   was
    proportionate on account of the weight  to  be  attached  to  the  best
    interests of the children.

29. The challenges set out in the grounds at paragraphs 1 and 2 are at best
    a  challenge  to  the  finding  that  the  children  have  not  led  an
    independent life which proceeds  on  an  erroneous  basis  of  what  an
    independent life is.  It is not at all speculative  to  consider  that,
    given that it had been established that there  was  abuse  towards  the
    respondents' mother within the relationship, that they were  living  in
    an abusive household.  In any event  whether  they  were  or  were  not
    living in an abusive household was  not  relevant  to  a  consideration
    under the Rules.

30. In summary, Judge Mensah made adequate and  sustainable  findings  that
    the requirements of paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules  were  met.
    For reasons that are not at all clear she then  went  on  to  speculate
    about matters arising on irrelevant matters  when  considering  whether
    there was a breach of Article 8.  The self-direction that she needed to
    find exceptional circumstances is simply misplaced and wrong.  The need
    to find justifiably harsh consequences arises only when the  Rules  are
    not met.

31. In the circumstances, there is no  merit  in  the  grounds  whatsoever.
    They focus on matters which were not material to the finding under  the
    Immigration Rules and insofar as they are  an  attack  on  the  finding
    there would be a breach on Article 8 they are misplaced.  They  do  not
    show any error in the findings that the requirements of the Rules  were
    met in that they misconstrue what an independent life is and  bring  in
    extraneous issues with regard to the best interests of the children.

32. The comments of Judge Grant at paragraph [5] of the grant of permission
    are inappropriate and should not have been made.  Further, in so doing,
    no regard appears to have been made to the principles  set  out  in  AZ
    (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA practice) Iran [2018] UKUT  245  (IAC)
    with particular reference to paragraph [69].  Mr Bates did not seek  to
    rely on that ground nor, with respect, does it  properly  identify  any
    error of law.

33. For these reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law capable of affecting  the
    outcome and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and uphold it.

 2. The respondents are reminded that any application  for  costs  must  be
    made pursuant to Rule 10 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 within one month of the issue of this notice.

 3. I make an anonymity order in respect of the respondents.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 9 November 2018


    Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
