
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/27430/2016
                                                               HU/27433/2016
                                                               HU/27435/2016
                                                               HU/27440/2016
                                                               HU/27441/2016
                                                               HU/27443/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2018                    |On 16 October 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                Catherine [W]
                                 Joseph [T]
                             and their children
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr L Lourdes of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




This is an appeal brought by a Ghanaian family against the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana promulgated on 18 May 2018 following a
hearing at Hatton Cross on 16 April 2018 in which she dismissed the appeal
of a mother and father and their three children against the decision of the
respondent dated 12 December 2016 refusing to give them leave to remain
under the Immigration Rules paragraph 276ADE(1) and Article 8 of the ECHR.

As a matter of history, it cannot be avoided to state the chronology of
this case.  The father was issued with periods of leave to remain and those
provided him with valid leave until 14 June 2006.  Thereafter he remained
without leave and made various applications which were unsuccessful.  In
order to maintain himself in the United Kingdom he necessarily had to use
false documents.  The application centred upon the position of two
children.  At the relevant time the children were aged 8 and 7.  The judge
dealt with the position of each of the qualifying children, that is, those
two children to which I have referred, and considered the effect of their
removal to Ghana, a place which they had not visited.

The background to the legal decision-making has to centre upon the decision
of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, and the
judgment of Elias LJ, Lady Justice King and Sir Stephen Richards.  In that
case consideration was given to the interplay between the appellants' poor
immigration history and the children's best interests.  In paragraph 47 it
was said:

Even if we were applying the narrow reasonable test where the focus is on
the child alone, it would not in my view follow that leave must be granted
whenever the children's best interests are in favour of remaining.  I
reject Mr Gill's submission that the best interests assessment
automatically resolves the reasonable question.  If Parliament had wanted
the child's best interests to dictate the outcome of the leave application,
it would have said so.  The concept of 'best interests' is after all a well-
established one.  Even where the children's best interests are to stay, it
may still be not unreasonable to require the children to leave.  That will
depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the links in the
UK and in the country where it is proposed he should return.  What could
not be considered, however, would be the conduct and immigration history of
the parents.

The Court of Appeal's decision goes on to say in paragraph 49:

Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the wider construction
of s.117B(6), the same principles would apply in such a case.  However, the
fact that the child has been in the UK for seven years would need to be
given significant weight in the proportionality exercise for two related
reasons: first, because of its relevance to determining the nature and
strength of the child's best interests; and second, because it establishes
as a starting point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful
reasons to the contrary.

Then, in paragraph 52 of the Court of Appeal's decision, a series of tests
or considerations are set out which includes that there can be no
substitute for a careful examination of all relevant factors when the
interests of a child are involved in an Article 8 assessment (that is the
decision found in subparagraph (6)) and finally, a child must not be blamed
for matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the conduct of
a parent, subparagraph (7).

The interplay that is the central feature of a reasonableness
consideration, is the interplay between the immigration history and the
fact that the parents and the children have no substantive right to remain
under the Immigration Rules (on the one hand) and the need to protect
children against harm from being taken away unreasonably from the
environment which they know and from which they benefit.  It is worth
pointing out, however, that in AM (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the
Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 180 Elias LJ  also said in paragraph 20 in
reference to MA (Pakistan) that the court, admittedly reluctantly,
concluded that it was inherent in the reasonable test in s. 117B(6) that
the court should have regard to wider public interest considerations and in
particular the need for effective immigration control.

In the cursory survey that I have conducted into the relevant case-law I
shall also refer to the decision of the Tribunal in the case of MT and ET
(child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88.  This
was a decision by the President and Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley given on
1 February 2018 following a hearing on 9 January 2018.  The relevant
passage in relation to the Tribunal's decision is found in the concluding
paragraphs.  In paragraph 34 it was said that there were no powerful
reasons to mitigate against the child's right to remain.  In the case of ET
the child had been in the United Kingdom since the age of 4.  She had
remained in the United Kingdom for over ten years and, as a 14 year-old,
she could plainly be expected to have established significant social
contacts involving friends in school and outside such as in the church and
she had embarked upon a course of studies leading to the taking of GCSE
examinations.

These cases clearly establish that such cases are fact-sensitive.  That
must be apparent from the very opening of the italicised words in MT and
ET, which begin:

A very young child, who has not started school or who has only recently
done so, will have difficulty in establishing that her Article 8 private
and family life has a material element, which lies outside her need to live
with her parent or parents, wherever that may be.  This position, however,
changes over time, with the result that an assessment of best interests
must adopt a correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position in
the wider world, of which school will usually be an important part.

Thus, when dealing with children, one of the significant factors to bear in
mind is whether the stage which the child has reached and the length of
stay in the United Kingdom that the child has enjoyed is such as to merit a
finding by the Tribunal or by the Secretary of State that it would be
unreasonable for the child to be removed but the range is a fact-sensitive
range.  In the case of a very young child, who has not started school, then
there will be very little in the way of a powerful reason why the child
cannot return with his or her parents.  In contrast, even where the parents
have a poor immigration history, by the time the child has been in the
United Kingdom for a long period during which the child has been involved
in education and is in the middle of a course of studies, then very
different considerations may apply.

This was the approach that was adopted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
She begins in paragraph 7 by examining the evidence.  In relation to
English, it was said by the judge that the mother speaks English and the
children speak English.  She also speaks the Ghanaian dialect.  The
position of the mother was examined in the following paragraphs.  She says
that she spoke in a Ghanaian dialect at home but the children do not
understand it.  She has a qualification in home economic science.  She said
that she could not get a job in Ghana and she only has contact with two of
her former schoolmates.  Joseph, the father, also gave evidence.  He said
that he had worked in the United Kingdom as a courier.  He had finished
high school in Ghana and did not have any qualifications and he submitted
that he could not find work in Ghana as there were no jobs and that is why
people turned to robbery.

The judge's assessment of the evidence then takes place between paragraphs
13 and 28 of the determination insofar as it relates to the Immigration
Rules.  There then follows a passage dealing with Article 8 in paragraphs
29 to 43 of the determination.

The judge accepted that her role was to pay particular regard to the two
qualifying children aged 7 and 8 in the sense that they were qualifying
children within the meaning of s. 117D(1).  She refers to the fact that
case-law had indicated that the child's connections to the United Kingdom
become more important from the ages of 4 to 11 and she then moved on to
consider the likely circumstances of the qualifying appellants if returned
as a family unit to Ghana.  She conducted what she described as an
individual consideration and assessment of the best interests of these
qualifying appellants and first and foremost took into account the simple
fact that the removal of the family to Ghana does not involve the
separation of the children from their parents or siblings.

The judge went on to consider the importance that the best interests of the
children included the provision of security, wellbeing, social integration,
education and to be clothed, housed and fed and took those as significant
factors in the consideration of the children's best interests.  She then
assessed the evidence provided by the mother that, although they speak to
each other in the Ghanaian local dialect, the children only understand a
couple of words.  That perhaps would be surprising in that if the children
are spoken to in a language which the parents realise their children do not
understand, there would be limited point in conducting such conversations
but the judge was content to rely upon the fact that the parents speak the
local dialect, the children are very young and are in a position to learn
to speak it relatively quickly.

The judge then went on to consider their education on return to Ghana and
was satisfied that there was a system of education in Ghana such as not to
subject them to harm on return to Ghana without the benefit of such
education.  There was also, the judge noted, no background evidence that
the children would not live in a secure environment with medical care being
available and the judge made the obvious point that children are capable of
making friends in Ghana and continuing to socialise as they do in the
United Kingdom.

She went on to consider the safety of the children and that included an
assessment as to whether the parents would be able to find work to support
themselves and she rejected the parents' evidence that there were no jobs
in Ghana and that people had to resort to robbery to support themselves.
At the hearing the judge found that it became increasingly obvious that the
parents have relatives in Ghana who can support them in integrating and
that they contradicted each other's evidence as to the nature of the
support mechanisms which existed in the form of relatives living in Ghana.
She said: "I find I have not been told the whole truth about their
circumstances."

One of the matters which is of crucial importance in the consideration of
these cases is that the children's best interests must not be determined as
against the wrongdoing of the parents but the judge expressly advised
herself against taking that approach in paragraph 27 by saying: "I
emphasise that I do not take against the third appellant the illegal status
of their parents in determining their interests."  In consideration of the
circumstances as a whole the judge concluded that it would be reasonable
for the qualifying appellants to return with their parents as a family
unit.

I do not need to go beyond that in my consideration of the Article 8 claim
because very much the same considerations were in play.

The Secretary of State points out that the letters of support spoken in
support of the appellants were within the Ghanaian community and those
therefore indicated that the appellants including the children were
embedded within the Ghanaian community within the United Kingdom and
consequently the differential, as it were, between their life in the United
Kingdom and their life on return to Ghana has to be seen in the context of
the community in which they thrive in the United Kingdom.  It is true that
the judge did not use the word "powerful" as is suggested in MA (Pakistan)
but that, in my judgment, is an adjective that properly describes the
nature of the reasons that were put forward by the judge.

The judge fully reasoned why there would be no harm to the children.  They
would be returning to an environment where they would benefit from
education, healthcare, relatives and an environment with which they were
broadly familiar.  They would be able to speak English and they would be
able to pick up the Ghanaian dialect which their parents use to them in the
United Kingdom.  It does not seem to me that it was essential that the
children at the age of 7 or 8 should be able to write this dialect.
Indeed, many children of that age have only a limited ability to write
English in any event.

So, the factors which the judge identified were factors that were all
material to her consideration of the best interest of the children and
there is nothing in the grounds of appeal to suggest that the judge erred
in law.  It is simply wrong to assert that any of the case-law supports the
bold proposition that once a child has been in the United Kingdom from
birth until the age of 7 or 8, that child can no longer lawfully be removed
from the country.  That is far too simplistic an approach to be adopted.
Instead, one has to adopt a nuanced, fact-sensitive, sympathetic approach
to the position of the child, based on the evidence that is placed before
the Tribunal, and reach a decision upon that material as to whether it can
properly be said to be reasonable to deprive the child of the environment
that child currently enjoys in the United Kingdom.

For the reasons I have given I find that that was the approach adopted by
the judge and accordingly I dismiss the appellants' appeal against the
determination of the First-tier Tribunal, whose determination of the appeal
shall stand.

DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of
law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
Dated 09 October 2018
