
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/27319/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17 April 2018                          |On 18 April 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                             MADIHA ADMAN RAJPUT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, instructed by Lighthouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 9  November  2017
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge A A  Wilson  which  refused  Mrs  Rajput's
    Article 8 ECHR appeal.

 2. Mrs Rajput is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 20 February 1982.

 3. The background to the  application  is  that  Mrs  Rajput  married  the
    sponsor, Mr Adnan Rajput, on 18 October 2010. It is undisputed that the
    couple now have two children. The oldest child is said  to  be  British
    and it was also submitted that an application for  British  nationality
    had been made for the younger child.

 4. Mrs Rajput made an application for entry clearance but this was refused
    on 7 October 2016. The application was refused as Mr  Rajput  had  been
    married to his first wife until 21 October 2010. He was therefore still
    married to his first wife when he married Mrs  Rajput.  The  respondent
    considered that as he was domiciled in the UK, under UK law the  second
    marriage to Mrs Rajput was  polygamous  and  not  valid.  Further,  the
    respondent did not find that the materials provided in support  of  the
    application showed intervening  devotion  such  that  the  relationship
    could be said to be genuine and subsisting or that the couple  intended
    to live together permanently in the UK.

 5. The appeal against the refusal was listed for 3 November 2017. The case
    was placed on the "float" list. First-tier Tribunal Wilson indicated at
    [3] and [4] of the decision that when "a substantial gap occurred in my
    list that morning" the case was put on before him. The sponsor did  not
    appear. The sponsor had not appeared by early afternoon when  the  list
    was complete and so Judge Wilson determined the case on  the  basis  of
    the papers and submissions from the Home Office Presenting Officer. The
    First-tier Tribunal found that the marriage was  not  valid.  He  found
    that the family were living together in Pakistan so no  breach  of  any
    family life arose as a result of the decision. The appeal was refused.

 6. Mr Rajput appealed the decision as  he  maintained  that  he  had  been
    present at the hearing centre and some kind of administrative error had
    led to his not being made aware that his wife's case had  been  called.
    He  provided  a  detailed  witness  statement  dated  6  December  2017
    describing how he had come back to the UK to attend the hearing. He had
    arrived at approximately 8:30am. When he was informed that the case was
    on the "float" list he sat and waited and then went to get a coffee  as
    the machine in the hearing centre was broken. On his return he was told
    that the case had been heard in his absence. He was told  that  nothing
    could be done. He asked to speak to the Immigration Judge but was  told
    that the appeal had been concluded.

 7. The statement provided by Mr Rajput contains, in  my  view,  compelling
    details, such as his having to wait until reception opened at 9am,  the
    nearest coffee shop being in Tesco's opposite the hearing  centre,  his
    concern at the delay of 13 months in the case being listed at  all  and
    his anxiety that the case might not get heard if it was on the  "float"
    list. I am more than satisfied that Mr Rajput was present and  that  an
    administrative error in the way in which the case was called led  to  a
    material procedural  error,  the  case  being  determined  without  his
    evidence or submissions.

 8. The parties were in agreement that there were also confusing statements
    in the decision, for example at [8]  which  was  difficult  to  follow.
    There was also agreement that the proper approach of assessing  whether
    the Immigration Rules were met in order to inform the  Article  8  ECHR
    assessment did not appear to have been taken. The parties were also  in
    agreement that even if the issue of the validity of  the  marriage  was
    conceded by the appellant, the couple still maintained that  the  human
    rights assessment had to take into account their claim to have been  in
    a relationship akin to marriage for the requisite period and  the  best
    interests of the children.

 9. My conclusion is that a procedural error has occurred and the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be re-made  de  novo.  Where
    that is so, it is appropriate for the remaking to  take  place  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed: [pic]                           Date: 17 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
