
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/27184/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14th December 2017                 |On 16 Janaury 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MD Suheb Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Uddin of Taj Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Obhi made following a hearing at Birmingham on 11th September 2017.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 22nd August  1985.   He
    came to the UK on 24th February 2011 as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    until 27th June 2012.  He then applied to extend  that  leave  on  28th
    February 2012 and again on 9th November 2012  resulting  in  his  leave
    being extended to 10th July 2013.  On 1st  July  2013  he  applied  for
    permission to remain as the  spouse  of  a  settled  person  which  was
    granted until 1st January 2016.

 3. On 4th December 2015 he applied for further  leave  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of a  settled  person  but  was  refused  and  the  refusal  was
    certified under Section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 denying him a right of appeal.  The appellant challenged  that
    decision by a judicial review resulting in  a  further  refusal  letter
    being issued on 30th November 2016.  It was this decision which was the
    subject of the appeal before the Immigration Judge.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application on the basis that it was
    believed  that  the  appellant  had  fraudulently  obtained   a   TOEIC
    certificate which he had submitted with  his  application  in  November
    2012.  The Secretary of State relied on the information  provided  from
    the Educational Testing Service which was able to detect when a  single
    person was undertaking  multiple  tests.   It  was  believed  that  the
    appellant's certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy
    test taker.  The Secretary of State  relied  on  the  generic  evidence
    provided in a number of these appeals, from a Mr  Millington  and  Miss
    Collings and Professor Andrew French.

 5. The judge considered the evidence and concluded as follows

         "However, I cannot rule out the possibility that the  appellant  is
         telling me the truth and that  the  tickets  he  has  provided  are
         genuinely the tickets which he used to  attend  the  centre.   Very
         much on balance,  after  weighing  up  the  fact  that  whilst  not
         probable, it is possible that the equipment used by  ETS  may  have
         thrown up a false positive in  the  case  of  this  appellant,  and
         noting that he has produced the tickets that he has,  I  find  that
         the balance has shifted in his favour and that it is possible  that
         he attended and sat the test.  I am conscious of the fact  that  if
         the appellant had used fraud in his TOEIC then he could well go  to
         greater lengths to disguise that  fact,  even  by  accessing  these
         tickets.  However that is not currently supported by  the  evidence
         before me.   Accordingly  based  purely  on  the  evidence  and  my
         critical evaluation of it, I find that the appellant has proved his
         case."

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had failed to make a finding  on  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State had met the initial evidential burden of proof in line  with  the
    case of SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) UT (IAC)  (21
    April 2016).

 7. It was also submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons as to why the SSHD had not met the legal burden or  that  there
    was  an  adequate  innocent  explanation.   Had  the   judge   properly
    considered the evidence of deception she would have reached a different
    conclusion.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Boyes for the reasons  stated
    in the grounds on 18th October 2017.

Submissions

 9. Mr Duffy did not rely on  the  first  point  made  in  the  grounds  in
    relation to whether the judge had taken  the  proper  approach  to  the
    evidence, namely firstly to decide whether the SSHD had discharged  the
    initial evidential burden of proof in respect of deception and then  to
    consider whether, the burden having shifted to the claimant, there  was
    an innocent explanation.  He accepted that  the  judge  had  taken  the
    correct approach to the issue of the evidential burdens.

10. He did however submit that reasoning was not  adequate  and  sought  to
    enlarge the grounds by making the point that the judge had applied  the
    wrong standard of proof when she had said that "she could not rule  out
    the possibility".

11. Mr Uddin submitted that this was a careful determination, and the judge
    had reached a decision properly open to her.   He  submitted  that  the
    reference to the possibility that the claimant was  telling  the  truth
    was immaterial in the light of the evidence which was before the judge.



Findings and Conclusions

12. I am satisfied that the judge did not materially err in  law  and  that
    her decision should stand.

13. First, Mr Duffy properly did not pursue the  first  Ground  of  Appeal.
    The judge was plainly aware of the relevant case law which she applied.
     She did in fact state in terms at paragraph 31

         "If the evidence  provided  shows  that  the  test  taken  by  this
         particular appellant was  under  the  invalid  characterisation  as
         opposed to the questionable category that  will  shift  the  burden
         onto the appellant."

    She then set out the Secretary of State's evidence.

14. The second ground as drafted is in effect a reasons  challenge.   In  a
    detailed determination the judge set out all of the oral evidence which
    she had considered together  with  the  documentary  evidence  and  the
    submissions made both by the Presenting  Officer  and  the  appellant's
    representative.  The judge recorded that the claimant had been able  to
    provide train tickets, which he had found in  an  old  wallet,  showing
    that he had travelled to the test centre.  She acknowledged that it did
    not necessarily prove that he had taken the  test.   She  set  out  her
    concerns that there was no evidence relating to his enrolment  for  the
    test and that there was limited information as to  why  he  had  chosen
    this particular college.  Whilst she did not say so  in  terms,  it  is
    clear from her conclusions that she  found  the  oral  evidence  to  be
    credible and on that basis she allowed the appeal.  It was open to  her
    to do so.  The claimant had  been  able  to  provide  some  documentary
    evidence going at least in part to  show  that  he  attended  the  test
    centre and the judge was entitled to rely on that evidence.

15. So far as the late amendment to the grounds is concerned, Mr  Duffy  is
    quite right to highlight the clear error at paragraph 34 when the judge
    refers to the possibility of the claimant telling the truth.

16. I am conscious that this is an experienced Immigration  Judge  who  had
    properly set out the correct standard of proof at the beginning of  her
    determination.  I am not persuaded that the poor  use  of  language  in
    this paragraph is sufficient to negate the reasoned findings which  she
    made, after a proper consideration of all of the evidence.

Notice of Decision

17. The Secretary of State's challenge fails.  The  original  determination
    stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 13 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor










