
                                    [pic]

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/27402/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 September 2018                         |On 28 September 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 Sandra [s]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mahmud, a legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the respondent against the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    (F T T's) decision to allow the appellant's appeal against a refusal by
    the respondent to grant the appellant further leave to  remain  in  the
    UK.

 2. Throughout  this  decision  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  by  their
    designations before the FTT.

The Appellant's Immigration Background and History

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was  born  on  4  of  October
    1968.

 4. The appellant entered the  UK  on  1st  May  2002  as  a  visitor.  The
    appellant was refused further leave to remain on 28th of February 2003.
    However, on 24th of July 2012,  having  remained  in  the  UK  for  the
    intervening 10 years, the appellant applied further leave to remain  on
    human rights grounds (article 8). It seems from the decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Blum dated 27 October 2016, that application was on  the
    basis of the appellant's relationship with a Mr [L], a British citizen,
    as well as her relationship with her daughter Ms [M]. Ms [M] was and is
    a Jamaican national who at the time  of  the  application  for  further
    leave to remain on 24 July 2012 had discretionary leave  to  remain  in
    the UK. The appellant also claimed that her  daughter  suffered  mental
    health problem and the applicant was her main carer. She  claimed  that
    she  resided  with  Mr  [L],  who  provided   financial   support   and
    accommodation. It was  asserted  in  support  of  the  judicial  review
    application that the appellant's removal would be "very detrimental" to
    both Ms [M] and Mr [L] and would result in a breach of article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR).  The  application  to  the
    respondent on human rights grounds was refused on 5 August 2013 without
    any right of appeal. The appellant applied for permission to apply  for
    judicial review of the decision, which was refused by Judge Blum on  27
    October 2016. Following Judge Blum's decision, on 22 November 2016  the
    respondent decided to grant the appellant an in-country right of appeal
    relating to her application for leave to remain in the UK. However, the
    respondent subsequently refused that application. It was  against  that
    decision that the appellant  appealed  to  the  FTT.  Accordingly,  the
    appeal which became the came before the FTT was the appellant's  appeal
    against the respondent's decision dated 22nd of November 2016 to refuse
    the appellant's application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  on  human
    rights grounds. That appeal was brought under section  82  (1)  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (2002 Act) which, since the
    respondent's decision post-dated the commencement  into  force  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014, could only be made on human rights grounds.




The decision of the FTT

 5. Following a hearing on 15 March 2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lal
    (the immigration judge) decided that the appellant's removal  from  the
    UK would constitute an unlawful interference with her  protected  human
    rights and specifically her right under article 8 of the ECHR to  enjoy
    a private or family life in the UK. This was on the basis that the risk
    the FTT was satisfied on the evidence that the appellant was an  active
    and committed parent of her adult child  (Ms  [M]),  that  her  removal
    would end the relationship between her and her daughter and that it was
    not in the public interest or indeed  in  the  interests  of  effective
    immigration control to require the appellant to leave the UK and return
    to Jamaica. The immigration judge noted that the Ms [M] by the date  of
    the hearing had been given British citizenship but, I was  informed  at
    the hearing, has retained her Jamaican nationality also.




The hearing

 6. The respondent submits that based on the case of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11
    the appellant's status in the UK was "precarious".  Accordingly,  there
    had to be "very compelling "reasons for allowing her to stay in the UK.
    It was noted that the appellant was  financially  independent  and  had
    dual nationality (Jamaica and the UK). The reference in paragraph 18 of
    the decision to "paragraph 276 (vi) should have been a reference  to  o
    paragraph 276 A D E (vi). That sub-paragraph provides that an applicant
    seeking leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK,  who
    is aged 18 years or above, who lived continuously in the  UK  for  less
    than 20 years, must show "very significant obstacles to the applicant's
    integration into the country to which he would have to go  if  required
    to leave the UK" before the requirements of the Immigration Rules would
    be met. Mr Tofan argued that the appellant  plainly  did  not  surmount
    this high hurdle as no "very  significant  obstacles"  existed  to  her
    return to the country to which she would be sent - an  English-speaking
    Commonwealth country. As far as the appellant's daughter's health needs
    were concerned,  if  necessary,  social  services  could  pick  up  the
    functions currently discharged by the  appellant.  I  was  referred  to
    several cases by Mr Tofan including the case of B L Jamaica [2016] E  W
    C A C iv 357 where the Court of Appeal said (at paragraph 53) that  the
    U T were entitled to work  on  the  basis  that  social  services  will
    perform their duties under the law, as was required of them, where this
    was an issue in a case of this type. I was also referred to the case of
    Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA  Civ  803  where  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  at
    paragraph 61 of their judgment that it did not follow  that  because  a
    person is able to speak English that it is in the public interest  that
    they should be given leave to enter or remain. Section 117B (2) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration Asylum Act 2002 (2002 Act) requires the  court
    or tribunal hearing the  matter  to  assume  that  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control is in the public interest and one  public  interest
    factor is the ability of the appellant to speak English. As  the  Court
    of Appeal point out in that case, the ability of the appellant to speak
    English was only a neutral factor in the case. I remind myself  of  the
    contents of section 117B of the 2002 Act and pointed out to the parties
    that subsection (4) and  (5)  of  that  section  provide  that  "little
    weight" should be given to a private life formed when the person was in
    the UK unlawfully or precariously. Mr Tofan invited me to set aside the
    decision of the FTT.

 7. Miss Mahmud agreed that the appellant  was  here  illegally.  But,  she
    said, the immigration judge had considered all the evidence,  and  this
    included  a  psychological  report.  I  was  particularly  referred  to
    paragraphs 14 - 15, where the immigration judge had found  the  account
    to be credible and consistent as well as  supported  by  objective  and
    other evidence. She also found that the appellant's daughter had  needs
    under  the  mental  health  legislation  and  that  the  appellant  was
    designated as a person who required a protective environment under  the
    "mental health act". The immigration judge had noted  the  medical  and
    other expert evidence from an educational  and  child  psychologist  as
    well as other  professionals.  The  immigration  judge  had  taken  all
    relevant matters into account. The appellant's  continued  presence  in
    the UK  is  of  the  upmost  importance  in  terms  of  long-term  care
    arrangements for Ms [M]. The relationship between them was  beyond  the
    normal parent-child one and it would be disproportionate to return  the
    appellant to  Jamaica.  Accordingly,  even  if  one  applied  the  high
    threshold that Mr Tofan had set (very compelling  circumstances)  there
    were indeed very compelling circumstances in this case  and  that  test
    was therefore met. Furthermore, the appellant would not be a burden  on
    taxpayers she  and  her  daughter  were  in  full-time  employment.  In
    particular, the  appellant  had  been  employed  as  an  administrative
    officer in a company. I was invited to leave the decision in place  and
    to dismiss the respondent's appeal.

 8. Mr Tufan had nothing further to add.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing  I
    reserved my decision as to whether there was a material  error  of  law
    and if so what steps to take to rectify it. I note  that  in  doing  so
    that the FTT had made fact findings upon which I would be relying if  I
    decided that the decision had to be set aside. Accordingly,  I  pointed
    out to the parties that I was likely to remake the decision without the
    need to hear any further evidence. This was, of course,  in  accordance
    with the directions that had been given.




Discussion

 9. The immigration judge had medical evidence in the form of a report from
    Dr Jochen Binder-Dietrich dated 22nd of December 2014, which notes that
    appellant has cared for Ms [M] since approximately 2010 when she became
    hospitalised and subject to the Mental Health Act. She has a  diagnosis
    of bipolar affective disorder for which she takes regular medication to
    control the symptoms. She has been a danger to herself on occasions  as
    she leads a chaotic, aggressive and sexually disinhibited lifestyle. Ms
    [M] tends to avoid mental health services and can deteriorate  rapidly.
    There is also a letter from a Ms Calloway who records the level of care
    provided by the appellant for her daughter and a  psychological  report
    from Mr Simon Claridge dated 5 September 2017 which notes at page 18 of
    the report (page 41 of the appellant's bundle  at  the  FTT)  that  the
    appellant provides a sufficient level of support that  the  removal  of
    her from the UK would be "extremely likely" to cause Ms [M]  to  suffer
    "a relapse into mental illness".

10. Faced with this evidence it is unsurprising that the Immigration  Judge
    considered this to be a case where "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences"
    for the appellant and her family unit would flow from  her  removal  UK
    (see paragraph 28 of the decision).

11. However, Judge Grimmett in granting permission  not  only  pointed  out
    that the appellant's daughter is in full-time employment but also noted
    that  she  had  been  able  to  travel  to  Jamaica  two  years  before
    unaccompanied  by  the  appellant.  Also,  it  was  plain,   that   the
    immigration judge had erred in saying that this was "not a  case  where
    private  and  family  life  developed  when  immigration   status   was
    precarious". Plainly it was precarious immigration status.

12. There are several obvious errors in the immigration  judge's  decision,
    for example, her characterisation of the case (inn paragraph 23) as one
    where the private and  family  life  had  "not"  developed  whilst  the
    appellant's immigration status was precarious. It was  accepted  by  Ms
    Mahmud that her client had been in the UK unlawfully for  much  of  her
    stay in the UK. Consequently, in part based on that erroneous  finding,
    there was a failure to properly apply sections 117A - B of the 2002 Act
    and consider the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  apply  the
    relevant law to the facts of this case. For  example,  earlier  in  the
    same paragraph (paragraph 23) the Immigration Judge erroneously  stated
    that if the appellant is removed from the UK "... This  will  end  this
    relationship between her and her  daughter  in  terms  of  its  current
    protective quality".  That is a dubious conclusion to  reach  based  on
    the evidence which, as I  have  indicated,  shows  that  the  appellant
    travelled to Jamaica and had managed to retain  full  time  employment.
    There was also a failure on the part of the Immigration Judge  to  give
    proper reasons for  her  decision,  for  example,  the  fact  that  the
    appellant spoke English and has "never been a burden on  the  taxpayer"
    paragraph 25 of the decision) was merely a neutral  factor  and  not  a
    reason for allowing appeal.

13. On any view that decision has to be regarded as generous, having regard
    to the appellant's precarious immigration  status.  Parliament  directs
    that little weight is to be given to a private life  formed  whilst  an
    applicant's status is precarious or illegal. Mr  Tufan  submitted  this
    applied equally to a claim to having established family life in the UK.

14. The medical evidence relating to Ms [M]' stated mental  ill-health  and
    the effect of the appellant's removal on the wider family unit, and  in
    particular on Ms [M], were only part of the evidence in  the  case  and
    this evidence was not necessarily decisive.

15. I was referred by Mr Tufan to a number of other  decisions  which  deal
    with healthcare issues. The Upper Tribunal in the case  of  R  (on  the
    application of Sison) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] UKUT 33 (IAC) had to consider a  case  in  which  the  applicant
    sought leave to continue as a carer of an elderly  couple.  She  sought
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules, arguing that there  were
    exceptional compassionate circumstances and that the care of the couple
    concerned would be adversely affected  by  her  returning  to  her  own
    country, the Philippines. However, one distinction  between  that  case
    and this was that the applicant there did not seek  to  establish  that
    she continued to have a family or private life with the person she  was
    caring for. The judge, Upper Tribunal Judge Andrew Grubb, decided  that
    the appellant had not established that she was the only adequate  carer
    for the couple concerned and it was properly open to the respondent  to
    refuse under both the Rules  and  the  ECHR.  The  burden  lay  on  the
    appellant to show that she was really  the  only  adequate  carer.  The
    respondent's decision was not unlawful, and,  for  the  purposes  of  a
    judicial review application, there were no compelling reasons which the
    respondent had failed to attach proper weight to. Whilst the judge  had
    sympathy  with  the  position  the  appellant  found  herself  in,  the
    respondent's decision was not unlawful.

16. In Rajendran [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal had to  consider
    the case in which the appellant was a 62-year-old citizen of Canada who
    suffered from her own problems in that she was blind. She had  come  to
    the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  2013  and  returned  to  Canada  but  have
    subsequently come to the UK in 2014 when she  was  admitted  for  three
    months only. Her daughter looked after her. The respondent rejected the
    application under paragraph 276 ADE (1) of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    decided there were no exceptional  circumstances  to  justify  granting
    leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  under  article  8.  The
    appellant appealed.  The  judge  concluded  that  the  appellant  would
    receive adequate care on her return to Canada whether provided  by  the
    Canadian authorities or by the appellant's elder  daughter,  who  lived
    there. The judge in that case made adverse credibility findings in  any
    event.

17. I was also referred to the leading case of  Rhuppiah  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    1803, in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the  relevance  of
    precariousness of immigration status is the effect it has on the extent
    of protection afforded to private life for the purposes of article 8 in
    the proportionality balancing  exercise.  The  more  the  immigrant  is
    expected to have understood their time in the  host  country  would  be
    limited, the more the host state is able to show a fair balance between
    the  public  interest  in  the  effective  enforcement  of  immigration
    controls and the rights of the appellant been struck. This  often  came
    down in favour of the removal of the individual concerned.  There  were
    no compelling circumstances in that case which was a case in which  the
    appellant had come to the UK on  a  student  visa  expired  many  years
    previously.  The  appellant  had  sought  leave  to  remain  under  the
    Immigration Rules, relying on her article 8 rights. The  appellant  had
    taken up with a friend, who suffered  ill  health.  The  appellant  had
    significant commitment to helping out  the  friend  as  well  as  being
    engaged in charitable activities the local church. The  respondent  had
    dismissed  the  application  saying  there  was  no  basis  under   the
    Immigration Rules for the  appellant  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  the
    appellant should be returned to her native country, Tanzania.

18. Finally, I was referred to BL (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA  Civ  57  Court  of
    Appeal had to deal with a deportation  case.  The  case  also  involved
    children,  and  therefore  is  distinguished  from  the  present  case.
    However, the public interest in  that  case  demanded  the  appellant's
    deportation. The relevance of the case, from the respondent's point  of
    view, was the reference to the fact that support will be available from
    social services which would you after the family  whilst  the  criminal
    concerned  remained  in  prison.  It  was  concluded  there   were   no
    exceptional  circumstances  could  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    criminal should not be deported. The errors of law was  such  that  the
    Court of Appeal decided the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  should  be
    set aside.

19. Turning to the evidence in this case, in relation to harm  to  Ms  [M],
    this came principally from Dr Simon Claridge. He reported that  Ms  [M]
    would suffer a relapse into mental illness as  if  the  appellant  were
    removed from the UK. The relationship is not merely one  between  carer
    and cared for. The importance of relationship  is  that  the  appellant
    could do things for Ms [M] that a paid carer could not do. Dr  Claridge
    said the  absence  of  Ms  [M]  mother  would  be  "unbearably  anxiety
    provoking".




Conclusions

20. Without hearing Dr Claridge give oral evidence it is impossible to know
    whether or not the immigration judge was  correct  to  accept  all  his
    evidence. Nevertheless, as his evidence was unchallenged, it seems that
    the immigration judge was entitled to give  weight  to  this  evidence,
    which contained clear conclusions. Furthermore,  it  appears  that  his
    evidence in this case went beyond the more common  scenario  where  the
    person to be removed is the principal carer for  a  relative.  In  that
    situation, which was the situation in a number of authorities  that  Mr
    Tufan referred me to, it is possible for third party take on  the  role
    of carer - usually employed by the local authority or  National  Health
    Service. The situation here, based on Dr Claridge's evidence, was  that
    a third-party professional would not necessarily be able to  take  over
    the role of a carer for  Ms  [M].  For  example,  on  page  42  of  the
    appellant's bundle (page 19 of the report) Dr Claridge said:

         "... in my opinion it is extremely unlikely that in  this  scenario
         (the appellant  being  removed  from  the  UK)  without  the  help,
         guidance, emotional support of Ms [S], Trudy  would  [not]  recover
         any discernible level of true independent functioning".

21. However, Ms [M] does not need round-the-clock care  and,  as  has  been
    pointed out by the respondent, she has held  down  a  regular  job.  In
    addition, she is otherwise in good health and still only a  34.  It  is
    also true that she could choose to return  to  Jamaica,  utilising  the
    dual nationality, with  the  appellant,  although  that  would  involve
    giving up her current  employment.   I  will  consider  this  point  in
    greater detail below.

22. The immigration judge did not consider adequately or at all the  effect
    of section 117B of the 2002 Act. The immigration judge failed  to  take
    account of the appellant's poor immigration history  and  much  of  her
    reasoning is sparse or, in places, non-existent. Despite  these  errors
    it is necessary to look at the findings she made and  consider  whether
    they were justified on the evidence before her  and  then  ask  whether
    these errors were material.

23. The finding that the appellant would face "very significant  obstacles"
    to her integration back into Jamaica was plainly wrong despite the fact
    the appellant have "no family and close friends or contacts".  Even  if
    the latter finding was justified on the evidence, the appellant, who is
    now aged 50, had spent the bulk of her life in Jamaica, which of course
    is an English-speaking country. The question of whether  the  appellant
    faces "very significant obstacles" involved not  only  looking  at  her
    ties with Jamaica but also all other relevant factors  and  asking  the
    question whether there were sufficient hurdles  to  her  re-integration
    into Jamaican society to make it  unduly  harsh  to  return  her  there
    having regard to the other balancing factors in the case.  The  factors
    on the appellant's side must add up  to  more  than  mere  hardship  or
    difficulty in relocating. The immigration judge was therefore wrong  to
    reach this conclusion and that amounts to a material error of law.

24. Secondly, the immigration judge did not give any  adequate  explanation
    for her conclusion that family  life  between  the  appellant  and  her
    adults daughter could not continue in Jamaica, a country from which the
    appellant's daughter had come in 2002. Interestingly, at  the  date  of
    the hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Blum, on 5 August  2016,  there
    was no evidence that Ms [M] was actually living with the  appellant.  I
    note that, without going into any detail in their  witness  statements,
    both the appellant and Ms [M] now give the same address  and  therefore
    appear to be living under the same roof. I have no  doubt  that,  faced
    with the evidence from Dr Claridge, the immigration judge was  entitled
    to conclude that Ms [M] was maintained by her mother, the appellant, in
    the sense that she derived material daily support, moral and  practical
    from her. The fact that it would have materially adverse impact on  her
    to remove her mother from that role, was also a conclusion open to  the
    judge. However, where the  judge  erred  was  in  failing  to  consider
    whether the proportionality test was satisfied. The judge ought to have
    asked  whether  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  flowed   from   the
    appellant's removal from the UK. Ms [M] clearly had developed a  family
    life with the appellant in the UK. However, in  the  appellant's  case,
    this had been whilst she had been in the  UK  unlawfully.  Furthermore,
    they could continue the family life they had developed in Jamaica.

25. In my view the  immigration  judge  carried  out  no  proper  balancing
    exercise and the conclusion that she came to, even  on  strong  medical
    evidence summarised above, was not reasonably open to her  on  totality
    of the evidence. The  immigration  judge  failed  to  take  any  proper
    account of the respondent's  interest  in  the  enforcement  of  proper
    immigration controls. The factors outlined by the immigration judge, at
    paragraph 25 of her decision, were merely neutral factors and  did  not
    sway the matter one way or the other.

26. Despite the high degree of mutual support between the appellant and her
    adult daughter and despite  the  fact  that  there  is  undoubtedly  be
    hardship caused to Ms [M], it does not appear, when a proper  balancing
    exercise is carried out that it was disproportionate for the respondent
    to conclude that the appellant should return to Jamaica.

27. Accordingly, there are a material errors of law which require the FTT's
    decision to be set aside.

28. There was no application to adduce  any  additional  evidence.  In  any
    event there appear to have been no additional developments in the  case
    since the hearing before the  FTT.  I  have  therefore  carried  out  a
    balancing exercise on the evidence summarised above.

29. In the circumstances, I have decided to re-make this decision which  is
    to substitute a finding that the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  FTT  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does containing material error of law. I  set  aside
that decision.

The respondent' s appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

I  substitute  a  decision  that  the   appellant's   appeal   against   the
respondent's decision to refuse her  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
remain on human rights grounds  is  dismissed.  This  was  the  sole  appeal
before the FTT but, insofar as it would have  been  relevant  to  do  so,  I
would also have dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 25th of September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have substituted a dismissal of the appellant' s appeal  to  the  FTT  and
therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 25th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
