
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/27244/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2019                           |On 30 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                REEZWANA [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Deepchand, Solicitor, Lambeth Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Stedman sitting at Hatton Cross on 11 October  2018)  dismissing
    her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department ("the Department") made on 29 November 2016,  to  refuse  to
    grant her leave to remain on the grounds of  family  and  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom since her arrival  in  the  UK  as  a
    student on 1 November 2008.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the appellant  requires
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Mauritius, whose date of  birth  is  [~]
    1988.  She was lawfully present in the UK as a student from the time of
    her entry on 1 November 2008 until the expiry  of  her  last  grant  of
    leave to remain as a student on 4 August 2014.  The evidence shows that
    she made an in-time application for further leave to remain on 1 August
    2014 on the basis of family life established in the UK with  a  partner
    who was present and settled here.

 3. On 29 November 2016 the Department gave its reasons  for  refusing  her
    application for further leave to remain.  The decision was  made  under
    the  10-year  Partner  route.   It  was  accepted  that  she  met   the
    suitability requirements of  Appendix  FM,  and  also  the  eligibility
    (relationship) requirements of  Appendix  FM.   However,  she  had  not
    brought herself within the scope of EX.1.  While she appeared to have a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her  partner,  the  Department
    was not satisfied that there were insurmountable  obstacles  preventing
    her from continuing their relationship in  Mauritius.   While  she  had
    undergone medical treatment for depression, this did not mean that they
    would be unable to live together in Mauritius.

 4. The decision was also made under the 10-year Private Life route.  As of
    the date of application, she had lived in the UK  for  5  years  and  9
    months.   Accordingly,  it  was  not  accepted  that  she   had   lived
    continuously in the UK for at least 20 years. It was also not  accepted
    that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration
    into Mauritius, given that she had  spent  the  majority  of  her  life
    there, during which time she would have built up  cultural  and  social
    ties to that country.

 5. She had provided an NHS letter dated 14  November  2016.   This  stated
    that she was under the care of Mental Health Services in  Newham  as  a
    consequence  of  her  diagnosis  of  severe  current  depression   with
    psychotic symptoms.  The doctor mentioned that she would  benefit  from
    emotional and social support and being able  to  visit  family  abroad.
    The doctor did not have concerns about her fitness to travel.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both  parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Stedman.   Mr
    Deepchand appeared on behalf of the appellant.

 7. In his subsequent decision, the Judge recorded at  paragraph  [5]  that
    the appellant was a little nervous and tearful  at  the  start  of  the
    hearing, although she was able to listen to his introductions  and  she
    responded to him when asked about how she was feeling.  She  said  that
    she had not been feeling very well recently, and had  seen  someone  at
    the Crisis Team  who  had  increased  her  medication.   She  said  she
    continued to hear voices at times,  and  this  was  a  feature  of  her
    depression.  She said that she was on a high dose of an  anti-psychotic
    drug, and she was also taking a large dose of Venlafaxine, which was  a
    second-line anti-depressant.  The  Judge  decided  that  the  appellant
    should speak to  her  representative  about  giving  evidence,  and  he
    informed the parties that, whatever her decision, he did  not  consider
    it appropriate, in line with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  No.2
    of 2010: Child, Vulnerable adult and  Sensitive  Appellants'  Guidance,
    that she should be cross-examined. After he had time  to  consider  the
    matter in private, Mr Deepchand informed the Judge that  the  appellant
    was not going to give evidence.  The Judge said that he  had  therefore
    decided the matter on the written evidence and the submissions made  by
    both parties.  At the conclusion of the hearing, he said  that  he  was
    able to announce his decision and  to  give  a  short  summary  of  his
    reasons.

 8. In his written decision promulgated  on  18  October  2018,  the  Judge
    explained in paragraphs [8]-[14] why he  had  accepted  the  Presenting
    Officer's submission that the only issue before him was the appellant's
    private life.  This was because  the  relationship  relied  on  in  the
    application of 2014 had come to an  end,  and  the  appellant  was  now
    seeking to rely on family life established with someone else.  Her  new
    partner was Mohammad Azar,  who  was  working  full-time  and  who  had
    dependent children by a previous relationship.  The Judge accepted  the
    submission of the Presenting Officer  that  because  evidence  of  this
    relationship had only been presented to the  Department  on  9  October
    2018, it was a new matter for the purposes of section 85(5) of the 2002
    Act; and that therefore he should not consider it unless the  Secretary
    of State had given the Tribunal consent to do so.  At  paragraph  [12],
    the Judge held that this was a new matter which the Department had  not
    previously considered, and that he was precluded from considering a new
    matter without consent, which had not been  given:  "If  the  appellant
    wished to rely on her new relationship with  Mohammad  Azar,  then  she
    would need to make a new application.  The remedy against  the  refusal
    to consent to a new matter was by way of judicial review."

 9. At paragraphs [18]-[23], the Judge gave his reasons  for  finding  that
    there would not  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    reintegration into Mauritius, applying the guidance given by the  Court
    of Appeal in SSHD -v- Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.

10. At paragraphs [26]-[35], the Judge gave his reasons  for  finding  that
    there were not exceptional circumstances which justified the  appellant
    being granted Article 8 relief outside the Rules. At paragraph [33], he
    said that he appreciated that the delay in  the  determination  of  her
    application, and  the  ongoing  proceedings,  had  been  the  cause  of
    considerable anxiety for the appellant and had resulted in  her  having
    panic attacks.  While he gave appropriate weight to  this  and  to  the
    serious nature of the appellant's mental health problems  as  providing
    the  backdrop  to  the  entire  case,  he  found  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances  that  would  breach  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    appellant might continue to receive medication in Mauritius  and  there
    would not be any detrimental break in the continuity of  her  treatment
    or care.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

11. On 9 November 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes granted  permission
    to appeal as it was clearly arguable that the Judge had  erred  in  the
    assessment of 10 years' continuous lawful residence, and had also erred
    in not treating the appellant properly as a  vulnerable  witness,  thus
    making the hearing unfair.  This was especially so in that he had given
    his decision extempore when the appellant was  suffering  from  serious
    mental health problems.

The Rule 24 Response

12. On 29 November 2018 a member of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  a
    Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.  In  summary,  it  was  submitted
    that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  directed  himself
    appropriately.  It was  not  unfair  for  the  Judge  to  announce  the
    decision in Court with brief reasons.  The Judge also set  out  in  his
    written decision that he had looked at  all  the  medical  evidence  in
    coming to the conclusion that he  did.   It  was  noteworthy  that  the
    appellant had  a  new  partner,  which  was  a  matter  for  which  the
    Department  did  not  give  her  permission  to  rely   on:   "In   the
    circumstances the appellant's representative was clearly in a  position
    to  notify  the  appellant  that  she  could  apply  relying   on   her
    relationship if she so chose."

13. In short, the view of the Specialist Appeals Team was that it was  open
    to the appellant to make a fresh in-country application  for  leave  to
    remain based on her relationship with her new partner.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Deepchand developed the arguments advanced in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  On behalf of the Department, Mr Clarke endorsed  the  Rule  24
    response.  He submitted that the appellant had not been  prejudiced  by
    the Judge announcing his decision at the conclusion of the hearing, and
    the factual inaccuracies identified by  Mr  Deepchand  in  the  Judge's
    reasoning did  not  have  a  material  bearing  on  the  outcome.   The
    appellant had not applied for ILR on the grounds of  continuous  lawful
    residence of at least 10 years, and it would not have been open to  the
    Tribunal to allow her appeal on the grounds that she was about to reach
    the 10-year watershed, as a result of her  enjoying  section  3C  leave
    since 4 August 2016.

Discussion

15. The first issue is whether the proceedings in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were vitiated by procedural impropriety.

16. Mr Deepchand referred me to the  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No.1  of
    2014, in  which  the  President  said  as  follows  at  paragraph  21):
    "Notwithstanding that there is power in Rule  29  to  give  a  decision
    notifying the parties of an outcome of an appeal orally at the hearing,
    the Tribunal will continue to reserve the substantive  decision  in  an
    appeal and issue a notice of decision in the statement of reasons as  a
    single document in every case.  It would be inappropriate to give an ex
    tempore decision without giving a full statement of reasons at the same
    time.  This is because  the  factual  questions  and  other  issues  in
    dispute in appeals to the Immigration  &  Asylum  Chamber  are  usually
    complex and the parties are entitled to receive  a  full  statement  of
    reasons for the decision."

17. This Guidance must be set alongside the guidance  on  giving  decisions
    contained in  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No.2  of  2010.
    Paragraph 11 of this Guidance simply  provides  that  an  appellant  is
    entitled to a "clear decision with reasons".

18. According to the grounds of appeal, the Judge asked the  appellant  and
    her partner to come forward, and said as follows: "I am sure what I  am
    going to say will have a serious impact on you and your future,  but  I
    have to tell you of my decision today so you don't need to wait.  I  am
    going to dismiss your appeal".

19. If the Judge said that what he was going to say to  the  appellant  was
    going to have a serious impact on  her  future,  this  was  regrettably
    bleak and it was an observation which sat  uneasily  with  the  Judge's
    earlier ruling, or at least indication, that he was not going  to  deal
    with the implications of the appellant's relationship with her  partner
    as it was a new matter - and hence it provided  the  appellant  with  a
    fall-back position if her appeal on private life grounds failed.

20. Mr Deepchand submits that the Judge breached his duty  to  protect  the
    appellant, and that he should have  been  aware  that  his  conduct  in
    announcing his decision on the day would simply make matters worse  for
    her, and cause her to suffer  more.  It  is  unlikely  that  the  Judge
    suspected that his conduct might make matters worse for  the  appellant
    from a psychological perspective.  On the contrary, he appears to  have
    been of the view that having to wait for  his  written  decision  would
    increase the appellant's anxiety, and therefore it was better  to  give
    his decision immediately, accompanied by a brief summary of his reasons
    for reaching his adverse decision.

21. While the course of action taken by the  Judge  breaches  the  guidance
    given in the Presidential Guidance No.1 of 2014, I do not consider that
    the proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal  were  thereby  vitiated  by
    procedural impropriety or procedural unfairness.  It is  not  suggested
    that the detailed reasons which the Judge gave in his written  decision
    are inconsistent with the summary of the reasons which he  gave  orally
    at the hearing.  Further, as the appellant was legally  represented  at
    the hearing, her legal representative was in a position to  advise  her
    immediately after the hearing about the  implications  of  the  Judge's
    ruling on the "new matter", and the fact that the appellant  could,  if
    she so wished, immediately make a fresh application for leave to remain
    on the basis of family life established with her new  partner  and  his
    dependent  children.   In  addition,  as  the  written   decision   was
    promulgated only a few weeks before the ten  year  anniversary  of  her
    lawful entry to the UK and continuous lawful residence  thereafter,  Mr
    Deepchand was also in a position to advise the appellant that she had a
    second string to her bow, which was to  apply  for  ILR,  or  at  least
    further leave to remain, on the grounds of 10 years' continuous  lawful
    residence.

22. The second ground of appeal identified as being arguable by Judge Boyes
    is that the Judge's assessment of proportionality was flawed because it
    did not take into account that the appellant had  completed  nearly  10
    years' continuous lawful residence, and indeed  wrongly  asserted  that
    the appellant had only accumulated 8 years of residence in the UK.

23. It is undoubtedly the case that the Judge made some factual errors.  At
    paragraph [4], he said that the appellant had been living in the UK for
    a period of 5 years and 8 months at the time  of  decision.   In  fact,
    this  was  the  appellant's  period  of  residence  at  the   date   of
    application.  At paragraph [13], the Judge said that the appellant  had
    spent the first 30 years of her life in  Mauritius,  but  in  fact  the
    appellant had spent the first 25 years of her life  in  Mauritius.   At
    paragraph [22], the Judge said that the appellant had spent  the  first
    30 out of 35 years of her life in Mauritius.  In fact,  she  had  spent
    the first 20 out of 30 years of her life in Mauritius.

24. However, I do not consider that these factual errors were  material  to
    the  outcome  of  the  proportionality  assessment.   At  the  date  of
    application, the  appellant  was  well  short  of  accruing  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence.  Her period of residence was less  than  6
    years.  The Judge erroneously took 1 August 2016, rather than 1  August
    2014, as  the  date  of  application  because  this  was  the  date  of
    application given incorrectly in the refusal  decision.   But  this  is
    academic as the decision to refuse  the  application  was  made  on  29
    November 2016, which is only just over  8  years  since  the  appellant
    first entered the UK as a student.

25. At the hearing before Judge Stedman, Mr Deepchand did not seek to  rely
    on the proposition that the appellant was about to reach the  watershed
    of 10 years' continuous lawful residence, and that therefore her appeal
    should be allowed on this  alternative  basis.   But  even  if  he  had
    advanced an argument on these lines, it would  not  have  assisted  the
    appellant in the proportionality assessment.

26. Firstly, the appellant needed to  make  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain under Rule 276B before an appealable decision could be generated
    in the event of the refusal of such an application.  Secondly, the very
    fact that it was open to the  appellant  to  make  a  fresh  in-country
    application for leave to remain under Rule 276B weakened,  rather  than
    enhanced, the appellant's case on proportionality.  The consequences of
    the maintenance of the refusal decision of November 2016 were not now -
    as at the date of the hearing - going to lead to the  appellant  having
    to leave the country.  Instead, she had the option of not only applying
    for leave to remain on account of the new matter  of  her  relationship
    with a new partner, but she also could apply for leave to remain  under
    Rule 276B.

27. For the above reasons, I consider that the Judge gave adequate  reasons
    for dismissing the appeal on the case that was  put  before  him.   The
    appellant was not prejudiced by the Judge failing to  take  account  in
    the proportionality assessment that she was about to reach the  10-year
    threshold which would enable her to apply for ILR, or at least  further
    leave to remain, under Rule 276B.

28. As Mr Clarke acknowledged, it remains open to the appellant to apply in-
    country for further leave to remain/ILR.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 15 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
