
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/27606/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 March 2018                             |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                              lynda dzifa quaye
                       (anonymity direction nOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Bellara, Counsel instructed by Ilford Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie  promulgated  on  25  July  2017  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse further leave to remain under Article 8.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "Whilst technically it is arguable that the judge did not  consider
         the appeal under Article 8, and it was raised in the grounds, where
         all the factors relevant to an assessment under Article 8 had  been
         considered under the Immigration Rules,  it  cannot  reasonably  be
         argued that the proportionality assessment  would  have  yielded  a
         different outcome.  Simply because the judge  did  not  technically
         dismiss the appeal under Article 8, permission is granted."



  3. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I  heard  brief  submissions  from
     both  representatives  following  which  I  stated  that  the  decision
     involved the making of a material  error  of  law.   I  set  aside  the
     decision aside and remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be
     reheard.


Error of Law


  4. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules.   There  is
     no power to allow or dismiss an  appeal  under  the  immigration  rules
     following the changes made to sections 82 to  84  of  the  Nationality,
     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by the Immigration  Act  2014,  section
     15.  The only  ground  of  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  an
     application made  under  the  immigration  rules  is  on  human  rights
     grounds, section 84(2) of the 2002 Act, as amended.   The  Judge  could
     have allowed or dismissed the appeal under Article 8  on  human  rights
     grounds,  but  he  cannot  allow  or  dismiss  an  appeal  "under   the
     immigration rules".  This is an error of law.


  5. The Judge's findings are  set  out  in  paragraph  11.   The  grant  of
     permission states that the outcome would not necessarily  be  different
     had the Judge considered Article 8 more widely.  However, the  findings
     set out in paragraph 11 relate entirely to whether or not the Appellant
     satisfies the requirements of the immigration  rules.   These  are  the
     only matters that the Judge has considered.


  6. The Judge considered paragraph 276ADE and found that there would not be
     very significant obstacles to the Appellant's return.  His findings are
     set out in three  sub-paragraphs  [11(i)  to  (iii)].   These  findings
     relate only to the situation in Ghana.  There are no findings  relating
     to the Appellant's circumstances in the United Kingdom, and any private
     or family life which she has established in the United Kingdom.   There
     is no proportionality assessment, and no consideration of  the  factors
     set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act.  It cannot be  said  that  the
     decision would necessarily be the same, and that the Appellant's appeal
     would be dismissed under Article 8 outside the immigration rules, where
     there has been no consideration of any of the factors which fall to  be
     considered outside the immigration rules.  I find that the  failure  to
     consider Article 8 outside the immigration rules is a material error of
     law.


  7. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
     law.  I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10  February
     2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be  remitted
     to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error  has  been  to
     deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or
     other opportunity for the party's case to be put to and  considered  by
     the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature  and  extent  of  the  fact-
     finding necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  given  that  no
     findings have been made as to the Appellant's private and  family  life
     in the United Kingdom, having regard to  the  overriding  objective,  I
     find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
     Tribunal.


Decision


  8. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


  9. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


 10. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Devittie.


 11. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date 13 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


