
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HX/00914/2005

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 January 2014                            |On 4 February 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                             Asso Hama abdullah
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal, for Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Pugh (as she then was) promulgated as long ago  as  4
    August 2008 dismissing his appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
    made on 20 December 2004 to refuse him asylum and to refuse  him  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom.
 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq,  and  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.  His
    account of what happened to him  in  Iraq  has  been  accepted  by  the
    respondent. In May 1996, he joined the Workers Communist Party of  Iraq
    ("WCPI"), and became an active member. This brought him  into  conflict
    with the PUK who in August 1996  detained,  interrogated  and  tortured
    him. He was released only when the KDP overran the place where  he  was
    being held. The WCPI were not favourable to the  KDP  and  so  he  fled
    first to Sulemaniyeh, then to  Arbil  then  under  KDP  control.  While
    there, on 15 September 1997, a play highly critical of both the PUK and
    the KDP which he had written and directed, was produced.  This  led  to
    his arrest and detention by the KDP security forces. He  was  released,
    having promised not to involve himself in such  activities  again,  but
    was on 6 November 1998 arrested with others who were rehearsing a play.
    His father obtained his release on "life bail", and he was told that he
    would be killed if he engaged in such activities again.


 3. In 2000 the WCPI launched a campaign against the KDP's involvement with
    the Turkish government. Two of the appellant's friends  were  arrested,
    and he fled, fearing that if arrested, he would be executed given  that
    he had breached the conditions  of  his  bail.   He  left  Iraq  on  14
    September 2000 and fled to the United Kingdom, arriving  on  8  October
    2000. He claimed asylum on arrival.


 4. The appellant remained active in politics after  his  arrival,  and  on
    2003 attended a meeting in Hull in 2003 to which he brought the head of
    the WCPI from London. He claims that his brother was  arrested  by  the
    PUK and interrogated about his activities as a result; the brother  was
    also  told  to  contact  the  Appellant  to  tell  him  to  cease  such
    activities.


 5. The Appellant fears that if returned to Iraq, he will be at  risk  from
    both the KDP and the PUK; that he would not be safe anywhere  in  Iraq;
    and, in the alternative that it would be unreasonable or  unduly  harsh
    to expect him to relocate anywhere within Iraq.


 6. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 20 December 2004.
    In summary, he accepted the appellant's account of  his  activities  in
    Iraq but concluded that his fear related only to certain  areas  within
    Iraq, and that he could return to Kurdish areas in Baghdad or elsewhere
    in central or Southern Iraq.   An  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    lodged in January 2005.

 7. The unfortunately long procedural history is set out  in  the  decision
    promulgated on 9  August  2012  in  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper
    Tribunal  Judge  Dawson  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Rintoul).   That
    decision is set out in an annex to this determination.

 8. In summary, we concluded that her decision did involve an error of law,
    and we therefore set it aside to be remade on the issues of  relocation
    and internal flight, it not being in issue that  the  appellant  is  at
    risk of persecution in the KRG.

 9. It is unfortunate that there were  further  delays  in  resolving  this
    issue, in part due  to  the  timing  of  the  promulgation  of  country
    guidance cases, and a later appeal to the Court of Appeal on  the  case
    which was promulgated.

10. At the reconvened hearing I heard evidence from Dr Fatah; I also  heard
    submissions from both representatives.  Dr Fatah adopted his reports of
    19 July 2008 and 4 March 2013.  He added that he would  be  speculating
    if he said that the appellant would  be  targeted  but  that  when  the
    general  level  of  tension  rises,  particularly   where   there   are
    accusations levelled against Kurdish groups, and the level of  violence
    against Kurdish groups increases, the level of risk for  the  appellant
    would also, as a result, rise.  He said that the situation in Syria has
    complicated matters in Iraq and that there is a tendency  when  Kurdish
    politicians in Iraq make statements suggesting that the Kurdish area is
    not part of Iraq, that the Kurds in  the  Government  of  Iraq  ("GoI")
    areas come under more chance of being targeted.

11. Dr Fatah said that the appellant  would  have  difficulty  settling  in
    certain Kurdish areas given that he may not speak the same dialect.  He
    said the suggestion that he could perhaps settle in Nineveh was perhaps
    a bad example as the province was very much polarised; Kurds  were  not
    welcome there although there was a Kurdish area and that  it  was  more
    likely that the appellant would find it easier to "fit in"  in  Baghdad
    given the overwhelmingly Sunni orientation of Nineveh.  Dr  Fatah  said
    that, assuming that the  appellant  was  able  to  relocate  safely  to
    Baghdad, he would be able to find somewhere to live and to do  that  he
    would need to have a social network and then, if he was able to find  a
    room, he would need to get a job.  He said that if the  appellant  does
    not speak Arabic, given the  unemployment  rate,  there  was  not  much
    chance of a job and that adding all the factors together  it  would  be
    challenging even for somebody who spoke Arabic to establish themselves.
     He said that he thought that the appellant might be able to stay in  a
    hotel until he developed some  links  and  becomes  familiar  with  the
    environment.

12. Turning again to Nineveh Dr Fatah said that it  now  appears  from  the
    statistics that Nineveh is more  violent  than  Baghdad  and  that  for
    historical reasons, given that there are a lot of other minorities,  of
    a non-Kurdish origin there,  that  the  area  is  unstable  leading  to
    attacks on them.  He said that the main area of difficulty  in  Baghdad
    was the Shia versus Sunni.

13. Turning to the documents required to live and travel around in Iraq, Dr
    Fatah  confirmed  the  important  documents  the  CSID  and  the  Iraqi
    nationality certificate.  The former showing birth in Iraq is important
    as Iraqi political groups now accuse each other of bringing  people  in
    from outside and giving them these documents and thus it is harder  now
    to get them than before these accusations were levelled.  He said  that
    if you have the main document, CSID, then the  nationality  certificate
    is obtainable.  He confirmed the evidence that if you have the page and
    file number of the registers in which  births  are  registered,  it  is
    possible to get copies of this;  if  an  individual  were  returned  to
    Baghdad Airport, then a father, brother or uncle, that is someone  from
    the father's family, could attend and vouch for him as all people  from
    the same family are  registered  on  the  same  page  and  even  if  an
    individual then gets married, there is a link from that page to the new
    page.

14. Dr Fatah said that he assumed that if someone had  no  family  then  on
    arrival it would be possible to get a special letter and that  although
    there are checkpoints between the airport  and  Baghdad,  it  might  be
    possible for him to get a laissez-passer. That  said,  to  move  around
    Iraq one would need an ID card.  This had to be obtained from the  home
    area and although the Iraqi Embassy said that one needs to go there  in
    person, he believed from information he had gleaned that it is possible
    if someone has a legal representative in their home town who has  power
    of attorney then the ID may be obtained.

15. Dr Fatah said that as far as he was aware it would still be  policy  of
    the Iraqi Parliament to refuse to accept involuntary returns.  He  said
    that if someone has no ID card, it would be  very,  very  difficult  to
    move around the country and whilst it might be able to bribe one  post,
    it would not be possible to rely on bribery all  the  time.   Dr  Fatah
    said that even with an ID, it is not that easy to move  around  as  you
    need to know which areas are dangerous and to which you cannot go; that
    requires local knowledge and the appellant would need the assistance of
    somebody who knows the area. In addition, the  appellant  would  be  at
    risk not speaking Arabic.  He pointed out also that the country was now
    very different from what it had been in the past and certainly when the
    appellant was there.

16. Dr Fatah said that Iraq is still a collective society by which he meant
    that people live in communities and  neighbourhoods  and  if  you  have
    family and friends, as well as connections, that would help.   He  said
    that it was also nepotism whereby the President's  family  are  all  in
    power and the Prime Minister's son is very prominent, not because he is
    qualified but simply because he is the son of the Prime Minister.

17. Dr Fatah attributed the recent spike in the number of  civilian  deaths
    partly due to the insurgent groups coming out of Syria  partly  because
    these groups were now very well armed unlike before.  He  said  another
    factor was the  general  situation  which  was  degrading  for  several
    reasons, among them a failure of the government  to  provide  security,
    housing and so on and also because the Shia and Sunni  coalitions  were
    themselves splitting open and breaking down into smaller groups.   This
    all  led  to  people  losing  faith  in  all  central   authority   and
    particularly because of the economy.  There was also substantial growth
    in the gap between the poor and the wealthy primarily to  do  with  oil
    which is controlled by a small group of people.

18. In cross-examination, Dr Fatah said that the appellant should know  the
    page and file reference relating  to  his  personal  status.   He  also
    confirmed that his enquiries as to how it was possible to get an ID  by
    using a local agent was new information subsequent to  his  report  and
    was contrary to what the Iraqi Embassy were saying.  He said it was his
    understanding that if one wishes to return with an expired passport the
    Consulate would assist to get a one trip  laissez-passer  although  one
    would still needed a civil ID.

19. Dr Fatah said that he had still not found any evidence that there is  a
    central archive, adding that Quandil, the Swedish NGO  which  had  said
    that this existed had not replied to any of his queries and that in any
    event, from 1991, when the Kurdish  region  went  its  own  way  it  is
    unlikely that any records would then have been passed from that area to
    Baghdad.

20. Dr Fatah accepted that the unemployment rate in Iraq was about the same
    as that in southern Europe and that the most practical difficulties the
    appellant would have would be language, employment and accommodation.

21. Dr Fatah said there are Kurds who are  in  the  police  and  the  armed
    forces partly because they  have  been  recruited  there  individually,
    partly because they are there to undertake specific tasks  at  specific
    units for example guarding the President and also because in  the  past
    political groups have contributed certain forces to the army and police
    and this included Kurdish leaders.

22. Dr Fatah said that there are two different Kurdish groups  in  Baghdad.
    The Shia Kurds who had returned  from  Iran  who  had  previously  been
    expelled and  who  speak  their  own  dialect;  there  are  also  Kurds
    originally from the north of Iraq, the  KRG,  although  there  are  now
    fewer of them because of the pressure that is for  them  on  that  area
    since 2003.  He said he accepted that there are  many  judges  who  are
    Kurdish and politicians but it is  now  very  difficult  for  Kurds  to
    continue to live in Iraq unlike the breakdown.

23. In re-examination Dr Fatah said that those  originally  from  Kurdistan
    had their clubs, a community, and were established  but  this  has  all
    gone since 2003.  He was not able to  put  a  number  on  the  existing
    community adding that like Christians now in  Iraq,  they  just  "live"
    rather than living in communities.  He said that  the  security  vacuum
    had not helped and the situation does become harder from time  to  time
    when Kurdish leaders make irresponsible statements for  example  saying
    they are not part of Iraq which is increasing tension and  makes  Kurds
    more vulnerable.

24. In response to my questions Dr Fatah said that many  of  the  prominent
    Kurds from the north live in the "Green Zone" and do not move around in
    the usual way.  In many cases the family of these individuals  live  in
    the KRG and they return there at weekends and for holidays.

25. Dr Fatah said also it is difficult  for  somebody  in  the  appellant's
    position of returning to Iraq as he would need somebody local to  guide
    him to avoid the areas where he might face hostility and being targeted
    by his ethnicity.

26. I then heard submissions.

Discussion

27. It is not in issue that the appellant is at risk within the  KRG  area.
    While the appellant is a Kurd from the KRG, it is not suggested that he
    would be at risk of persecution for that reason per se, at least not in
    large areas of Iraq; the question remains as to whether he would be  at
    risk elsewhere; and, whether it would be reasonable to  expect  him  to
    relocate or whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him to do so.

28. In this context I note from AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49  at [5]:

        5.  In paragraph 21 of  my  opinion  in  Januzi  I  summarised  the
           correct approach to the problem of internal relocation in  terms
           with which all my noble and learned friends agreed:
             "The  decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all   relevant
             circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  country  of
             origin, must decide whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
             claimant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
             expect him to do so . . . There is, as Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
             observed  in  Svazas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department, [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum  of  cases.
             The decision-maker  must  do  his  best  to  decide,  on  such
             material as is available, where on the spectrum the particular
             case falls. . . . All must depend on a fair assessment of  the
             relevant facts."
           Although specifically directed to a secondary issue in the case,
           these observations are plainly of general application. It is not
           easy to see how  the  rule  could  be  more  simply  or  clearly
           expressed. It is, or should be, evident that the enquiry must be
           directed to the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose
           age, gender, experience, health, skills and family ties may  all
           be very relevant. There is no warrant for excluding,  or  giving
           priority to, consideration of the applicant's way of life in the
           place of persecution. There is  no  warrant  for  excluding,  or
           giving  priority  to,  consideration  of  conditions   generally
           prevailing in the home  country.  I  do  not  underestimate  the
           difficulty of making decisions in some cases. But the difficulty
           lies  in  applying  the  test,  not  in   expressing   it.   The
           humanitarian object of the Refugee Convention  is  to  secure  a
           reasonable measure of protection for those with  a  well-founded
           fear of persecution in their home country or some part of it; it
           is not to procure a general  levelling-up  of  living  standards
           around the world, desirable though of course that is.

29. It is at this point worth  noting  what  was  said  in  HM  and  Others
    (Article 15 (c)) Iraq CG [2012] 00409 (IAC) about its scope, given that
    this appeal is concerned with internal relocation.   The  panel  stated
    [259]-[260]:


         Confinement to the Article 15(c) issue


         259.     The  burden  of  proof  in  these  appeals  rests  on  the
             appellants, albeit the standard of proof is relatively low and
             the seriousness of the issues at stake requires  us  to  apply
             anxious scrutiny. In deciding this case we have to have regard
             to the entirety of the evidence. This being a CG case we  have
             set out the enormous amount of evidence  with  which  we  have
             been presented in Appendix A.


         260.     Our primary focus in these appeals is strictly confined to
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, and  a  discrete
             issue relating to risk on return to BIAP. However, since  this
             case  deals  with  the  current  situation  in  Iraq  it  will
             inevitably be a reference point for  decision-makers  deciding
             asylum-related appeals brought by Iraqis that are not confined
             to the Article 15(c) issue. In this context we would reiterate
             the  observations  made  recently  by  the  Tribunal   in   AK
             (Afghanistan) at  [154]-[156]  that  in  the  general  run  of
             appeals decision-makers should ordinarily deal first with  the
             issue of refugee eligibility and only deal with the  issue  of
             subsidiary protection (including Article  15(c)  second.  They
             should not deal with Article 3 until last:

30. Thus, it is necessary to consider first  internal  relocation  and  the
    relevant factors before going  on  to  consider  article  15  (c),  but
    bearing in mind that the current situation in Iraq  was  considered  in
    extensive detail in HM where the panel heard evidence  from   Dr  Fatah
    and others. They attached significant weight to the evidence both of Dr
    George and Dr Fatah [267].

         "267.    In the present appeals we wish to make it  just  as  clear
             throughout that our concern is to assess the current level  of
             Article 15(c) risk in Iraq.   Of  course,  for  such  purposes
             evidence as to the historic  situation  is  relevant  and  the
             previous findings of fact made by the Tribunal in both KH  and
             HMI do afford helpful reference points  in  certain  respects;
             particularly as we know  precisely  what  body  of  background
             evidence they had before them when reaching  their  decisions.
             But plainly the fact that both were overturned by the Court of
             Appeal means that their findings on the evidence  before  them
             cannot be treated as starting points.  The effect of the Court
             of Appeal decisions is that we must approach this case on  the
             basis that there is no previous binding country guidance  case
             on the application of Article 15(c) to Iraq."

31. At [104] - [106] the Upper Tribunal recorded Dr  Fatah's  evidence  (in
    relation to relocation) as follows:

         "104.    He was asked how broad would support  networks  be  for  a
             person relocating and he said that political groups  were  the
             best example and that it was all around political groups.   If
             he were Sunni and wanting to leave, for example, Kirkuk,  then
             he would look to go where there were other Sunnis if you  were
             from a big tribe.  Family was important.  You would  look  for
             the tribe initially, which would be Sunni or  Shi'a.   He  was
             asked whether, if a person was not influential in  the  tribe,
             the latter would  feel obliged to help him and he said not the
             tribe but more a political organisation.  If a person  had  no
             influence, then they would look for a job.  It was put to  him
             that his  [705] was very general and he said that if  he  were
             from a city the neighbour would be like a social  network  and
             like the tribe might help with connections for jobs, etc.   It
             was put to him that although there were job problems for IDPs,
             there was no evidence of starvation or a  humanitarian  crisis
             and he said he accepted that  there  was  not  a  humanitarian
             crisis, but life was harsh.  It was put to him that most  IDPs
             lived in houses and not in apartments or  towns  and  he  said
             there were people living in  camps.   HF  was  single  and  of
             working age and would have to find a job.


         105.     There were no more Kurdish neighbourhoods in Baghdad after
             the Shi'a Kurds were deported  by  Saddam  Hussein.  Kurds  in
             Baghdad would live in mixed neighbourhoods.  Some  had  become
             Arabised.  He agreed that if you were a Kurd  you  would  know
             where to go.  There were checkpoints to avoid.  With regard to
             the examples he gave immediately after [181] of his report, it
             was suggested to  him  that  it  was  often  unclear  who  had
             attacked and why and who the victim was and he said you  could
             tell from the figures.  Dr George had given an  example  of  a
             sectarian attack.

         106.     He said the Shi'a militia was  powerful  in  Baghdad.   As
             regards risk to a Sunni Kurd who was a failed asylum seeker in
             Baghdad, he had to know his way around and if he  was  in  the
             wrong neighbourhood he would be at more risk.  There was  more
             violence where there was a greater population.  He  could  not
             say how the first appellants could avoid violence  in  Kirkuk.
             As regards the departure of the US troops, it had not  reduced
             the exposure of civilians to high levels of violence."

32. Also of note is Dr George's evidence at [162] - [164}:

         "162.    According to January 2009 statistics cited in the COIS, 30
             August 2011, unemployment in Iraq is 18% and a further 10%  of
             the labour force are part-time workers.  According to the UNSG
             Report, 7 July 2011, the country's poverty index remains  high
             (22.9%). The UNICEF Humanitarian  Action  for  Children,  2011
             report states that 23% of Iraqis reportedly live on less  than
             US $2  per  day  (cited  in  2012  UNHCR  Guidelines,  p.165).
             Illiteracy is also high. There are ongoing problems  with  the
             delivery of essential services.  Public services  continue  to
             be  plagued  by  severe   deficiencies,   notably   widespread
             corruption.  Iraq's crime  rate  is  high.   According  to  Dr
             George,  the  great  majority  of  Iraqis  depend  heavily  on
             subsidised rations ([224]).

         163. In the 30 June 2012 issue of Measuring Stability and  Security
             in Iraq, a New York  consulting  firm  is  quoted  as  ranking
             Baghdad as last of 221 cities in a survey of quality  of  life
             and personal security, describing it  as  'the  world's  least
             safe city'.


         164.     According to Dr George, there is an  economic  crisis  and
             housing shortage afflicting Iraq.  Persons  without  a  family
             support network would encounter difficulties finding  a  means
             of supporting themselves and places to live (at  [221],  [61]-
             [71]).   Access  to  jobs  relies  on  corruption,  patronage,
             nepotism or being a political appointee: a  Wasta  (person  of
             influence) is needed."

33. In his second report at [ 50] - [51] prepared for this appeal, Dr Fatah
    expands on the collective nature of Iraqi society:

         50. It is  in  the  nature  of  Middle  Eastern  communities  that
             individuality does not exist; individuals are treated as  part
             of the community to which they belong. The identity that  most
             poses a threat is  the  one  that  could  be  recognised  most
             easily. For example, in a Shiia community, a  Kurd's  religion
             might be labelled as Sunni, overshadowing their Kurdish ethnic
             identity: in a Sunni Arab community, Kurds would be identified
             by their Kurdish ethnicity, linking them en mass to the  Kurds
             who generally supported the coalition forces  in  ousting  the
             Sunni-Arab-dominated government in Iraq.

         51. This question of identity, collectivism, and belonging has  an
             obvious impact on anyone removed from their place or community
             of origin. A  number  of  issues  should  be  addressed  while
             considering relocation an Arab to a predominately Kurdish area
             or vice versa. These may be considered as soft issues but they
             nonetheless can accumulate to form substantial pressure on the
             individual on question.  By  way  of  a  helpful  hypothetical
             example, it could be argued that a Kurd  could  relocate  more
             easily to a European capital, where he might find a  community
             with his own culture, sect, and belief that to  an  Arab  city
             where none of these elements are available. These  are  issues
             that ought to be considered, and as the objective evidence has
             shown, there are strong tensions between Kurds and Arabs,  and
             security in the 'disputed territories' cannot  be  guaranteed.
             As a Kurds, Mr Abdullah could be affected were he relocated to
             an Arab-dominant or ethnically mixed area.

34. This, combined with the extent to which people in Iraq depend on  their
    family, connections,  and  community  for  protection  and  in  getting
    accommodation and employment, are important factors to bear in mind.

35. The starting point for considering whether the appellant is at risk  on
    return to Iraq outside the KRG is the findings of fact  made  by  Judge
    Pugh who broadly accepted the appellant's claims. She accepted that the
    appellant was active within the United Kingdom; what she did not accept
    was that the KDP/PUK had become aware of that in Iraq.

36. I do not understand it to be Dr Fatah's opinion  that  the  conclusions
    reached in HM are incorrect, but that the situation has deteriorated to
    a degree, with a large spike in civilian  deaths,  partly  due  to  the
    destabilising effect of the insurgency in Syria, and partly due to  the
    fracturing of the Sunni and Shia coalitions into smaller factions.

37. Dr Fatah's evidence is not that Kurds face  persecution  in  Iraq,  but
    that they are at more risk (although not sufficiently to  cross  either
    the article 15 (c) threshold or engage  the  refugee  convention)  when
    anti-Kurdish sentiment rises, usually when  a  Kurdish  politician  has
    made a comment about Kurdistan not being part of Iraq  or  expressed  a
    similar sentiment.

38. I bear in mind also, that in addition to his ethnicity,  the  appellant
    was also active as a communist, and it  is  implicit  in  Judge  Pugh's
    findings that he had been active within the United Kingdom; that  said,
    she did not accept those activities had come to the  attention  of  the
    PUK/KDP in the KRG.

39. In his first report Dr Fatah says,

         "At Section 8.2 the WCPI has been condemned by Kurdish  groups  and
         various Iraqi groups with the Shia sect itself, being as an Islamic
         ideology, is not compatible to communist ideas which  may  lead  to
         persecution of WCPI in Shia parts of Iraq."

40. In this context it must be  borne  in  mind  that  as  the  COI  Report
    indicates, political parties in Iraq tend to be organised either  along
    religious or ethnic lines [17.22].

41. Whilst it appears on the evidence of Dr Fatah that the appellant is not
    at risk per se on account of his political views, there  would,  on  Dr
    Fatah's oral  evidence  be  enhanced  risk  were  he  openly  to  voice
    communist views which are inimical to Islamic concepts of the state.  I
    deduce from this that simply being a communist would  not  put  him  at
    greater risk although being identified as one and speaking out  as  one
    would enhance risk.

42. This is not a situation in which the appellant has given  evidence  nor
    has it been submitted that he would keep  his  political  views  silent
    only out of fear of the consequences.

43. In the light of Dr Fatah's evidence regarding the mechanisms  by  which
    an individual can obtain the necessary documentation to return to Iraq,
    and assuming that the appellant would be able  to  obtain  an  ID  card
    given that he still has links with his home area, I  consider  that  he
    would be admitted to Iraq if he returned voluntarily.

44. I bear in mind that if the appellant were to return to Iraq, he  is  an
    ethnic Kurd which is evident from his name, as Dr Fatah confirmed. That
    cannot be hidden.  Further, he is originally from the KRG, as would  be
    clear from his papers, and I accept that  he  does  not  speak  Arabic.
    While there is a sizeable Kurdish community in Baghdad, this is formed,
    according to Dr Fatah, from two distinct groups.  Those  returned  from
    Iran who are Shia (and with whom the appellant has no  common  language
    or faith); and those who are originally from the KRG area  but  are  no
    longer a coherent community. There is, therefore, limited scope for the
    appellant to forge ties with other Kurds who speak his language, and on
    whom he could hope to depend.

45. The appellant would be returning to  a  country  after  an  absence  of
    fourteen years and returning to a part of the country in which  he  had
    not  lived.   As  noted  above,  many  areas  outside  of  Baghdad  are
    particularly polarised.  It is also evident from what  is  said  by  Dr
    George and Dr Fatah in HM that an ability to  obtain  accommodation,  a
    job and some  degree  of  security  is  dependent  on  an  individual's
    connections, be it  family,  ethnicity  or  religious  affiliation.   I
    accept Dr Fatah's evidence that it would be easier for the appellant to
    relocate to Baghdad than anywhere else which  is  perhaps  unsurprising
    given that it is a large mixed city.  Equally, I note  that  there  are
    areas within that city which would not be  safe  for  him  due  to  his
    ethnicity and/or religious affiliation which is likely  to  be  assumed
    once it is known that he is Kurdish.  I  accept  that  there  would  be
    significant difficulties in this case given the appellant's lack of any
    connections with Baghdad, his inability to speak Arabic and even with a
    relocation package staying in a hotel as envisaged by Dr Fatah is not a
    long term proposition.  I accept also that it would  be  difficult  for
    him to adjust and that he would need assistance in avoiding those areas
    where he would be at risk.

46. In this case, the appellant would be without family links and would not
    be able to rely on informal social  links.   Given  his  ethnicity  and
    inability to speak Arabic, he would be  particularly  disadvantaged  in
    obtaining employment.  Whilst I accept that the level of employment  in
    Baghdad appears to be relatively low I bear in mind that the  situation
    is such that one needs connections and contacts to be  able  to  access
    the job market  which  the  appellant  does  not  have  having  had  no
    connections with Baghdad and having spent fourteen  years  out  of  the
    country.  The language problems would make it difficult for him to live
    a relatively normal life in Baghdad and it is  speculative  whether  he
    would be able to find somebody to guide him to avoid the areas to which
    he should not go.  While he would be entitled to a relocation  package,
    and that is taken into account, it would not last for  any  significant
    length of time and would not meet many of the problems  identified.  In
    any event, being identified as someone who has  returned  with  such  a
    package, is unlikely to enhance his safety.

47. In summary, the appellant would be disadvantaged by a lack of community
    ties which are essential in Iraq; would have, as a  result,  and  as  a
    result  of  his  lack  of  Arabic  and  being  an  ethnic  Kurd,   real
    difficulties in earning a living; would, given his lack of knowledge of
    the area, an enhanced risk of simply  straying  into  the  wrong  area;
    would be unable to express his political views freely, given that  they
    are inimical to Islamic  traditions;  and,  would  have  difficulty  in
    obtaining accommodation.  All of these factors are interrelated, and no
    single one is determinative, but taken  together,   and  following   AH
    (Sudan) I am persuaded that on  the  facts  of  this  case,  given  the
    unusual number of factors specific to him,  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect this appellant to relocate to Baghdad,  and,  given  Dr
    Fatah's evidence that relocation would be even more  difficult  outside
    of Baghdad, and which I accept,  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect him to relocate anywhere in Iraq outside the KRG.

48. On that basis, and as it is not in doubt that the appellant has a well-
    founded fear of persecution in the KRG, I find that the  appellant  has
    established a well-founded fear of persecution on return to Iraq and  I
    allow his appeal on that basis.

49. Accordingly, I remake  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by
    allowing the appeal on refugee convention grounds.  I  also  allow  the
    appeal under the Human Rights Convention on the  basis  that  requiring
    the appellant to return to Iraq  would  be  in  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations  pursuant  to  article  3  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law, and I set it aside.

 2.  I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds and  on
    human rights grounds.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HX/00914/2005

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 August 2012                              |On 4 February 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                             ASSO HAMA ABDULLAH
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  against  the  determination  of
   Immigration Judge Pugh (as she then was) promulgated  on  4  August  2008
   dismissing his appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  made  on  20
   December 2004 to refuse him asylum and to refuse him leave to  enter  the
   United Kingdom.

2. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Iraq,  and  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.  His
   account of what happened  to  him  in  Iraq  has  been  accepted  by  the
   respondent. In May 1996, he joined the Workers Communist  Party  of  Iraq
   ("WCPI"), and became an active member. This  brought  him  into  conflict
   with the PUK who in August 1996 detained, interrogated and tortured  him.
   He was released only when the KDP overran the place where  he  was  being
   held. The WCPI were not favourable to the KDP and so  he  fled  first  to
   Sulemaniyeh, then to Arbil then under KDP control.  While  there,  on  15
   September 1997, a play highly critical of both the PUK and the KDP  which
   he had written and directed, was produced. This led  to  his  arrest  and
   detention by the KDP security forces. He was  released,  having  promised
   not to involve himself in such activities again, but was  on  6  November
   1998 arrested with others who were rehearsing a play. His father obtained
   his release on "life bail", and he was told that he would be killed if he
   engaged in such activities again.


3. In 2000 the WCPI launched a campaign against the KDP's  involvement  with
   the Turkish government. Two of the appellant's friends were arrested ,and
   he fled, fearing that if arrested, he would be executed given that he had
   breached the conditions of his bail.  He left Iraq on 14  September  2000
   and fled to the United Kingdom, arriving on 8 October  2000.  He  claimed
   asylum on arrival.


4. The appellant remained active in politics after his arrival, and on  2003
   attended a meeting in Hull in 2003 to which he brought the  head  of  the
   WCPI from London. He claims that his brother was arrested by the PUK  and
   interrogated about his activities as a result; the brother was also  told
   to contact the Appellant to tell him to cease such activities.


5. The Appellant fears that if returned to Iraq, he will  be  at  risk  from
   both the KDP and the PUK; that he would not be  safe  anywhere  in  Iraq;
   and, in the alternative that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  to
   expect him to relocate anywhere within Iraq.


6. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 20  December  2004.
   In summary, he accepted the appellant's account of his activities in Iraq
   but concluded that his fear related only to certain  areas  within  Iraq,
   and that he could return to Kurdish areas  in  Baghdad  or  elsewhere  in
   central or Southern Iraq.


   Procedural History


7. The Appellant's appeal was heard on 29 March 2005 by Mr S  Gillespie,  an
   Adjudicator, sitting at North Shields. He dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
   grounds.  On  29  June  2005  the  Appellant  made  an  application   for
   reconsideration under section 103A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). That was  refused  but  on  10  October
   2005, after the application had been renewed to the High Court, Collins J
   ordered reconsideration. The matter than came back before the AIT  on  28
   July 2006 when Senior Immigration Judge Warr determined  that  there  had
   been an error of law in the first decision. The appeal was then adjourned
   for the appeal to be determined afresh.


8. The appeal next came before the AIT on 31 July 2008 when it was heard  by
   Immigration Judge Pugh who dismissed it on 4 August 2008.  The  appellant
   applied pursuant to  section  103B  of  the  2002  Act  to  the  AIT  for
   permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.  That  application  was
   refused,  as  was  the  renewed   paper   application   for   permission.
   Eventually, on 19 February 2010 permission to appeal was granted  by  the
   Court of Appeal after an oral hearing.


9. By an order of the Court of Appeal made on 22  September  2010  with  the
   consent of both parties, the appeal was allowed to the extent that it  is
   remitted to the Upper Tribunal for Reconsideration.


10. The Statement of  Reasons  attached  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's  order
   provides:-

   Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal....was ... expressly  granted
   "on limited grounds" although the parties understand that permission  was
   granted o the limited ground relating to the issue of Dr  Fatah's  report
   and internal relocation.


   The single point in issue at the hearing on 31 July 2008 was the issue of
   relocation. IJ Pugh expressed reservations about the general  reliability
   of the evidence of Dr Fatah, based on the findings in SM & others  (Kurds
   - protection - relocation ) Iraq CG [2005]UKAIR 00111,  and  HA  (WCPI  -
   IMIK - KRG) Iraq CG[2007] UKAIT 00087. The Respondent and  the  Appellant
   agree that Dr Fatah's report in the present  case  does  not  necessarily
   suffer from the same flaws as identified  in   SM  and  HA,  namely  over
   reliance on WCPI documents, and it is therefore arguable that  IJ  Pugh's
   approach to Dr Fatah's evidence demonstrated a material error of law.




   Hearing on 6 August 2011


11. We considered first the extent of our jurisdiction, given that  sections
   103A to E of the 2002 Act were repealed by The Transfer of  Functions  of
   the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal Order 2010  (SI  2010  No.  21).  The
   relevant transitional provisions are set out in Schedule 4:


      11.  An appeal which is proceeding before the  appropriate  appellate
      court under section 103B or 103E of the 2002 Act  before  15  February
      2010 but which is not determined before that date shall continue as an
      appeal to the appropriate appellate court under section 103B  or  103E
      of the 2002 Act.

      12.  A case remitted by the appropriate appellate court on or after 15
      February 2010 which, if it had been remitted before  that  date  would
      have been remitted to the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal,  shall  be
      remitted to the Upper Tribunal and sections 12 and 13 of the 2007  Act
      shall apply.

12. This is an appeal to which these paragraphs apply, and so the  Court  of
   Appeal's powers in remitting the appeal are  those  set  out  in  section
   103B. These, unlike the powers set out in section 14 of the 2007 Act  are
   not predicated on the Court  of  Appeal  having  determined  whether  the
   decision in question involved a  question  of  law,  a  matter  which  is
   therefore for us to consider.

13. We observe first that this matter has been remitted on a limited  basis.
   The original grounds of appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal  challenged  IJ
   Pugh's finding that the Appellant's brother had not been arrested due  to
   the Appellant's activities in the United Kingdom, and that the removal of
   the Appellant would not be in breach of Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
   Convention. As Ms Vidal agreed, we consider that  these  grounds  are  no
   longer be pursued.


14. There is no substantial dispute as to the facts  of  this  claim,  other
   than the reason behind the Appellant's brother's arrest. The  appellant's
   credibility is not  in  issue  and  the  central  issue  is  whether  the
   appellant could safely relocate to other areas of Iraq  away  from  those
   under the control of the PUK/KDP.


15. There was before IJ Pugh a report from an expert, Dr Fatah, specific  to
   the Appellant, and which opines that he would be in  danger  outside  the
   area under PUK/KDP control.  She noted that Dr Fatah had been the subject
   of criticism in SM & Ors  (Kurds-Protection-Relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2005]
   00111  and  HA  (WCPI-IMIK-KRG)  Iran  CG  [2007]  00087,  in  that   his
   objectivity was questioned in the latter as he was too  involved  in  the
   Kurdish cause and that some of his findings were unsourced.   She said at
   paragraph [44]:


      "In these circumstances, I find it would be difficult  to  accept  the
      conclusions in the report from Dr Fatah uncritically in this case"


16. IJ Pugh did go  on  to  consider  the  report  but  concluded  that  the
   Appellant would not be at any greater risk than other individuals,  there
   being only report sfrom the WCPI on which Dr Fatah had relied to  suggest
   otherwise, and that nothing is his report shows that returns  should  not
   be made.


17. IJ Pugh also said at paragraph 49:


      "HA has thrown doubt on the objectivity of Dr Fatah's report  in  that
      case, and on his general impartiality, since he is  committed  to  the
      Kurdish report. This is the lynchpin of the Appellant's case, but  the
      expert involved was, as  I  noted,  criticised  in  HA  and  had  been
      criticised in other areas for lack of objectivity. In this case, it is
      because he relied  heavily  on  WCPI  evidence.   In  HA  there  is  a
      reference to AM at para 26. AM dealt with conditions in Mosul  and  Dr
      Fatah had relied on WCPI reports about assassination of  its  workers.
      The killing was found to have taken place in 1998.  In  that  case,  I
      cannot see how I can rely on such evidence simply because is postdates
      the hearing. If an expert is criticised for reliance on unreliable and
      unsourced WCPI evidence, should an Immigration Judge now in the  light
      of HA be criticised for not relying on it uncritically?"


18. It is common  ground  that  Dr  Fatah  has  given  evidence  in  Country
   Guidance cases on Iraq. It is also not in dispute that certain aspects of
   Dr Fatah's evidence were criticised in both HA and SM; as agreed by  both
   parties before the Court of Appeal.


19. Before us, Ms Vidal, relying on the grounds of appeal submitted that  IJ
   Pugh  had  failed  to  carry  out  a  proper  assessment  of  Dr  Fatah's
   reliability by relying on criticisms of him which  were  not  related  to
   this report, and that as this report relies on  sources  other  than  the
   WCPI, her reasoning for rejecting it was flawed.


20.  Mr  Saunders  submitted  that  the  error  was  not  material  as   the
   conclusions at section 8 of  the  report  were  not  sourced.   Ms  Vidal
   replied that this was taking them out of context,  as  this  section  was
   only a distillation of the previous 265 paragraphs,  covering  35  pages,
   which are sourced.


21. While Dr Fatah was criticised for relying on WCPI sources in his  report
   in HA, the sources for the report on the Appellant  are  more  extensive,
   and while Dr Fatah was criticised for being  pro-Kurdish  in  SM,  it  is
   evident from HA that he was strongly opposed to the WCPI, the party which
   the Appellant, although a Kurd, supports.  The judge did not engage  with
   these factors, but discounted it  for  reasons  which  related  to  other
   reports he had produced, and while the cases  cited  indicate  why  those
   specific reports were flawed, she did not consider why  this  report  was
   flawed.  The  criticisms  of  Dr  Fatah  in  the  other  reports  do  not
   necessarily apply to the report produced for the Appellant; that requires
   proper consideration and analysis. We consider that IJ Pugh erred in  the
   analysis of this important evidence.


22. The opinion contained in the report is that the Appellant would  not  be
   safe anywhere in Iraq where he could be expected to go.  Looking  at  the
   report as a whole, that the conclusions  at  part  8  are  based  on  the
   detailed, referenced material  which  proceeds  it,  and  which  requires
   detailed consideration. The error is therefore material, as  it  goes  to
   the core of what was in dispute.


23. For these reasons, we find that the decision of IJ Pugh did  involve  an
   error of law, and we therefore set it aside.  For the avoidance of doubt,
   the remaking of the decision is limited to the issues of  relocation  and
   internal flight.


24. We therefore direct that the appeal be listed for hearing not  before  1
   November 2012, as it is anticipated that a  fresh  decision  on  internal
   flight in Iraq is to be handed down by the Upper Tribunal before then.

25. This case has, unfortunately,  had  a  long  history  within  the  court
   system which as Mr Saunders candidly  admitted,  has  prevented  its  due
   consideration under the Legacy Provisions operated by the respondent.  We
   would hope that the adjournment of this matter until November will  allow
   the parties to ensure steps are taken such that the matter is dealt  with
   under the Legacy provisions as a matter of urgency.
Signed:                             Date:  9 August 2012

J K H Rintoul
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

