

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HX/47710/2003



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|No hearing                                    |Promulgated on               |
|21 November 2014                              |3 December 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                             BARHAM KAMAL AHMED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has a very long history.   The  appellant,  a  national  of
    Iraq, claims to have entered the United Kingdom on 27 May 1999.  He was
    served with illegal entry papers.  He appears to have  claimed  asylum.
    He was issued with a self-completion form on 19 October 2001.   It  was
    to be returned within a week, but so far as we are aware, it never  has
    been returned.  His asylum claim was in due  course  refused  for  non-
    compliance.

 2. He was arrested early in 2002 on a charge of rape.  He  was  sentenced,
    apparently in July 2002, to fourteen months imprisonment  for  indecent
    assault for which he served half.  He appealed against the  refusal  of
    asylum.  By the time  the  matter  first  came  before  an  Immigration
    Adjudicator on 19 December 2003, he had already  had  the  services  of
    three different immigration solicitors  and  the  Immigration  Advisory
    Service.  But on that occasion he appeared unrepresented and sought  an
    adjournment.  The adjournment was granted,  with  directions  that  the
    appellant be ready to present his case in full, and that  all  evidence
    of the claim, including any witness statement, was to  be  filed  seven
    days before the hearing.

 3. The hearing was on 3 November 2003, before Immigration  Adjudicator  Mr
    Palmer.  The appellant again appeared unrepresented.  There had been no
    compliance with the directions; Mr Palmer considered that there was  no
    reasonable   excuse.    Nevertheless,   as   is   apparent   from   his
    determination, Mr Palmer gave the appellant an open opportunity to  say
    anything he wanted to say in support of his claim.  He is not, however,
    recorded as having said anything that could establish  it.   Mr  Palmer
    dismissed his appeal.

 4. The appellant then, still acting in person, applied for  permission  to
    appeal to the Immigration Appeal Tribunal.  The grounds are recorded as
    indicating that "the claimant insists that he fears being  returned  to
    Iraq".  The Tribunal's decision was made by Ms Gill, a Vice  President,
    who indicated in the text of her decision that permission was  granted,
    because of the lack of reasons behind the Adjudicator's indication that
    he considered that the appellant lacked credibility.  Despite giving  a
    reason for granting permission,  however,  she  gave  her  decision  as
    "permission to appeal is refused".  Her decision went out on 9 February
    2004 under cover of a letter indicating that permission to  appeal  had
    been refused.

 5. Nothing appears to have happened in the next nine years.  A letter from
    the  appellant's  most  recent  solicitors  indicated  that  they  were
    instructed in February 2013, and by March 2014 regarded  themselves  as
    well enough informed to tell this Tribunal what  the  problem  was.   I
    arranged for the matter to be listed for mention before  the  Tribunal,
    constituted with myself and Upper Tribunal Judge Deans on 18 July 2014.

 6. That was the occasion for  determining  the  present  status  of  these
    proceedings.  The appellant was now represented by  Latta  &  Co.   Mrs
    O'Brien, who appeared  for  the  respondent,  did  not  object  to  our
    treating Ms Gill's decision as though it had been a grant of permission
    to appeal.

 7. In those circumstances it was necessary to consider whether the  matter
    was before the Upper Tribunal, and if so, what the Tribunal's task was.
     Without, it is fair to say, very much assistance from the parties,  we
    were able to reach a view on which there is  no  room  for  doubt.   We
    arrive at the same position, whether Ms Gill's decision is regarded  as
    having always been a grant of permission to appeal to  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal, or is regarded as having become a grant of  permission
    to appeal only on our decision that it would be so treated.

       a) If permission to appeal to the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  was
          granted in early 2004, then on the abolition  of  the  Immigration
          Appeal Tribunal on 4 April  2005,  there  was  an  appeal  pending
          before that Tribunal.  By art 4(b) of the Asylum  and  Immigration
          (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004  (commencement  No.  5  and
          Transitional Provisions) Order  2005  (SI  565/2005),  the  appeal
          continued  after  that  date  as  an  appeal  to  the  Asylum  and
          Immigration Tribunal, and by art 5(2) of that  Order,  the  Asylum
          and Immigration Tribunal was to deal with the appeal in  the  same
          manner as  if  it  had  originally  decided  the  appeal  and  was
          reconsidering its decision.  On the abolition of  the  Asylum  and
          Immigration Tribunal on 15 February 2010, and the transfer of  its
          functions to this Tribunal, no decision having been  made  by  the
          Asylum and Immigration Tribunal, the appeal continued  as  one  in
          which the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  was  reconsidering  its
          decision.  Paragraph 4 of Schedule 4 to the Transfer of  Functions
          of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  Order  2010  (SI  21/2010)
          provides that the reconsideration "shall continue as an appeal  to
          the Upper Tribunal under section 12 of the 2007 Act and section 13
          of the 2007 Act shall apply".


       b) If, on the other hand, permission to appeal to this  Tribunal  was
          not granted at that earlier date, the application  for  permission
          to appeal continued under Article 6(1) of the  2005  Order  as  an
          application for an order  requiring  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
          Tribunal to reconsider the decision:  and  under  paragraph  2  of
          Schedule 4 to the 2010 Order, continued as an application  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal  under  s.11  of  the
          2007 Act.  If our decision to  allow  Ms  Gill's  decision  to  be
          treated  as  a  grant  of  permission  constituted  the  grant  of
          permission, then it was made by judges of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
          their capacity as judges of the First-tier Tribunal, and again the
          structure of the 2007 Act applies.


       c) If neither of those is right, then the appellant has no permission
          to appeal.  It is, however, clear that whatever process  might  be
          used for obtaining permission to appeal or setting aside Ms Gill's
          determination as defective, any  grant  of  permission  to  appeal
          would be for an appeal governed by the 2007 Act.


 8. The relevant provisions of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
    2007 in relation to the method of determining an appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal are those in s.12:

          "12. Proceedings on appeal to the Upper Tribunal


          (1) Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in  deciding  an
          appeal under section 11, finds that the  making  of  the  decision
          concerned involved the making of an error on a point of law.
          (2) The Upper Tribunal -
            a) may  (but need not) set aside the decision of the First-tier
               Tribunal, and
            b) if it does, must either -
       i) remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal with directions for  its
          reconsideration, or
                ii) re-make the decision.
          ...."
 9. In  order  to  succeed  in  the  present  proceedings,  therefore,  the
    appellant needs to show that the adjudicator made an error  of  law  in
    his determination such that  it  should  be  set  aside.    We  invited
    submissions identifying any error of law.  After further discussion  we
    agreed to adjourn the matter to enable substantive  submissions  to  be
    made.  We directed orally that unless substantive  submissions  to  the
    contrary were made within 7 days of the hearing, the  appeal  would  be
    dealt with on the papers and dismissed.

10. The Tribunal then received a letter from Latta & Co, asking for further
    time to  make  submissions  on  jurisdiction.   The  Tribunal  replied,
    allowing further time, but pointing out that jurisdiction was  not  the
    issue.  There has been no further communication from the  appellant  or
    his solicitors.  In a note of argument sent on 23 July, however (before
    the correspondence to which I  have  just  referred),  an  argument  is
    raised on behalf of the appellant, asserting that the adjudicator erred
    in law by failing to grant an adjournment of the hearing.

11. The appellant's claim was an asylum claim.  He had  evidently  made  it
    some time before 19 October 2001.  By the time the matter  came  before
    Mr  Palmer  over  two  years  later,  the  appellant  had   failed   to
    substantiate it in any way.  He did not complete and  return  the  SEF:
    none of the representatives who had acted for him had done anything  to
    help him establish his case: then, given an  opportunity  to  tell  the
    adjudicator anything about his case, he failed to  do  so.   Even  now,
    thirteen years after his claim, the Tribunal has  not  been  given  any
    indication  of  the  circumstances  upon  which  it  is   based.    The
    appellant's nationality does not appear to be disputed,  but  there  is
    simply no evidence that might support the allowing of an appeal against
    the refusal of asylum.  So far as the evidence before  the  adjudicator
    is  concerned,  his  decision  to  dismiss   the   appeal   is   wholly
    unassailable.

12. Ms Gill's reason for granting permission to appeal to  the  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal was that the adjudicator had given no reasons  for  his
    conclusion that the appellant was not credible.   It  is  fair  to  say
    that, read as whole, the determination may be regarded as containing  a
    number of reasons for that conclusion; but, even if the conclusion  had
    not been open to the adjudicator, it is  wholly  irrelevant:  there  is
    nothing that might support the appellant's claim that  was  capable  of
    being affected by the adjudicator's assessment of credibility.   As  we
    have said, there was simply no evidence that could have  led  that  the
    conclusion that the appellant was at risk of persecution.

13. So far as concerns the assertion that the  adjudicator  ought  to  have
    granted an adjournment, the position is that that is not a ground  upon
    which permission was granted.  There has, in the  ten  years  since  Ms
    Gill's decision, been no application to raise any  other  grounds.   In
    any event, however, the question whether to  adjourn  the  hearing  was
    clearly a matter on which the adjudicator took  into  account  all  the
    material before him.  He noted  the  history  to  date.   He  noted  in
    particular that the appellant had had a period of some  six  months  to
    assemble his case after his original claim, if he had chosen to do  so.
    He noted that despite what was already a passage of  some  years  since
    the  claim  was  made;  the  appellant  had   failed   to   offer   any
    substantiation for it.  He noted the fact that the  appellant  had  had
    the assistance of a number  of  legal  representatives.   The  question
    whether to adjourn was a matter for his discretion,  and  it  does  not
    appear to us that there was any perceptible legal error in his decision
    not                             to                             adjourn.



14. The note  from  the  appellant's  current  representatives  also  raise
    questions about whether the appellant should have been granted leave to
    remain under policies existing at various times in the past.   That  is
    not a matter that falls for consideration  in  an  appeal  against  the
    refusal to grant asylum.

15. For the foregoing reasons,  we  do  not  find  that  the  adjudicator's
    decision contained any error of law.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    must therefore be dismissed.  It is absolutely clear that no  injustice
    to the appellant is caused by that decision.  Despite his claim to fear
    persecution in Iraq, he seems to have  done  nothing  to  indicate  the
    grounds of his fear.  He remains in this country.  If his fear is well-
    founded, he can no doubt make a properly  supported  claim.   There  is
    simply  no  basis  for  saying  that  he  has   been   prevented   from
    substantiating his claim at any time when he chose to do so.

16. The adjudicator's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal  therefore
    stands.









                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 28 November 2014
