
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00995/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On April 13, 2015                    |On April 24, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR ANTHONY SHERWIN HENRY
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Longhurst-Woods, Counsel, instructed by Obaseki
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in
         the  interests  of  convenience  and  consistency,  replicate   the
         nomenclature of the decision at first instance.

      2. The Appellant is a citizen of Guyana.  The  appellant  entered  the
         United Kingdom as a spouse on July 2,  2010  with  valid  leave  to
         enter until September 23, 2012. On October 2, 2012 he submitted  an
         application for further leave to remain under  private  life  under
         the Immigration Rules but the respondent refused  this  on  May  2,
         2013. On June 26, 2013 the appellant submitted an  application  for
         further leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
         settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  respondent  refused   this
         application on November  27,  2013  and  gave  directions  for  his
         removal under paragraph 10A of Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration  Act
         1971.

      3. The appellant appealed this decision on  December  23,  2013  under
         section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      4. The appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Majid
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on August 14, 2014 and in a
         decision promulgated on September 3, 2014  he  allowed  the  appeal
         under the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

      5. The respondent lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  September  11,  2014
         submitting the FtTJ had erred by materially in law.

      6. On October 22, 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Lambert  gave
         permission to appeal finding the "determination is so  bad  that  I
         cannot divine from it either what decision of  the  respondent  was
         being appealed or the basis on which the appeal was allowed."

      7. The matter came before me on the above date and  the  parties  were
         represented as set out above. The appellant and his  wife  were  in
         attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

      8. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal that had been lodged  and
         submitted the FtTJ had failed to engage with the refusal letter and
         the  issues  raised  in  the  "marriage  interview".   The   FtTJ's
         conclusion in paragraph [17] of his  determination  was  unreasoned
         and the respondent  could  not  tell  why  the  decision  had  been
         reached.

      9. Ms Longhurst-Woods argued that the FtTJ's decision could be  upheld
         because the FtTJ was entitled to find in  the  appellant's  favour.
         The FtTJ had not commented on the alleged  inconsistencies  because
         they did not  exist.  She  further  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  was
         entitled to conclude that as the appellant had entered legally  and
         as the respondent had not challenged the marriage in 2010 then  the
         FtTJ was entitled to find the marriage was genuine and subsisting.

     10. Having heard the  submissions  I  reviewed  the  determination  and
         submissions and found there was an error in law. The reason for the
         error is for the reason given in the permission namely there was  a
         total failure to engage  with  any  of  the  evidence  or  to  make
         findings on material issues or to consider the application  against
         the appropriate Immigration Rule. The findings, as they were,  were
         unclear. The FtTJ was entitled to allow the appeal but in doing  so
         he had to give reasons for that decision and as  his  determination
         contained no reasons at all there was a material error.

     11. I asked Ms Longhurst-Woods whether she intended to  call  any  oral
         evidence and after  taking  instructions  she  indicated  that  her
         intention was to  proceed  with  submissions  only.  I  then  asked
         whether she wanted the matter remitted back to the  First-tier  and
         again after taking instructions she confirmed the appellant  wanted
         me to  determine  his  appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  those
         circumstances I invited submissions from the representatives.

    SUBMISSIONS

     12. Mr Tarlow relied on the refusal letter and submitted there  were  a
         number of inconsistencies between their respective interviews and a
         failure by each party to answer questions on some occasions.  Those
         inconsistencies led the  respondent  to  conclude  that  they  were
         neither living together at the time of the interview nor  intending
         to live together permanently. Even if the  Tribunal  accepted  they
         were  in  a  genuine  relationship  there  were  no  insurmountable
         obstacles to family life continuing in Guyana. There was nothing to
         prevent the  appellant  and  his  wife  travelling  to  Guyana  and
         enjoying a private and family  life  there.  The  appellant's  wife
         worked but her skills were transferable. Alternatively, it was  not
         unduly harsh to require them to live outside of the United Kingdom.



     13. Ms Longhurst-Woods submitted  the  marriage  was  genuine  and  the
         parties had and intended to continue to live  together  as  husband
         and wife. There was documentary evidence that  both  lived  in  the
         same property and had done so for a period of time. The reason  for
         gaps in the interview was because some of the questions were  posed
         to only one party as they did not need a response from  the  other.
         Any inconsistencies were minor and should not be held against  them
         and in some instances the parties had corrected  any  error  during
         the hearing. The interview should be  considered  as  a  whole  and
         questions should not be considered in isolation. She submitted  the
         respondent should have considered the application under Appendix FM
         of the Immigration Rules, paragraph 276ADE and article 8 ECHR.  She
         submitted the appellant's wife would face insurmountable  obstacles
         if she were required to return to live in a foreign country as  she
         was now a British citizen having been found to face persecution  if
         returned  to  Uganda.  Ms  Longhurst-Woods  did  not  argue   under
         paragraph 276ADE but submitted  that  if  there  no  insurmountable
         obstacles then it would be unduly harsh to expect her  to  give  up
         well-paid employment especially as she had  been  living  here  for
         many years and was settled. There was no evidence to show she would
         be  able  to  obtain  work  and   she   submitted   it   would   be
         disproportionate to refuse the appellant leave to remain.

     14. I reserved my decision.

    ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS

     15. The appellant entered the United Kingdom legally as  a  spouse  but
         failed to apply to extend  his  stay  and  consequently  became  an
         overstayer. His first attempt at regularising his stay was  refused
         and this is his second attempt so to speak.

     16. I have before me witness statements from the appellant and his wife
         (pages 34-42 of the appellant's bundle). These statements  tell  me
         that the parties married in 2008 in Guyana but  the  appellant  was
         only granted leave to enter in June 2010.

     17. Ms Longhurst-Woods submitted that as he entered  legally  I  should
         accept the marriage  is  genuine.  However  I  prefer  Mr  Tarlow's
         submission on this issue namely that the parties have to  show  the
         marriage was subsisting and they intended  to  remain  together  as
         husband and wife because section E-LTRP 1.7 and 1.10 of Appendix FM
         require the appellant to demonstrate not only that the relationship
         between them is genuine and subsisting but that they also intend to
         live together permanently in the United Kingdom. I  therefore  find
         that the appellant must demonstrate this in order  to  come  within
         Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM.

     18. The application was refused because of alleged  inconsistencies  in
         the  interviews  they  had  with  the  respondent.   During   those
         interviews  they  were  asked  similar  questions  and  the   whole
         interview appears in the respondent's bundle.

     19. During his submissions I invited Mr Tarlow to identify his concerns
         to me and he referred me to questions 2, 3, 5, 9, 10,  39,  40  and
         42. I have considered those questions along with the  rest  of  the
         interviews and I make the following findings:

          a. The appellant told the interviewing officer he  and  his  wife
             had only been apart on two occasions namely for one  month  in
             2011 and between September and November 2013 (he corrected the
             answer given at Q2 in  Q10.  His  wife  was  asked  a  similar
             question and at Q5 she stated they had been apart  briefly  in
             April 2011 for four weeks and then at Q11 she  confirmed  that
             shortly before he was due to apply  for  indefinite  leave  to
             remain  they  separated  and  she  refused  to   support   his
             application. I accept they gave  consistent  answers  on  this
             issue.

          b. However, when asked  where  the  appellant  stayed  when  they
             separated in 2013 the appellant stated he lived with his uncle
             (C Ross) in London whereas his wife stated  he  went  to  stay
             with his uncle Dexter in Sunderland.  Whilst  the  appellant's
             wife referred to him staying with  his  uncle  in  London  she
             stated this was on the first occasion (April 2011). This is an
             inconsistency.

          c. In question 9 the  appellant  tried  to  explain  the  alleged
             discrepancy in the evidence he gave in questions 3 and 6 to  8
             when he made it clear that he was only referring to their time
             in the United Kingdom. I find his explanation credible.

          d. The  respondent  questioned  the  answers  given  by  them  at
             question 16 in relation to why they received a single person's
             discount on the council tax. Whilst they may have deceived the
             local authority I am  satisfied  that  their  answers  do  not
             demonstrate any inconsistency.

          e. They both gave consistent evidence about how they travelled to
             Liverpool for their interview that day and who  paid  for  the
             bus tickets.

          f. They gave consistent evidence about where they were each born.



          g. The appellant accurately described how his wife came to  be  a
             British citizen.

          h. At question 27 the appellant's wife suggested that her husband
             went to church on a Saturday and  she  went  to  church  on  a
             Sunday and at question 28 the appellant confirmed they had not
             attended church together since 2011.

          i. The appellant accurately stated when his  wife  moved  to  her
             current address.

          j. At question 31 they both stated the appellant's uncle financed
             the wedding although they did give inconsistent evidence about
             who made the arrangements. Ms Longhurst-Woods  submitted  that
             the discrepancy could be explained by the fact she was in  the
             United Kingdom but I accept Mr Tarlow's  submission  that  the
             answers were inconsistent.

          k. Their explanations about when  they  became  serious  and  how
             marriage was proposed do contain inconsistencies but I do  not
             find they  are  so  different  that  they  could  be  said  to
             undermine their accounts.

          l. They gave consistent evidence about who attended the  marriage
             in 2010 but they gave inconsistent evidence  about  where  the
             wedding  rings  came  from  (question  40  and  41)  with  the
             appellant claiming he purchased the ring in a shop whereas his
             wife claimed the appellant's uncle gave her  the  ring  before
             she travelled to Guyana.

          m. The appellant did not  know  his  wife  had  a  child  from  a
             previous relationship although she  claimed  this  was  simply
             because she had never told him.

          n. They both mentioned the fact they were starting IVF treatment.



          o. In so far as Christmas Eve and Day  2012  were  concerned  the
             appellant stated that they were together over that period  and
             that they slept together on Xmas Eve. His wife stated that  he
             went to Sunderland two days before Christmas and they were not
             together over Christmas. This is a significant discrepancy.

          p. They corroborated their tea and coffee habits. The appellant's
             wife confirmed his periods  of  employment  and  he  confirmed
             where the department  and  hospital  she  worked  in  and  the
             frequency and method of payment.

     20. Mr Tarlow had submitted the interviews demonstrated inconsistencies
         but in considering those discrepancies I have to consider the whole
         of their interviews. Whilst I accept there are some inconsistencies
         I am satisfied they are limited when placed against the  background
         of the whole interview and having considered all of the evidence  I
         am satisfied the appellant has satisfied sections  E-LTRP  1.7  and
         1.10 of Appendix FM. I therefore conclude the marriage  is  genuine
         and subsisting and the parties intended to continue living together
         as husband and wife.

     21. Having assessed the genuineness  of  the  relationship  I  have  to
         consider whether the appellant satisfies the remaining requirements
         of Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM.

     22. In order to succeed under  the  Rules  the  appellant  must  either
         demonstrate he meets all of the requirements of Section E-LTRP  and
         that includes demonstrating the relevant requirements  of  Appendix
         FM-SE are met.

     23. The financial documentation is contained in the appellant's  bundle
         from pages 52 onwards. The pages are not indexed but it seems pages
         52 to 135 relate specifically to the  appellant  and  in  assessing
         whether the financial requirements are met I can only  have  regard
         only to his wife's income. Evidential requirements  of  income  are
         governed by Section A1(bb) of Appendix FM-SE which makes clear that
         both wage slips and a letter from the employer confirming the  wage
         slips are authentic is required and Section 2 of Appendix  FM  sets
         out additional requirements that have to be met. The appellant does
         not satisfy these requirements and consequently in order to satisfy
         Appendix FM he must satisfy  Sections  E-LTRP  1.2  -1.12  and  2.1
         (which he does) and come within the remit  of  Section  EX.1(b)  of
         Appendix FM. This states-

             "the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British  citizen,  settled
             in the UK or in the UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection and there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

     24. Section EX.2 defines insurmountable obstacles as

             "... very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
             applicant or their partner in continuing family life  together
             outside the United Kingdom and which could not be overcome  or
             would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or  their
             partner."

     25. The respondent's own guidance confirms the high test the  appellant
         needs  to  satisfy  when  demonstrating  insurmountable   obstacles
         (Section EX.2) by stating:

             "The assessment of whether there are insurmountable obstacles"
             is a different and more stringent assessment than  whether  it
             would be reasonable to expect the applicant's partner to  join
             them  overseas....  A  significant  degree  of   hardship   or
             inconvenience   does   not   amount   to   an   insurmountable
             obstacle...."

     26. I have accepted  the  parties  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship  and  so  the  issue  is  whether   there   would   be
         insurmountable obstacles.

     27.  Ms  Longhurst-Woods  submits  the  following  factors  amount   to
         insurmountable obstacles namely:

          a. The appellant's wife is Ugandan refugee and has been living in
             the United Kingdom since 2001 and is now a British citizen and
             has been since 2007.

          b. The appellant's wife has a good job here.

          c. No evidence the appellant's wife would  be  able  to  work  in
             Guyana and the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  support  any
             application she may make to join him in Guyana.

     28. Mr Tarlow's argument is simply that  these  circumstances  are  not
         insurmountable.

     29. I have considered these issues and I find there is  nothing  before
         me that supports the  submission  the  appellant's  wife  would  be
         unable to accompany him to Guyana  or  be  unable  to  obtain  work
         especially given the fact she has a transferable skill as a  nurse.
         All of the reasons put forward are valid reasons for not wanting to
         have  to  relocate  to  Guyana  but  they  cannot  be  said  to  be
         insurmountable. Insurmountable obstacles are a high  test  to  meet
         and having considered all of the factors I  am  not  persuaded  the
         appellant has met that part of the test. I therefore find that  the
         appellant does not  satisfy  the  family  life  provisions  of  the
         Immigration Rules. It may well be that the appellant and  his  wife
         would meet the financial requirements if the correct  documentation
         was submitted but that would  require  a  fresh  application  being
         submitted to the respondent.

     30. Ms Longhurst-Woods indicated to me that she did not intend to argue
         that removal would breach paragraph 276ADE HC 395 but she would  be
         arguing that the appellant's case should be considered  outside  of
         the Rules under article 8 ECHR.

     31. I am satisfied that although Appendix FM provides a route  for  the
         appellant to remain in the United Kingdom it is not a complete code
         in this case. The appellant lawfully came to the United Kingdom  as
         a spouse and lived with his wife during  the  following  two  years
         albeit there were two brief separations one of which coincided with
         the time when  he  was  supposed  to  submit  his  application  for
         indefinite leave to remain. If that application had been  submitted
         in time then the appellant's application would have  fallen  to  be
         considered under paragraph 287 HC 395.  Given  the  only  objection
         would have been  the  relationship  the  appellant  may  well  have
         succeeded as the financial requirements of paragraph 287 HC 395 are
         not as stringent as the provisions of Appendix FM. I make it  clear
         that a near miss does not entitle an  applicant  to  succeed  under
         article 8 ECHR.

     32. I have applied the guidance set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.  I
         accept there  is  family  life  based  on  my  findings  about  the
         relationship and removal of the appellant from this  country  would
         interfere with that relationship  but  such  removal  would  be  in
         accordance with  the  law  and  for  the  purposes  of  immigration
         control. The issue it seems is whether  requiring  the  appellant's
         wife to relocate would be unduly harsh.

     33. In R (on the application of Onkarsingh Nagre) 2013 EWHC 720 Sales J
         at paragraphs [42] and [43] said:

             "The approach explained in the Strasbourg  case-law  indicates
             that ... consideration of  whether  there  are  insurmountable
             obstacles  to  the  claimant's  resident  spouse  or   partner
             relocating to the claimant's country  of  origin  to  continue
             their  family  life  there   will   be   a   highly   material
             consideration. This is not to say that  the  question  whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles to relocation  will  always
             be decisive.... Therefore, it cannot be  said  that  in  every
             case consideration of the test  in  Section  EX.1  of  whether
             there  are  insurmountable  obstacles   to   relocation   will
             necessarily exhaust consideration of proportionality, even  in
             the type of precarious  family  life  case  with  which  these
             proceedings are concerned. I agree with the statement  by  the
             Upper Tribunal in Izuazu (Article 8 - new rules)  [2013]  UKUT
             45 (IAC) in the  latter  part  of  paragraph  [56],  that  the
             Strasbourg case-law does not treat the test of  insurmountable
             obstacles  to  relocation  as  a  minimum  requirement  to  be
             established in a precarious family life case before it can  be
             concluded that removal of the  claimant  is  disproportionate;
             the case-law only treats it as a material factor to  be  taken
             into account. Nonetheless,  I  consider  that  the  Strasbourg
             guidance does indicate that in a precarious family life  case,
             where it is only in "exceptional" or  "the  most  exceptional"
             circumstances that removal of the non-national  family  member
             will constitute a violation  of  Article  8,  the  absence  of
             insurmountable obstacles to relocation of other family members
             to that member's own  country  of  origin  to  continue  their
             family life there is likely to indicate that the removal  will
             be proportionate for the purposes of Article 8".

     34. I must also have regard to  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  when
         considering the public interest in removal and in particular I must
         have regard to the following:

          a. Maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest.

          b. The fact the appellant can speak English, as this would affect
             his ability to obtain work. I note he had previously worked in
             the United Kingdom as evidenced by the payslips in the bundle.



          c. The appellant's wife is said to  be  in  employment  at  Guy's
             Hospital although the wage slips all pre-date June 2013 and  I
             did not have any  documentary  evidence  that  she  was  still
             employed there or how much her income currently is.

          d. The parties married before they came to the United Kingdom and
             have lived together as husband and wife since his  arrival  in
             2010.

     35. I have considered all  of  the  evidence  along  with  the  various
         submissions. I have had to balance the following positive factors:

          a. The appellant came here lawfully and sought to regularise  his
             status since his leave expired.

          b. The appellant's wife was granted refugee status in 2001 and is
             now a British citizen.

          c. She has only been to Guyana once and that was to marry.

          d. She maybe employed as a nurse.

          e. The appellant speaks English.

     36. I have to balance those factors against the following:

          a. He does not meet the Immigration Rules under Appendix FM.

          b. The appellant has family in Guyana and lived there as recently
             as 2010.

          c. No evidence that the appellant's wife is in employment now  as
             claimed or earning sufficient funds to ensure they  would  not
             be financially dependent on the taxpayers.

          d. No evidence that the appellant's wife would be unable to enter
             Guyana or work there.

          e. No other evidence of family life submitted.

          f. Importance of immigration control.

     37. Having considered all of the above  factors  I  am  satisfied  that
         removal would not be unduly harsh and removal would not breach  the
         appellant's and his wife's rights to family and private life.

    DECISION

     38. There was a material error. I  have  set  the  decision  aside  and
         remade the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  under  both  the
         Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

     39. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction  and
         pursuant to Rule 14 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 I see no reason to alter that order.



Signed:     Dated: April 23, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:     Dated: April 23, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
