

                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal number: IA/00129/2014

                                  THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Promulgated                |
|On December 5, 2014                 |On December 8, 2014        |
|                                    |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                         MR MOHAMED MALIKE MANSARAY
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                               Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                              Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shaw, Counsel, instructed by Forward
      and Yussuf Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born November 29, 1975 is a citizen of Sierra Leone.  On
    October 1,  2006  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    possession of an entry clearance visa as a spouse valid until September
    22, 2008. He applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  but  this  was
    refused, as was his application on March  12,  2010  for  access  to  a
    child. However, he was granted discretionary leave to  remain  for  the
    period October 1, 2010 and September 30, 2013. On September 5, 2013  he
    applied for further discretionary leave but the respondent refused this
    application on December 6, 2013.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  December  18,
    2013. On August 1, 2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Hussain
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard his  appeal.  He  refused
    his appeal on human rights grounds in a  determination  promulgated  on
    September 18, 2014.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on September  25,  2014  and  on
    November 5, 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Osborne  granted
    permission to appeal finding it arguable the FtTJ may have erred in his
    assessment of the appellant's family life and consideration of  section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 4. Miss Shaw relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted the FtTJ  erred
    by failing to find the appellant had private life  with  his  "partner"
    and his two children. He also erred by failing to have  regard  to  the
    best interests of the children. In paragraph [54] of his  determination
    the FtTJ found the appellant did not have  family  life  and  this  was
    despite one of his children attending the hearing  and  evidence  being
    given that the appellant had regular contact to the child. At  no  time
    does the FtTJ refer to section 55 of the 2009 Act and this should  have
    been at the forefront  of  his  thinking  in  light  of  the  fact  the
    appellant had two children both of whom are British citizens. The  FtTJ
    was aware also of the fact his current "partner"  was  expecting  their
    child and that that child would also be British.

 5. Mr Walker relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that whilst  the
    FtTJ did not refer to Section 55 of the 2009  Act  he  had  made  clear
    findings on  the  evidence  that  involved  him  considering  the  best
    interests of the  children.  At  paragraphs  [32],  [42]  and  [43]  he
    outlined his concerns about the children and why he found there was  no
    family life. All findings were open to him.

    DISCUSSION AND ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

 6. In considering this application I raised with Miss Shaw  the  following
    issues:


     a. Whether she agreed that at the date of hearing  the  appellant  had
        not seen his eldest son since 2013?


     b. Whether she agreed the FtTJ was entitled to come to the findings he
        did about the relationship between the appellant and his "partner".



 7. Miss Smith conceded:


     a. At the date of hearing the appellant was not  having  contact  with
        the child from his marriage although he  did  make  small  payments
        into an account for him.


     b. The findings about the appellant's current relationship  were  open
        to him.


 8. I am satisfied the FtTJ was entitled to reach the findings  he  did  in
    relation to the eldest child and the "partner" in so far as family life
    was concerned.


 9. The FtTJ clearly considered the eldest child at paragraph [40]  of  his
    determination and he recorded the appellant had not  had  contact  with
    his child since at least 2013. The mother of that  child  was  refusing
    him contact and there was no evidence before the FtTJ of any  steps  to
    alter this situation. The facts therefore spoke for themselves and  the
    FtTJ was entitled to make the findings he did.


10. The FtTJ also considered whether there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his "partner" from paragraph [47] onwards. As  Miss  Shaw
    fairly conceded the FtTJ was entitled  to  make  the  findings  he  did
    because  he  did  not  accept  the   appellant's   claims   about   the
    relationship. Although  he  accepted  the  "partner"  was  pregnant  he
    rejected their claims about them not living together and  their  claims
    they were not together for religious reasons especially in light of the
    fact the "partner's"  religion  did  not  permit  children  outside  of
    marriage and she was now expecting their  child  and  she  had  another
    child outside of marriage as well. The FtTJ's  findings  on  this  were
    open to him.

11. The remaining areas that I had to consider related to  the  appellant's
    second child and his "partner's" child.

12. The FtTJ heard oral evidence about both. From  paragraph  [42]  of  his
    determination he considered the relationship and the oral evidence. The
    FtTJ also recorded that this child had been living in Africa until June
    2014 and he had grave concerns  about  what  he  was  being  told.  His
    adverse findings can be  found  in  paragraph  [43]  and  [44]  of  his
    determination.

13. Miss Shaw referred me to the decision of  JO  and  Others  (section  55
    duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT  00517  (IAC)  but  she  accepted  that  this
    decision related to the approach by the respondent and not the FtTJ.

14. I have to consider whether the appellant considered the best  interests
    of the child. The FtTJ heard  the  oral  evidence  and  considered  the
    written evidence and made a negative finding  about  the  relationship.
    Although the child was in attendance at the hearing the  FtTJ  was  not
    persuaded by what he was told. That child lives with his mother and the
    FtTJ was not satisfied with what he was told and the decision  he  made
    on family life was open to him.

15. Miss Shaw did not push the issue of the "partner's" other child  and  I
    am satisfied that based on the findings  there  was  no  error  in  the
    FtTJ's assessment.

16. The appellant's situation is constantly changing, as his  "partner"  is
    due to give birth to his third child and will also  be  British.  These
    are not matters that concerned the FtTJ and no error  flows  from  that
    decision.

17. In summary,  the  FtTJ  did  consider  the  children.  They  formed  an
    essential part of his decision and he made findings that ultimately led
    to him concluding there was no  family  life.  On  the  evidence  these
    findings were open to him.

    DECISION


18. There was no material error of law. I dismiss the appeal.


19. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

The appeal was dismissed so no fee is payable.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
