

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/00979/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |           Decision & Reasons      |
|On 20 October 2015                 |Promulgated                        |
|                                   |On 5 November 2015                 |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Ms RITA ISMENIA VENEGAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:       Ms C Callinan (counsel) instructed by SLA,
Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins, promulgated on 27  May  2015,
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 22 May 1963 and is a national of Ecuador.


4. On 05 June 2009 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  UK  on
the basis that she had established both family and  private  life  with  the
meaning of article 8 ECHR in the UK.


5. On 09 December 2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application and decided to remove her.


The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Higgins ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on article 8 ECHR grounds.


7. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 27 August 2015 Judge JM Holmes  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "..........the judge's approach to the  issue  of  proportionality  is
      arguably misconceived and displays  a  freewheeling  approach  to  the
      requirements   of   the   immigration   rules   and   the   issue   of
      proportionality"

The Hearing

8. Ms Everett for the respondent adopted the terms of the grounds of  appeal
and told me that she relied on the cases of Agyarko v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ
440 and AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT  0260  (IAC).  She  argued  that  the
decision had been made relying on the case of Chikwamba, and that the  facts
and circumstances of this case are distinguishable. At [32] the Judge  finds
that there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
elsewhere, and at [33] the Judge made findings which indicate the  appellant
could make a successful application for  entry  clearance  from  abroad.  Ms
Everett told me that the Judge's findings amount  to  "a  blatant  error  of
law". She invited me to set aside the decision and remake  the  decision  by
dismissing the appellant's appeal.

9. Ms Callinan, counsel for the appellant told me  that  the  decision  does
not contain any material errors of law. She drew my attention to  paragraphs
[28] to [32] and told me that  the  Judge  considered  the  public  interest
factors, taking careful account of section 117A-D of  the  2002  act  before
considering the case of R(on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM  -
Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015]  UKUT  00189.
She reminded me that at [28] the Judge found that  the  appellant's  British
citizen husband could not reasonably be expected  to  relocate  to  Ecuador.
She told me that the Judge  had  manifestly  carried  out  an  adequate  and
appropriate proportionality balancing exercise. She urged me to dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand. In the alternative,  if  I  were  to
find an error of law, she asked me to remit the case back to the  First-tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.

Analysis

10. In Chikwamba (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 40, the House of Lords said  that  in
deciding whether a general policy of requiring people such as the  Appellant
to return to apply for entry in accordance with the rules  of  this  country
was legitimate and proportionate in a particular case, it was  necessary  to
consider what the benefits of the policy  were.   Whilst  acknowledging  the
deterrent effect of the policy the House of  Lords  queried  the  underlying
basis of the policy in other respects and made  it  clear  that  the  policy
should not be applied in a rigid, Kafka-esque manner.  The  House  of  Lords
went on to say that it would be "comparatively rarely, certainly  in  family
cases involving children" that an Article 8 case should be dismissed on  the
basis that it would be proportionate and more appropriate for the  Appellant
to apply for leave from abroad.

11. In R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)  it  was
held that (i) Appendix FM does not include  consideration  of  the  question
whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to  return  to
his home country to make an entry clearance application  to  re-join  family
members in the U.K. There may be cases in which there are no  insurmountable
obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where  temporary
separation to  enable  an  individual  to  make  an  application  for  entry
clearance may be  disproportionate.  In  all  cases,  it  will  be  for  the
individual to place  before  the  Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  such
temporary  separation  will  interfere  disproportionately  with   protected
rights. However, where a failure to comply in a particular capacity  is  the
only issue so  far  as  the  Rules  are  concerned,  that  may  well  be  an
insufficient reason for refusing  the  case  under  Article  8  outside  the
rules.


12. Between [24] and [26] the Judge considers  the  appellant's  application
in terms of both appendix FM  and  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  immigration
rules. He concludes that the appellant cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of
the immigration rules. At [25] he finds  "she  has  not  satisfied  me  that
there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  Mr  Sarabia-Torres
continuing outside the UK." At [27] the Judge considers whether or  not  the
appellant  would  be  able  to  make  a  successful  application  for  entry
clearance from Ecuador, and  concludes  that  the  appellant  is  likely  to
fulfil the requirements for a grant of  entry  clearance  as  a  partner  in
terms of E-ECP.4.1 of the immigration rules.

13. Between [28] and [33] the Judge considered  the  appellant's  article  8
ECHR rights out-with the immigration rules.  At  [28]  the  Judge  concludes
that the appellant's partner cannot reasonably be expected  to  relocate  to
Ecuador because he is likely to lose his employment in the UK  if  he  does,
and that will mean the appellant cannot satisfy the  financial  requirements
any longer  and  so  will  not  make  a  successful  application  for  entry
clearance. At [31] the Judge considers the factors set out in  section  117B
of the 2002 Act.

14. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  an
appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to  remain  from
either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English,  or
the  strength  of  his  financial   resources.   In   Forman   (ss   117A-C
considerations) [2015] UKUT  00412  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the  public
interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by  the  consideration
that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at no time  been  a
financial burden on the state or is self-sufficient or is likely to  remain
so indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is that where they  are
not present the public interest is fortified.

15. Having considered all of those matters the Judge found that the case  of
Chen was determinative of the appeal because at [28] the  Judge  found  that
the appellant's partner could not realistically join her  in  Ecuador  while
she awaited the outcome of an application for  entry  clearance.  The  Judge
found that the period of separation between the appellant  and  the  partner
amounted to a disproportionate interference with the right  to  respect  for
family life. The findings set out at [28] do not contradict the  finding  at
[25] that there are no insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing
outside the UK; the Judge acknowledges that at  [32]  by  reference  to  the
case of Chen.

16. The appellant's partner is a British citizen of Ecuadorian  origin.  The
Judge  specifically  finds  at  [28]  that  the  prospect  of  loss  of  the
appellant's  partner's  employment  is  the  factor   which   prevents   the
appellant's partner from leaving the UK.
17. In R(on the application of Agyarko) [2015] EWCA Civ 440  considered  the
phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used in paragraph EX.1  of  the  Rules.
"...The phrase as used in the Rules is intended to have the same meaning  as
in the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is clear  that  the  European  Court  of
Human Rights regards it as  a  formulation  imposing  a  stringent  test  in
respect of that factor, as is illustrated by  Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (see
para. [117]: there were no insurmountable obstacles to the  family  settling
in Suriname, even though the  applicant  and  her  family  would  experience
hardship if forced to do so). "
18.  At paragraph 26 of that decision "The mere facts that Mr Benette  is  a
British citizen, has lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a  job
here - and hence might find it difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to  re-
locate to Ghana to continue their family life there - could  not  constitute
insurmountable obstacles to his doing so."

19. A fair reading of the decision indicates that  the  Judge  made  careful
findings of fact and examined the appellant's  case  under  the  immigration
rules before correctly moving on to consider whether or not  article  8  was
engaged  out-with  the  immigration  rules.  The  Judge  correctly  directed
himself in law and at [32] found that the guidance  given  in  the  case  of
Chen should be applied to the facts and  circumstances  of  this  case.  The
Judge specifically found that  there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
family life being enjoyed outside the UK but that the  effect  of  temporary
separation on the appellant and her partner amounts  to  a  disproportionate
interference with family life. The Judge clearly distinguished the test  for
article 8 consideration within the rules, from the  broader  proportionality
exercise to be conducted out-with the rules.

20. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held (inter alia) that although a decision may contain an error  of
law where the requirements to give adequate reasons are not met,  the  Upper
Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
where there has been  no  misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-finding  process
cannot be criticised and the relevant Country Guidance has been  taken  into
account, unless the conclusions the judge draws from the primary  data  were
not reasonably open to him or her.

21. It is not an arguable error of law  for  a  Judge  to  give  too  little
weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is  alleged.
Disagreement with a  Judge's  factual  conclusions,  his  appraisal  of  the
evidence or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not
give  rise  to  an  error  of  law.   Unless   a   Judge's   assessment   of
proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no error  of
law.

22. The decision made by the Judge is  one  that  the  respondent  does  not
like.  It  may  be  that  another  Judge  considering  the  same  facts  and
circumstances might reach a different  conclusion.  But  in  this  case  the
Judge has not misdirected himself in law and has  quite  clearly  considered
the facts and circumstances particular to the appellant's  case.  It  is  at
least implicit that the Judge distinguishes the facts and  circumstances  in
this appellant's case from the facts and  circumstances  applicable  in  the
case of Agyarko.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore find that no errors of law have been  established  and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date 22
October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle






