
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00065/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 29th September 2015               |On 6th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               RUBINA KHATI BK
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Dey, Haque and Hausman solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State (SSHD) was granted permission  to  appeal  a
         decision by FtT Judge Lodge who allowed Ms Khati's appeal against a
         decision to refuse to vary her leave to remain and  to  remove  her
         under s47 Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

         Background

      2. Ms Khati arrived in the UK on 17th June 2010 with  entry  clearance
         as a Tier 4 student with leave valid from 28th May 2010 until  31st
         May 2013. On 13th March  2013  she  applied  for  and  was  granted
         further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student until 25th August 2014.
         On 25th August 2014 she applied for variation of leave to remain as
         the partner of a British Citizen.

      3. The SSHD accepted that her application did  not  fall  for  refusal
         under Section S-LTR and that she met the relationship requirements,
         immigration  status   requirements   and   the   English   language
         requirements. The SSHD did not accept that she  met  the  financial
         requirements and refused her  application  to  vary  her  leave  to
         remain under  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  application  was  also
         refused on Article 8 grounds and a decision to remove was taken.

      4. In [16], having set out the method of calculation,  the  FtT  judge
         found that the sponsor  (Ms  Khati's  partner)  did  not  meet  the
         financial requirements of the Rules and  she  could  not  therefore
         meet E-LTRP3.1.

      5. The respondent had accepted that if Ms Khati met  the  requirements
         of Section EX then she would be eligible for leave to remain for  a
         period not exceeding 30 months and would be eligible for settlement
         after a continuous period of 120 months with such leave.  The First-
         tier Tribunal judge considered whether  there  were  insurmountable
         obstacles to family life with her partner continuing outside the UK
         (EX.1.(b) and EX.2.) the only criteria she had to meet in order  to
         succeed under the Rules.

         Error of law

      6. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on the grounds
         that the  reasons  given  by  the  judge  for  finding  there  were
         insurmountable difficulties to family life continuing  outside  the
         UK ([18] and [19] of the  determination)  were  not  insurmountable
         difficulties; a period of re-adjustment to life in Nepal was not an
         insurmountable difficulty and that furthermore  Ms  Khati  had  the
         option of applying for  entry  clearance  in  Delhi.  A  period  of
         separation would ensue but that was  not  disproportionate  in  the
         light  of  the  requirement  of  the  SSHD  to  maintain  effective
         immigration control.

      7. In SSHD v SS (Congo) & ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 Richards LJ holds:

             "3.  The new  Rules  are  contained  in  Appendix  FM  to  the
             Immigration Rules, which  addresses  the  position  of  family
             members. Appendix FM constituted an attempt by  the  Secretary
             of State to reflect more precisely than  before  the  relevant
             balance  to  be  struck  between  the  public   interest   and
             individual interest for  the  purpose  of  Article  8  of  the
             European Convention of Human Rights (respect for  private  and
             family life), as incorporated in the  Human  Rights  Act  1998
             ("the HRA") ...

             ...

             33.  In our judgment, even though  a  test  of  exceptionality
             does not apply in every  case  falling  within  the  scope  of
             Appendix FM, it is accurate to say that the  general  position
             outside the sorts of special contexts  referred  to  above  is
             that compelling circumstances would need to be  identified  to
             support a claim for grant of LTR  outside  the  new  Rules  in
             Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which  is  not
             as strict as a test of  exceptionality  or  a  requirement  of
             "very compelling reasons" (as referred to in MF  (Nigeria)  in
             the context of the Rules applicable to foreign criminals), but
             which gives appropriate weight to the focused consideration of
             public interest factors as finds expression in  the  Secretary
             of State's formulation of the new Rules  in  Appendix  FM.  It
             also reflects the formulation in Nagre at  para.  [29],  which
             has been tested and has survived scrutiny in this court:  see,
             e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ."

      8. Paragraph EX.1. and EX.2. read, in so far as relevant to  Ms  Khati
         as follows;

             'EX.1. This paragraph applies if

             (a)  ...

             (b)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  Citizen,
             settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK.

             EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
             obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would
             be faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their
             family life together outside the UK and  which  could  not  be
             overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner'

      9. Appendix FM, which  includes  Section  EX.  is  the  manifestation,
         approved by Parliament, of the balance to  be  struck  between  the
         competing interests of the State and the individual  as  identified
         in Article 8. The Rules cannot and do  not  purport  to  cover  the
         whole range of possible circumstances where Article 8 could have an
         impact (save in deportation)  but  they  do  cover  a  considerable
         spectrum of circumstances.  Thus cases can fall clearly within  the
         Rules  in   their   determination.   In   particular   the   phrase
         "insurmountable obstacles" brings Strasbourg jurisprudence into the
         remit of the Immigration Rules in determining whether a family unit
         could and should be enabled to remain in the UK. That there may  be
         other circumstances which are not covered  by  the  Rules,  remains
         open to consideration under what could be called 'more wide-ranging
         Article 8 considerations'[1].

     10. "Insurmountable obstacles" is more demanding than a test of whether
         it would be reasonable to expect a couple to continue their  family
         life outside the UK. It is a stringent test but it is not  intended
         that it should be interpreted literally but in a sensible practical
         way. This concept is explained in Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440:

             "21. The phrase "insurmountable obstacles"  as  used  in  this
             paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be
             overcome by an applicant for leave to remain under the  Rules.
             The test is significantly more demanding than a mere  test  of
             whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to  continue
             their family life outside the United Kingdom.

             22.   This  interpretation  is  in  line  with  the   relevant
             Strasbourg   jurisprudence.   The    phrase    "insurmountable
             obstacles" has its origin in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence  in
             relation to immigration cases in a family context, where it is
             mentioned as one factor among others to be taken into  account
             in determining whether any right under Article  8  exists  for
             family members to be granted leave to remain or leave to enter
             a Contracting State: see e.g. Rodrigues da Silva and Hoogkamer
             v Netherlands (2007) 44 EHRR  34,  para.  [39]  ("...  whether
             there are insurmountable obstacles in the way  of  the  family
             living together in the country of origin of  one  or  more  of
             them ..."). The phrase as used in the  Rules  is  intended  to
             have the same meaning as in the Strasbourg  jurisprudence.  It
             is clear that the ECtHR regards it as a formulation imposing a
             stringent test in respect of that factor, as is illustrated by
             Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (see  para.  [117]:  there  were  no
             insurmountable obstacles to the family settling  in  Suriname,
             even though the applicant  and  her  family  would  experience
             hardship if forced to do so).

             23.   For  clarity,  two  points  should  be  made  about  the
             "insurmountable  obstacles"  criterion.  First,  although   it
             involves a stringent test, it is obviously  intended  in  both
             the case-law and the Rules to be interpreted in a sensible and
             practical rather than a purely literal way: see, e.g., the way
             in which  the  Grand  Chamber  approached  that  criterion  in
             Jeunesse v Netherlands at para. [117]; also the observation by
             this court in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1  WLR  544,  at  [49]
             (although it should be noted that the passage in the  judgment
             of the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC); [2013] Imm AR 453  there
             referred  to,  at  paras.  [53]-[59],  was  making  a   rather
             different point, namely that explained  in  para.  [24]  below
             regarding the significance of the criterion in the context  of
             an Article 8 assessment).

             24.  Secondly, the  "insurmountable  obstacles"  criterion  is
             used in the Rules to define one of the preconditions  set  out
             in section EX.1(b)  which  need  to  be  satisfied  before  an
             applicant can claim to be entitled  to  be  granted  leave  to
             remain under the Rules. In that context, it is  not  simply  a
             factor to be taken into account. However, in  the  context  of
             making a wider Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it is a
             factor to be taken into account, not an  absolute  requirement
             which has to be satisfied in  every  single  case  across  the
             whole range of cases covered by Article 8:  see  paras.  [29]-
             [30] below."

     11. Agyarko was a judicial  review  claim,  not  an  appeal  against  a
         decision by the respondent to refuse leave to remain in the UK. The
         distinction between human rights grounds and public law grounds  in
         judicial review and  immigration  appeals  was  considered  by  the
         President of the Upper Tribunal in R (on the application of  SA)  v
         Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department   (human   rights
         challenges: correct approach) IJR [2015] UKUT 536  (IAC)  where  he
         held:

             "(i) Tribunals should be alert to  distinguish  between  human
             rights grounds and public law grounds.

             (ii) In judicial review challenges  which  include  Article  8
             ECHR  grounds,  the  question  is  not  whether  the  impugned
             decision is vitiated by one or more of the established  public
             law misdemeanours. Rather, the question is whether a breach of
             Article 8 has been demonstrated.

             (iii)    Provided that the above distinction  is  appreciated,
             judicial  adjudication  of  issues  of   proportionality   may
             legitimately be informed by public law principles.

             (iv) The tribunal's approach to proportionality in immigration
             judicial reviews and immigration appeals differs. In  judicial
             review, the role of the Tribunal is limited by  the  principle
             of the discretionary area of judgment, albeit the intensity of
             review  will  invariably  depend  upon   the   context.   This
             inhibition does not apply in statutory appeals: Huang v SSHD.

             (v)  In human rights cases, the focus of the court or tribunal
             is always on the product of the decision making process  under
             scrutiny,  rather  than  the  process  itself,  except   where
             Convention  rights  which  have  a  procedural   content   are
             engaged."

     12. The assessment of this is and must be highly fact specific. As  was
         said in Mukarkar [2006] EWCA Civ 1045

             "38. Since neither Article 8 nor the case-law  lays  down  any
             specific  limits  to  what  may  reasonably   be   regard   as
             "exceptional" in this context, a legal challenge would have to
             be one of perversity. That  is  not  in  terms  asserted,  and
             rightly so in my view. Nor  is  this  conclusion  inconsistent
             with the reasoning of Huang. Indeed there are  some  parallels
             with the case of Mrs Huang herself.  Although  she  could  not
             bring herself within rule 317, this  court  evidently  thought
             that her "substantial family life" in the UK,  and  her  other
             special circumstances, made her case a potential candidate for
             exceptional treatment under Article 8 (see  Huang  paras  6-9,
             64).

             Conclusion

             39.  ...

             40.  Factual judgments of this kind are often  not  easy,  but
             they are not made easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or
             linguistic analysis. It is of the  nature  of  such  judgments
             that different tribunals, without illegality or irrationality,
             may reach different conclusions on the same case (as is indeed
             illustrated  by  Mr  Fountain's  decision  after  the   second
             hearing). The mere fact that one tribunal has reached what may
             seem an unusually generous view of the facts of  a  particular
             case does not mean that it has made an error of law, so as  to
             justify an appeal under  the  old  system,  or  an  order  for
             reconsideration  under  the  new.  Nor  does  it  create   any
             precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of  State's  right  to
             argue for a more restrictive approach on a similar case in the
             future. However, on the facts  of  the  particular  case,  the
             decision of the specialist tribunal should be respected."

     13. The FtT heard oral evidence and made findings of fact:

           . The couple have a genuine and subsisting relationship

           . The couple do not meet E-LTRP3.1 of the Rules

           . The husband would support an application for entry clearance

           . The husband would take holiday (a maximum of two  weeks  at  a
             time) if Ms Khati were removed

           . The husband had no prospects of employment in Nepal

           . The husband had lived his whole life in England

           . The husband was 50 years old

           . The husband would be unlikely to master the Nepalese language,
             at least not for a very considerable period of time

           . Ms Khati would have no difficulty returning to Nepal.

     14. The FtT judge referred himself to Izuazu [2013]  UKUT  45(IAC)  and
         that it is the degree of difficulty that a couple face rather  than
         the surmountability of the obstacle faced  that  is  the  focus  of
         judicial assessment - as a fact not a test.

     15. Mr Duffy relied in particular on [45], [50] and [51] of Agyarko:

             "45. The Upper Tribunal held that it could not  be  said  that
             there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing
             with Mr Ijiekhuamhen in Nigeria, within the meaning of section
             EX.1(b) of Appendix FM. Judge Craig referred to the letter  of
             support from Mr  Ijiekhuamhen  and  observed,  "these  factors
             could not possibly persuade any decision-maker that there were
             insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria"
             ([8]). He went on, at para. [9], as follows:

                  "The fact that  the  applicant's  partner  would  have  to
                  change jobs is not an insurmountable obstacle and  nor  is
                  the suggestion, as advanced, that  there  are  fake  drugs
                  circulating in Nigeria which the partner does not wish the
                  applicant to take. Were there an Article 3 claim  open  to
                  the applicant, no doubt it would be made. As I  understand
                  the argument now advanced, it is  that  the  applicant  is
                  undergoing fertility treatment in this country  which  she
                  wants to continue. That is not an insurmountable  obstacle
                  to the couple going to Nigeria if they choose to do so. It
                  is a matter for them; nobody is making a  British  citizen
                  leave this country but if this couple want to enjoy family
                  life together in this country they are only entitled to do
                  so if they satisfy  the  requirements  within  the  rules,
                  which in this case they do not."

             ...

             50.  First, as regards the appeal in  respect  of  refusal  of
             leave to remain under the Rules, in view of the stringency  of
             the test in section EX.1(b) (see above), I  agree  with  Judge
             Craig's assessment that the factors relied upon by  Mrs  Ikuga
             could not possibly persuade any decision-maker that there were
             insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Nigeria,
             within the meaning of that provision. Therefore, he was  right
             to refuse to grant permission to apply for judicial review  on
             this ground.

             51.  Secondly, as regards the appeal in respect of refusal  of
             leave to remain outside the Rules on the basis of Article 8, I
             again  consider  that  Judge  Craig's  assessment  cannot   be
             faulted. The position is indistinguishable from  that  in  Mrs
             Agyarko's case, discussed above.  Mrs  Ikuga's  case  involves
             precarious  family  life,  with  no  children.  No  compelling
             medical circumstances have been shown to exist. The claim  for
             leave to remain had not been put to the Secretary of State  on
             the basis of Chikwamba, and in any  event  no  materials  were
             submitted which might show that leave to enter would  have  to
             be granted under Appendix FM if  applied  for.  There  was  no
             arguable case that  Mrs  Ikuga  could  show  that  exceptional
             circumstances existed to support the conclusion that Article 8
             required that she should be granted leave to remain."

     16. He submitted that there was, in essence, very little difference  in
         the instant set of facts to those facts in  the  Agyarko  case  and
         that in effect the Court of Appeal were saying that the factors set
         out in the  instant  appeal  could  not  amount  to  insurmountable
         obstacles. He submitted that this was a case where  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge  had  misdirected  himself  in  law  rather  than  a
         perversity challenge; the reasons given by the judge do not  amount
         to insurmountable obstacles.

     17. But in this particular case for this particular  couple  the  judge
         looked at the evidence (documentary and oral) and found  that  this
         family unit would not be able  to  continue  outside  the  UK.  The
         husband would be able to visit for two-week periods only. This  was
         not a case where the husband was merely saying that he just  didn't
         want to go to live  in  Nepal  -  the  couple  had  considered  and
         concluded that it was simply not possible because of his age,  lack
         of language skills and lack of ability to  obtain  employment.  The
         family relationship  would  simply  cease  to  exist  if  she  were
         removed.

     18. Although the SSHD relies upon the ability of the applicant to  make
         an entry clearance application, that does not form a  part  of  the
         consideration under the Rules.  The  Rules  require  a  finding  of
         'insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  continuation  of  family  life
         outside the UK'. A two-week holiday was a matter that was  factored
         in.

     19. As  said  in  Mukarkar  these  decisions  are  difficult  and  fact
         sensitive. There may be a range of views reached by different judge
         but this judge has made  sustainable  findings  on  the  facts  and
         evidence before him. That the  Upper  Tribunal  judge  who  refused
         permission to judicially review a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
         State was upheld in Agyarko does not impact on this  appeal,  which
         is a statutory appeal, and, in the words of the  President  of  the
         Upper Tribunal, the focus is on the product and not the process.

     20. In so far as the judge's decision in the instant appeal that  there
         were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the
         UK, that decision is  neither  perverse  nor  irrational.  Although
         generous it is a decision, which  on  the  facts  and  evidence  as
         presented to the judge, he was entitled to reach.

     21. EX.1.1 and EX.2. are not free standing. In order  to  benefit  from
         the EX provisions, an applicant has to meet R-LTRP which  sets  out
         the criteria to be fulfilled for leave to remain as a  partner.  In
         particular, in so far as Ms Khati is concerned, she would  have  to
         meet R-LTRP.1.1(d)(ii) which requires her to fulfil E-LTRP.1.2-1.12
         and E-LTRP.2.1-2.2.  Her  partner  is  not  required  to  meet  the
         financial criteria of E-LTRP3.1. The respondent  accepted  that  Ms
         Khati met the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2-1.12 and E-LTRP.2.1-2.2.

     22. Accordingly there is no error of law in the finding that  Ms  Khati
         meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

     23. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted do not,  in
         terms, submit that the judge has  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
         appeal on Article 8 terms. It is possible  that  the  reference  to
         being able to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  is  an
         indirect submission under Article 8. But the First-tier Tribunal on
         the  basis  of  the  findings  of  fact  made  has  considered  the
         interference in this couple's family  life.  The  judge  considered
         Part  5A  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  in
         particular s117B. He gave specific consideration to the  suggestion
         that  she  could  travel  to  Delhi  to  make  an  entry  clearance
         application and specifically weighed the  public  interest  in  the
         maintenance of effective  immigration  control  against  the  facts
         found. It would indeed be unusual in any event  for  an  appeal  to
         succeed under the Immigration Rules  and  yet  fail  on  Article  8
         grounds.

     24. There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         judge.

     25. I do not set aside the decision.

     26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge stands.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision


     Date 4th January 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] See for example Nagre [2013] EWHC 720

