
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00453/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 21 January 2014                            |On 29 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 NAVEED ANJUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr Kennedy, Advocate, instructed by Abbott,
Solicitors, Luton
For the Respondent:      Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Burns, dismissing "on the papers" (as requested by  the  appellant)
   his appeal against refusal of a residence card.


2) These are the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

    Ground No 1


    Failure to consider Regulation 6 properly:


    Regulation 6
    "Qualified Person"
    6 -(1) In these Regulations "qualified person" means a person who is an
    EEA national and in the United Kingdom  as -
    (a)    a jobseeker;
    (b)    a worker;
    (c)    a self-employed person;
    (d)    a self-sufficient person; or
    (e)    a student.


    Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions  Chapter  7  Section  73,  EEA
    Nationals & Their Family Members explain self employed as
    "A "self-employed person" is someone who established him/herself in the
    UK in order to pursue activity as a self-employed person."


    In paragraph 16 the Immigration Judge states


    "I did not accept the evidence  tendered  of  the  appellant's  claimed
    employment."


    It is pertinent to mention that Immigration Judge did not consider  the
    grounds as it clearly indicates  that  the  appellant  is  a  qualified
    person  which  include  self-employed  along  with  other   categories.
    (Please see grounds).  In support of self-employment the Appellant  did
    provide Invoices.  Bank statement,  Accountant  letters  which  clearly
    shows that the Appellant is self-employed.


    The Appellant believes that the  Immigration  Judge  has  not  properly
    followed the Regulations.   Should  the  Immigration  Judge  apply  the
    Regulation 6 properly; he would have reached a different conclusion.


    Ground 2


    Failure to consider Papajorgji (EEA Spouse - marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).


    It is further argued that the appellant was not under duty to prove  at
    the  outset  that  the  marriage  of  the  Appellant  was  not  one  of
    convenience and burden of proving  the  allegation  of  genuineness  of
    marriage was on the Respondent who have failed to do so  in  line  with
    the case of "Papajorgji (EEA Spouse - marriage of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC)" wherein it is held that:


      "i)  There is no burden at the outset of an application on a claimant
    to demonstrate that a marriage  to  an  EEA  national  is  not  one  of
    convenience.


       ii) IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31 establishes
           only that there is an  evidential  burden  on  the  claimant  to
           address  evidence  justifying  reasonable  suspicion  that   the
           marriage is entered into for the predominant purpose of securing
           residence rights."


    In the presence of above mentioned evidence appellant has  proved  that
    the marriage between him and his wife is genuine and  burden  of  proof
    that it is not genuine on the  Respondent  and  the  Immigration  Judge
    cannot  simply  conclude  from  the  facts  that  all   the   personnel
    (accountant and solicitors) acting for the appellant are from  not  the
    same vicinity where the appellant resides.


    Should the Immigration Judge apply Papajorgji (EEA Spouse - marriage of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC)  properly;  he  would  have
    reached a different conclusion.


    Ground 3


    Failure to apply properly Tanveer Ahmed v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department (Pakistan) [2002] UKIAT 00439 (19 February 2002)


    Although Tanveer Ahmed v Secretary of State confirms that the  claimant
    to show that a document on which he seeks to rely can be relied on  and
    the decision maker should consider whether a document is one  on  which
    reliance should properly be placed after looking at all the evidence in
    the round, however the Immigration Judge never consider  the  documents
    properly as the Immigration Judge states  at  Paragraph  16:  "Why  the
    appellant's claimed wife should be working  in  a  modest  capacity  in
    Glasgow, but having account prepared for her by an accountant  in  Mile
    End Road London was unclear and unconvincing.   The  appellant  present
    solicitors are a firm called Abbott Solicitors who appear  to  practise
    in Luton."


    It is worth mentioning that there is no bar in statue or case law  that
    all the personnel acting for  the  appellant  should  be  in  the  same
    vicinity where the appellant resides.


    Should the Immigration Judge applied Tanveer Ahmed  case  in  totality,
    she would have reached different conclusion.


    Ground 4


    Failure to apply Law of evidence:


    The burden of proof is on the appellant and standard is the balance  of
    probabilities. Although the same is explained in the  Paragraph  15  of
    the determination however  the  Immigration  Judge  was  not  satisfied
    despite  the  fact  that  appellant  had  submitted  Letter  from   the
    Accountant Mac &  Co,  an  independent  qualified  chartered  certified
    accountant, along with Invoices, letter  from  the  landlord  and  bank
    statements.


    The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities  and  not  beyond
    reasonable doubt as in criminal cases.


    The  Immigration  Judge  was  not  satisfied  from  the  law  firm  and
    accountant's office location however it is not requirement of  the  EEA
    Regulations that the law firm and account must have specific  vicinity.
    It is submitted that the accountant is  qualified  Chartered  Certified
    Accountant and member of recognised body with  registration  number  as
    1176259.  But the same is totally ignored by  the  learned  Immigration
    Judge.  Apart from this the Appellant has provided Accounts, Accountant
    letter, invoices and Bank statement in support of self-employment which
    are totally ignored by the Immigration Judge, hence  there  is  serious
    error of law which need to be rectified.


    Should the Immigration Judge have considered the  case  on  balance  of
    probabilities he would have reached a different conclusion.


    Ground No 5


    There was a failure to take into account Article 8,  in  the  light  of
    recent judgment of Mr Abdullah Munawar and Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department Appeal No IA/26534/2010 promulgated on 20 October 2011.




    The appellant is here in the UK and in addition to his studies; he  has
    formed friendships with fellow students and work  colleagues.   He  has
    been living with his wife.  In short he has developed his  private  and
    family life in the UK.


    The Immigration Judge failed to consider the impact of Article  8  ECHR
    on appellant's case.  The impact of Article 8 ECHR  on  an  appellant's
    private and family life and this was of sufficient  gravity  to  engage
    his right to respect for private life under Article 8 of the ECHR hence
    the consequences of the decision are of  sufficient  gravity  and  this
    decision constitute a disproportionate breach of the appellant's rights
    as protected by Article 8 ECHR.


    Should the Immigration Judge have taken into consideration the  Article
    8 properly the Immigration  Judge  would  not  have  reached  the  same
    decision.


    Conclusion


    Taking all of the above factors into  account  the  appellant  requests
    that the decision to refuse his application amounts to disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for private and family life  and
    also against  the  spirit  of  the  Regulation  6  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

3) Mr Kennedy  submitted  as  follows.   The  business  of  the  appellant's
   sponsor as a self-employed cleaner was not of a complex nature,  did  not
   require registration for VAT, was carried on largely in cash and involved
   limited outlays.  In those circumstances, bank statements  might  not  be
   corroborative.  The sponsor's first tax return would be for the year to 5
   April 2013, due to be filed only on 31 January 2014, so to found  on  the
   absence of such evidence was premature.  The judge had shown  unwarranted
   cynicism towards the evidence.  It was irrelevant that the appellant  and
   the sponsor employed professional advisors who are not local.  They  were
   entitled to employ advisors anywhere in the UK.  Logically,  the  judge's
   position would represent an  unlawful  restraint  of  trade.   The  judge
   failed to take proper account of the appellant's  Article  8  rights  and
   failed to note that the burden of showing  the  marriage  to  be  one  of
   convenience was on the respondent.  Even if the burden had  been  on  the
   appellant to show the marriage was not one of  convenience,  he  arguably
   supplied sufficient evidence to discharge that burden.  The judge  failed
   to take account of documentation  showing  that  the  sponsor  was  self-
   employed and showing the Glasgow residence of both the appellant and  his
   spouse.  If the judge  had  been  right  that  this  was  a  marriage  of
   convenience,  it  would  follow  that  no  weight  would  attach  to  the
   appellant's Article 8 rights, but if the judge's reasoning were otherwise
   flawed, then he had not applied his mind properly to  Article  8  either.
   If so, Ground 5 disclosed  that  a  fresh  decision  was  required.   The
   appellant and sponsor married on 4 May 2012, and  have  cohabited  since.
   The adverse decision represented  a  disproportionate  interference  with
   their Article 8 rights.  The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   should be set aside and the decision remade  in  the  appellant's  favour
   under the Regulations, or alternatively under Article 8.

4) Mrs O'Brien accepted that the respondent's decision had not put in  issue
   whether this is  a  marriage  of  convenience.   She  argued  further  as
   follows.  Although the judge went astray with regard to that  issue,  the
   point was not material.  The appellant chose to  have  his  case  decided
   without an oral hearing on the evidence  he  put  forward  in  the  clear
   knowledge  that  the  adverse  decision  was  based  on   inadequacy   of
   documentary evidence produced, and of the further evidence sought by  the
   respondent. In short, the decision  was  reached  because  there  was  no
   evidence of any meaningful self-employment of  the  appellant's  sponsor.
   The judge's points  on  that,  although  briefly  stated,  were  properly
   reasoned.   The  appellant  did  not  produce  satisfactory  evidence  to
   establish his case.  The judge was entitled to observe that the  invoices
   were all in similar form for even (i.e.  suspiciously  rounded)  sums  of
   money and with bold (undetailed) narratives.  The judge was  entitled  to
   observe that the appellant and sponsor both resided in Glasgow and  there
   was no adequate explanation for their non-attendance  to  give  evidence,
   and to give that some weight.  While there was of course  no  prohibition
   on which professional advisers the appellant and sponsor might  instruct,
   and where they might be located,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  it
   curious that an appellant and a  sponsor  with  a  very  modest  cleaning
   business in Glasgow chose to instruct  a  solicitor  and  accountants  in
   London.  From the lack of evidence, the non-appearance of witnesses,  and
   other curious features, the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
   appellant had not proved his case.  The appellant had simply been refused
   a residence card.  There was nothing to stop him applying  again  if  and
   when he had the adequate evidence to support an  application.   In  those
   circumstances, there was no Article 8 case  to  consider.   Finally,  Mrs
   O'Brien observed that although the adverse decision by the respondent was
   based on inadequate evidence, the appellant appeared to have proceeded in
   the First-tier Tribunal on the  same  evidence  without  adding  anything
   further.

5) I reserved my determination.

6) The Grounds of appeal are not very well expressed.

7) The point raised at Ground 2 goes to burden of proof, not  to  the  judge
   taking an unforeseeable point.  However, the judge went further  than  he
   should have in finding that the marriage was nothing but a device.   That
   issue was not raised by the respondent.  A conclusion ought not  to  have
   been reached without giving parties the opportunity to deal with it.  The
   finding should not be held as adverse  to  any  further  application  the
   appellant may make.

8) Grounds 1, 3 and 4 are not well taken.   The  judge  was  not  under  the
   misapprehension that this application was based on  anything  other  than
   the sponsor's  alleged  self-employment.   He  made  no  error  of  legal
   approach to the documents or to  the  standard  of  proof.   Professional
   advisors may be instructed wherever the appellant and the sponsor choose,
   but the judge was entitled to note that their choice appeared rather odd,
   particularly in context of an appellant  and  sponsor  who  explain  non-
   attendance at the hearing by reasons of cost, while living only  a  short
   bus trip from the hearing centre.

9) On the best possible view for the appellant, the  decision  under  appeal
   could not constitute  a  disproportionate  interference  with  Article  8
   rights.  There was no evidence before the Tribunal by  which  that  might
   have been established, and if the  circumstances  are  as  the  appellant
   claims, he should be in a position to make a further, properly  supported
   application.

10) The judge was entitled to hold that the evidence fell short  of  proving
   the appellant's case, and those reasons which  survive  scrutiny  justify
   that conclusion.  I find that the determination discloses no  error  such
   as to require it to be set aside.

11) After reaching the above conclusion but while  dictating  the  draft  of
   this determination, a faxed letter  was  received  from  the  appellant's
   solicitors, dated 22 January 2014, enclosing a copy of the sponsor's  tax
   return to 5 April 2013  "... for a proper decision in  this  case."   The
   letter is not accompanied by any application for further evidence  to  be
   admitted, either for purposes of showing error of law or for  reaching  a
   fresh decision.  The document is not said to  have  been  copied  to  the
   respondent.  There is no explanation of why it might become admissible at
   such a very late stage, after the hearing in the Upper Tribunal.  In  any
   event, the document  can  have  no  bearing  on  whether  the  First-tier
   Tribunal made an error of law on the evidence before it.

12) After dictating the above, but before  revising  the  draft,  a  further
   faxed letter, dated 27 January 2014, has  arrived  from  the  appellant's
   solicitors.  This encloses a copy letter from the sponsor's  accountants,
   and says it has been copied to the respondent.   This  betrays  the  same
   misconceptions referred to in  the  preceding  paragraph.   The  time  to
   produce the relevant evidence was with the application to the respondent,
   or at latest by the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.   The  items
   now tendered are irrelevant and inadmissible for present  purposes.   The
   appellant's remedy is as mentioned at paragraph 9 above.

13) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.






                               [pic]
                                28 January 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
