
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00276/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 21 October 2014                   |On 22 October 2014                    |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MISS RENDY DUE PAGLOMUTAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Haji, Counsel (instructed by Greenfields
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Page  on  1  September  2014
         against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M Symes  who
         had  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the   Appellant's
         decisions dated 29 November 2013 to refuse to grant the  Respondent
         further leave to remain on Article 8 ECHR private life grounds  and
         to remove her. The determination was promulgated on 8 August 2014.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of the Philippines, born on 5 April
         1986.  She had entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student on  9
         November 2009, which leave had been varied to  Tier  1  (Post-study
         Worker) Migrant and extended until 2 November 2013.  On 29  October
         2013 the Respondent made  her  application  for  further  leave  to
         remain based on her private life.

    3.     Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
         Appellant was granted by Judge Page because he considered  that  it
         was arguable that the judge had failed to follow the  approach  set
         out in Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]
         UKUT  00640  (IAC).   The  judge  had  not  identified   compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Immigration
         Rules.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the Upper Tribunal.

    Submissions - error of law

    5.     Mr Wilding for the Secretary of State relied on the  grounds  of
         onwards appeal and submitted that this was a clear  case  of  legal
         error in relation to the Article 8 ECHR  claim,  as  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal indicated. No  exceptional  circumstances  had
         been identified by the judge.  Insufficient weight had  been  given
         to the public interest and  to  the  Immigration  Rules.    Gulshan
         (above) had not been followed, nor Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558.
         There had been an impermissible "freewheeling analysis".   Patel  v
         SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 showed that there was  no  "general  dispensing
         power".  The determination should be set aside and remade.

    6.     Miss Haji for the Respondent relied on  her  skeleton  argument.
         It has always been accepted that the Respondent could not meet  the
         Immigration Rules.  Counsel submitted that the judge's findings had
         been open to him and were based on the  proportionality  assessment
         which remained a requirement.  There were a number of compassionate
         factors.  There  was  the  Respondent's  contribution  to  society.
         These were factors which the judge had been entitled to factor into
         the balancing exercise.  His findings and  ultimate  decision  were
         open to him.  The determination should stand.

    The error of law finding

    7.     At the conclusion of submissions, the tribunal indicated that it
         found that the judge had fallen into material error  of  law.   The
         judge had singularly failed to identify any  matter  of  sufficient
         significance or weight on the facts  he  found  which  justified  a
         departure from the  Immigration  Rules.   No  sufficient  case  for
         special  treatment  of  the   Respondent   was   identified.    The
         Respondent's case was based wholly on her private life, and not  on
         any familial relationships in the United Kingdom.   The  Respondent
         works in the caring professions but it is matter  for  the  elected
         government what labour and skills requirements may exist from  time
         to time within such professions, executive policy  decisions  which
         will (if the government chooses) be reflected  in  the  Immigration
         Rules.  With  all  respect  to  the  judge,  conditions  which  the
         Respondent might face in her home labour  market  are  not  matters
         which the tribunal is able to take into account, save to the extent
         that Refugee Convention or Article 3 ECHR issues arose  (which  was
         not suggested applied in the present appeal).

    8.     Sections 117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         2002 are intended to ensure that courts  and  tribunals  adequately
         weigh public interest considerations when  Article  8  ECHR  issues
         arise.  These sections do not do  more  than  codify  the  existing
         Article 8 ECHR jurisprudence and create no new rights.   While  the
         judge  was  entitled  to  take  into   account   the   Respondent's
         contribution to society, family circumstances  in  the  Philippines
         and local circle of friendship, those factors were, for the reasons
         identified above, far from sufficient to show that they amounted to
         a compelling circumstance.  There was, for example, no evidence  to
         show that the Respondent did more than maintain the high  standards
         expected from her profession.  The  Respondent  was  in  effect  no
         different from any  other  young  migrant  workers  in  the  United
         Kingdom, enjoying living in a cosmopolitan country and earning  far
         in excess of her home country's level of wages.  The Article 8 ECHR
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  set  aside  for  material
         error of law.  The decision had therefore to be remade.  No further
         submissions were required for such purpose.

    Discussion and fresh decision

    9.     There was no dispute of fact in this  appeal  and  the  original
         findings of fact stand unchanged.  For convenience and clarity  the
         tribunal will refer to the parties by their  original  designations
         in this section of the determination.

    10.    Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) applies  to
         the Appellant's private life in the United  Kingdom,  which  is  of
         modest  duration  and  falls  far  short  of  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, as  was  accepted.   Her
         intention was in due course to return to the  Philippines  to  join
         her family who live there and to whose support she  contributes  or
         provides.  There was no factor  in  the  Appellant's  private  life
         which the tribunal considers was such as to require  the  Secretary
         of State to consider the exercise of  her  discretion  outside  the
         Immigration Rules.  There  was  no  express  consideration  in  the
         reasons for refusal letter of paragraph  353B  of  the  Immigration
         Rules (which deals with representations received  against  removal)
         but that was not raised as a ground of complaint at any  stage  and
         is not in any event a basis for an appeal to the  tribunal.   There
         is no reason why the Appellant cannot  maintain  contact  with  the
         circle of local friends who  provided  letters  of  support.   That
         aspect of her private life will not necessarily be affected by  her
         removal.

    11.    The Appellant's pessimistic views about her prospects of finding
         employment on her return to the Philippines were not  supported  by
         any objective evidence and must be regarded as speculative.  In any
         event, any such difficulties are immaterial given  that  they  were
         not argued to invoke any  of  the  United  Kingdom's  international
         obligations.

    12.    The fact that the Appellant meets factors listed in section 117B
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 does not create
         a right for her to stay in the United  Kingdom.   They  are  merely
         factors which must be taken into consideration,  and  the  tribunal
         has done so.  The Appellant failed to show  any  reason  to  depart
         from the Immigration Rules in her case.

    13.    If that were a mistaken or incomplete view for any  reason,  the
         live  issue  applying  the  Razgar  [2004]   UKHL   27   tests   is
         proportionality.  The legitimate objective is immigration  control,
         which embraces  many  related  matters.   An  important  aspect  of
         immigration control for the purposes of the present appeal is  that
         the decision as to which non citizens are permitted  to  settle  in
         the United Kingdom is not a matter of private  choice,  whether  or
         not there will be any measurable cost or indeed potential  economic
         benefit  from  such  settlement.    There  has  to   be   a   rule,
         democratically determined, which applies to all: see Patel  v  SSHD
         [2013] UKSC 72.

    14.    In the tribunal's view, the proportionality balance  is  against
         the Appellant.  She was unable to meet the Immigration Rules  which
         apply to everyone.  Her removal  to  her  home  country  cannot  be
         regarded as unreasonable nor will it create consequences which  can
         sensibly be considered as unduly harsh for her.

    15.    Thus, however the Appellant's appeal is analysed, it must fail.

    16.    There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
         tribunal sees no need for one.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, sets aside the original decision  and  remakes  the  original
    decision as follows:

    The appeal under Article 8 ECHR is dismissed




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell      21 October 2014






    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    The appeal was dismissed and so there can be no fee award




    Signed Dated


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell      21 October 2014


