
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 00929 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 June 2013                               |On 27 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                          UCHENNA GIFT CHIOMA ODEDO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Adams, Counsel instructed by Verdant Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  decision  of  the
    respondent refusing her leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier
    5 temporary worker.

 2. This is a case that illustrates the deliberately  inflexible  nature  of
    the  Immigration  Rules.   The  application  was  refused  because   the
    appellant had not shown in the required way that she  had  the  required
    funds.  In particular she had not shown that she had the required  funds
    for the required period of time in an account in her name.

 3. The appellant produced a great deal of evidence to show that  money  was
    available to her. This showed that there were members of her family with
    access to the funds of a family business or similar sources  that  could
    have provided for her financially. I make no finding  on  this  evidence
    because that is not my function. The fact that the appellant might  have
    been  supported  financially  is  irrelevant  because  that  is  not   a
    requirement of the Rules.

 4. The Rules are deliberately drawn in a way that ensures that it  is  easy
    to make a decision rather  than  requiring  a  decision  maker  to  look
    through what may be a large volume of material from a culture  which  is
    not always necessarily understood  and  then  having  to  make  a  value
    judgment about the reliability of the evidence presented.

 5. The Rules require the appellant  to  produce  her  evidence  in  a  very
    specific, well understood way. This appellant did not comply with  these
    requirements and her application was refused.

 6. Mr Adams, who has done his very best for her with very limited material,
    had to concede that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules.

 7. The appellant appealed. There is no  indication  that  she  took  proper
    professional advice at an early stage although there  was  a  suggestion
    that she was advised by someone on whom she thought that she could rely.
    The appeal was decided without a hearing and although there was much  in
    the material before the First-tier Tribunal alleging that the  appellant
    could have found financial support, there was no attempt  to  show  that
    she met the requirements of the Rules, which she did not.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had no  alternative  but  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the Rules.

 9. The appellant had not raised a ground of appeal relying on human rights.
     Nevertheless the First-tier Tribunal Judge was alert to the possibility
    that the decision would  lead  to  an  unlawful  interference  with  her
    private and family life and asked himself if it had been shown that  the
    decision was  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  to  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  On the very skimpy material before
    him he concluded that it was not and I do not see how he could have done
    anything else on the evidence produced.

10. The grounds of appeal allege, in effect,  that  removing  the  appellant
    would waste the considerable resources, both  financial  and  emotional,
    that had been invested in her training as a  pharmacist  in  the  United
    Kingdom. She says that she needs  to  complete  a  period  of  post-work
    training and an examination which she will sit no later than November of
    this year in order to be a properly qualified pharmacist.    It  may  be
    that these concerns influenced the Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    when he gave permission to appeal but there is  nothing  in  the  papers
    before the First-tier Tribunal when the decision  was  made  that  would
    support a finding that removal would interfere  disproportionately  with
    the appellant's human rights.

11. It follows that I am entirely satisfied on the material there  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made the only decision that could  be  made  in  the
    circumstances.  The decision was right in law.

12. I am aware that that appellant  now  says  this  could  have  disastrous
    consequences for her.  If that is so then that is very sad but  it  does
    not affect the legality of a procedure that requires  people  to  comply
    with the rules in a very specific way.  Basically she did not do as  she
    was told to do and is complaining of the consequences.

13. The respondent has accepted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  err
    in part. He did not show that he had appreciated that  he  had  got  two
    decisions before him: a decision to refuse leave under the Rules  and  a
    decision to remove the  appellant.  It  is  now  settled  law  that  the
    decision to remove the appellant was unlawful.  The appeal  against  the
    decision to remove the appellant is allowed to the extent that the issue
    of the appellant's removal remains to be decided.  This  means  that  if
    the Secretary of State wishes to remove the appellant a further decision
    has to be made.

14. There is  nothing  in  this  decision  that  in  any  way  prevents  the
    appellant applying for further leave to remain until November, which  is
    what she says she needs, and that is something about which she can  take
    advice. Nevertheless, it has been made perfectly clear to her today that
    there is no guarantee that such an application would  be  successful.  I
    merely make the observation that there is nothing to stop her making it.

15. I have sat back and reflected a little on this because I  do  appreciate
    that if the appellant  really  will  lose  her  chance  of  obtaining  a
    professional qualification by reason of this  decision  then,  from  her
    perspective, this is a very vexing decision which,  from  her  point  of
    view, will seem out of all proportion  to  the  evil  of  not  complying
    strictly with the Rules. Her vexation is no doubt increased because,  on
    her case, which, I stress, has not been tested, she had more than enough
    money available to meet her needs.  That is precisely the kind of  point
    the Rules are intended to avoid. The Rules are about  strict  procedures
    and they were not met.

16. There was  nothing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  would  have
    permitted him to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds responsibly. This
    is an appeal that has to be dismissed except to the limited extent  that
    I have I indicated.

17. Accordingly I find there is no material error of law in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision  and  I  dismiss  the  appeal  save  to  the  extent
    indicated.

Decision

The appeal against the decision to remove the appellant is  allowed  to  the
    extent that the respondent must make a fresh decision if she  wants  to
    remove the appellant.

Otherwise the appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 26 June 2013                   |









