
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00094/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 February 2016                      |On 8 March 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                               Dr YIXIAO ZHENG
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss K McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by Newland
Chase
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS





 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his challenge to the respondent's decision  to
    refuse to grant him indefinite leave to remain pursuant  to  paragraphs
    276A, 276B, 276D and 276ADE.  Both  the  appellant  and  his  wife  are
    citizens of the People's Republic of China.

Background

 2. The appellant and his wife both came to the United Kingdom to study and
    have been here for longer than 10 years.  The appellant entered  on  27
    September 2004 and has studied here for a PhD.  He is now  employed  as
    an academic researcher at the London School of Economics and  Political
    Science (LSE). Both the appellant  and  his  wife  have  spent  lengthy
    periods outside the United Kingdom during their studies here, in excess
    of 540 days.

 3. On 19 November  2013,  the  respondent  granted  the  appellant's  wife
    indefinite leave to remain,  although  her  absences  from  the  United
    Kingdom were longer than those of the appellant.  The appellant's  wife
    is still studying for a  PhD  in  health  governance,  with  particular
    reference to China as a country case study.  She  is  now  an  academic
    specialising in global  health  governance.   The  respondent  had  and
    exercised discretion in the wife's favour.

 4. On 25 July 2014, the appellant also applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain, supplying details of 552 days of absence during the relevant 10-
    year period, of which 212 days were identified in his  covering  letter
    as being for the purposes of fieldwork for his  academic  studies  with
    the remaining days being vacation and visits to family in China.

10-year long residence route

 5. The requirements for leave to remain on long residence grounds  are  in
    rule 276B:
         "276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the United
         Kingdom are that:
             (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful
             residence in the United Kingdom.
             (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons
             why it would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long residence ..."

 6. The definition of continuous residence,  so  far  as  relevant,  is  in
    paragraph 276A:

         "276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE(1).

         (a) "continuous residence" means residence in  the  United  Kingdom
         for an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period  shall  not
         be considered to have been broken where an applicant is absent from
         the United Kingdom for a period of 6 months  or  less  at  any  one
         time, provided that the applicant in question has existing  limited
         leave to enter or remain upon their departure and return, but shall
         be considered to have been broken if the applicant:  ...
             (v) has spent a total of more than 18 months absent  from  the
             United Kingdom during the period in question.

         *(b)  "lawful  residence"  means  residence  which  is   continuous
         residence pursuant to:
             (i) existing leave to enter or remain; ...

         (c) 'lived continuously' and 'living continuously' mean 'continuous
         residence', except that paragraph 276A(a)(iv) shall not apply.

         276C. Indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence in
         the United Kingdom may be granted provided that  the  Secretary  of
         State is satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph  276B
         is met.

         276D. Indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long residence in
         the United Kingdom is to be refused if the Secretary  of  State  is
         not satisfied that each of the requirements of  paragraph  276B  is
         met."

 7. The granting of indefinite leave to remain on the 10-year route remains
    discretionary. The respondent has issued Policy Guidance explaining how
    she proposes to exercise that discretion.

The respondent's Policy Guidance

 8. The respondent's caseworkers are provided with guidance as  to  how  to
    calculate the continuous period in the United Kingdom and when to apply
    discretions, in  a  document  headed  'Guidance  -  ILR  -  Calculating
    continuous period in the UK'.  The version in force when  the  decision
    was made read as follows:

         "Absences of more than 180 days in each consecutive 12-month period
         before the date of application (in all categories)  will  mean  the
         continuous period has been broken.  However you  may  consider  the
         grant of indefinite leave to remain (ILR) outside the Rules if  the
         applicant provides evidence to show the excessive absence  was  due
         to serious or compelling reasons.

         The applicant must provide evidence in the form of a  letter  which
         sets out the full details of the compelling reason for the  absence
         and supporting documents.

         Absences  of  more  than  180  days  in  any  12-month  period  for
         employment  or  economic  activity  reasons  are   not   considered
         exceptional.   You can only apply  discretion  where  it  has  been
         authorised at senior executive officer level."

Refusal letter

 9. The respondent in her refusal letter relied on  paragraph  276A(v)  and
    dealt with the appellant's 552 days' absences as follows:

         "Your representative has put forward your argument that you came to
         the United Kingdom as a foreign student to study and  that  because
         students have extensive holidays during the  academic  year  it  is
         expected that you should have longer absences  than  a  person  who
         came here to work so that you could travel home to China  to  visit
         your family during your vacation time and  your  ...  absences  are
         justified."

         However the  Immigration  Rules  are  clear  for  applications  for
         indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  10  years  long
         residency regardless of the reasons for you being here and you have
         exceeded the allowed 540 days.  You are considered to  have  broken
         your continuous residence at this point.   As  such  you  have  not
         satisfied the requirement to have  completed  at  least  10  years'
         continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom and  cannot  meet
         the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  with  reference  to
         paragraph 276B(i)(a)."

    The respondent noted that the appellant had  a  partner,  in  fact  his
    wife, in the United Kingdom and took that into account but did not take
    account of the fact that the wife was settled  at  the  material  time.
    That part of the letter is factually erroneous.

10. In concluding the respondent dealt with exceptional circumstances under
    Article 8 ECHR:

         "It has also been considered whether your  application  raises  any
         exceptional circumstances  which,  consistent  with  the  right  to
         respect for private and family life contained in Article 8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights, might warrant a grant of leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom outside  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration  Rules.  You  have  not  raised  any  such  exceptional
         circumstances so it has been decided that your application does not
         fall for a grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.  Regard  has
         been given to all the representations you have submitted.   However
         for the reasons given above, it is  considered  that  your  removal
         from the United Kingdom is appropriate."

    The respondent's decision carried an in-country right of appeal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. The  respondent  did  not  assist  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  by
    arranging for representation at the hearing. Perhaps for  that  reason,
    the judge was unaware  of  the  respondent's  policy  guidance  and  he
    erroneously directed himself that there was no such discretion at [28]:

         "28. ...In the present case  however  there  was  no  discretionary
         power vested in the decision maker and so there is simply no  basis
         to interfere with that aspect of the decision."

    On the basis of the Guidance the respondent's  caseworkers  do  have  a
    discretion and the judge's finding to the contrary is wrong.

12. There is also a factual error in the decision,  as  there  was  in  the
    refusal letter, regarding whether the wife was settled at the  date  of
    the respondent's  decision.  Again,  it  seems  unlikely  that  if  the
    respondent had been represented, she would have sought  to  argue  that
    indefinite leave to remain granted by her to the wife was a  matter  of
    which she had no knowledge when she made a decision  on  the  husband's
    application.

Grounds of appeal

13. At ground 1, the appellant contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to consider the decision maker's discretion to grant  indefinite
    leave to remain despite absence of more than 540 days.

14. At ground 2, the appellant stated that the First-tier Tribunal had made
    an error of fact in stating that the appellant's wife was  not  settled
    in the United Kingdom.

15. At ground 3, the appellant asserted that  counting  back  from  4  July
    2015, just a few days after the refusal letter, his absences drop below
    540 days and on Article 8 grounds, the Upper Tribunal  could  make  the
    initial decision and find him to be entitled  to  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

16. At ground 4, the appellant relies generally on Article 8, on his wife's
    settled status and her ongoing PhD studies, which mean that she  cannot
    yet return to China with him.  The wife's life is  now  in  the  United
    Kingdom and she intends to make  her  career  here.   The  couple  have
    bought a house in the United Kingdom and the appellant contends that he
    has substantial private life here.  He  argues  that  the  interference
    with his private and family life is disproportionate  and  contrary  to
    the United Kingdom's best economic interests as  the  failure  to  take
    account of study visits will deter students from overseas from studying
    in the United Kingdom at all.

Permission to appeal

17. Permission to appeal was granted on the business that it  was  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  finding  that  the  respondent
    lacked discretion to take the reasons advanced for  the  absences  into
    account and grant him indefinite leave to remain. In  particular,  when
    granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic noted that many of  the
    absences were attributable to academic work linked to his employment at
    the London School of Economics, and that, in addition, the judge  erred
    in finding that the wife's settled status was not before the respondent
    when the application was assessed.

Rule 24 Reply

18.  In her Rule 24 reply the Secretary of State says this:

         "3.  ...In respect of ground 1 the  Secretary  of  State  considers
             that the judge did not err in his consideration of  the  issue
             of discretion.  The Guidance relied on in the ground  was  not
             placed before the judge.  Furthermore, if the judge did err in
             this respect it is not material.  As the  Guidance  quoted  in
             paragraph 22 of the grounds points out,  the  appellant  would
             need to provide a compelling reason for  exceeding  the  limit
             and absences for employment are not considered exceptional.

         4.   Ground 2 does not make it clear  what  documents  it  is  said
             related to appellant's wife's status were  included  with  the
             application.  I do not have access to the file but it  is  not
             clear from the notes on our system that this was  included  as
             claimed.  Furthermore, again this is not material as the judge
             considered the position of the appellant with respect  to  his
             wife's status himself and found against the appellant.

         5.   The Secretary of State considers that ground 3 has  no  merit.
             The judge carefully considered the arguments put forward  with
             respect to the rolling 10-year point but  correctly  concluded
             that it was his role to review the decision of  the  Secretary
             of State and it was not in question that at the  time  of  the
             decision the appellant had exceeded that absence."

Upper Tribunal hearing

19. For the appellant, Ms McCarthy made  the  arguments  already  set  out.
    There is no need to rehearse them here.

20. For  the  respondent,  Ms  Savage  contended  that  the  need  for  the
    appellant, as an academic, to spend time abroad on his study (212 days)
    was not an exceptional circumstance and that no serious and  compelling
    reason had been advanced for the  caseworker  to  exercise  discretion.
    The decision was adequate, she argued, and any  want  of  reasoning  or
    error therein was immaterial, on the facts of this application.

Discussion

21. Both in the refusal letter and in her Reply, the  respondent  has  used
    standard text which does  not  engage  properly  with  the  appellant's
    reasons  for  absence,  clearly  set  out  in  his  application.    The
    appellant's case in relation to his absences  was  not  primarily  that
    'because students have extensive holidays during the academic  year  it
    is expected that you should have longer absences than a person who came
    here to work so that you could travel  home  to  China  to  visit  your
    family during your vacation time': 40% of his absences were related  to
    the doctoral studies for which leave to  enter  had  been  given.   The
    appellant set out  details  of  212  days  of  absence  which  were  so
    connected:  he undertook a  think  tank  internship  in  Shanghai,  PhD
    research fieldwork in  Canberra,  Sydney,  Beijing  and  Shanghai,  and
    attended two conferences, an academic conference  in  Shanghai  and  an
    international studies conference in Montreal, Canada.

22. The point made in the respondent's Reply at [5] is correct:   the  540-
    day absence limit in a 10-year period is to be assessed at the date  of
    decision. In this  case,  that  was  unfortunate,  as  the  appellant's
    absences then exceeded the limit by 12 days, so that had  the  decision
    been made two weeks later, the excess would have been reduced below the
    limit and there would have been no difficulty.

23. The failure to consider that the wife is settled is a relevant  Article
    8 point which should have been given weight.

24. Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal is made out.  It is  clear  that  the
    respondent's  caseworker  did  have  discretion,  which  has  not  been
    properly exercised in this appeal. I am not satisfied on the  basis  of
    the letter of refusal or the arguments before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    or the Rule 24 that the Secretary of State has  considered  the  actual
    reasons for the appellant's absence from the United Kingdom properly or
    at all.

25. Ground 2 also has merit: the respondent, who granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain to the wife in November 2013, cannot be heard to say that she
    was unaware of her  own  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain  when
    considering the appellant's application a year later.

26. Ground 3 is without merit.  The number of days' absence is counted,  at
    the latest, from the date of decision, not from a future date at  which
    it would be lower.

27. Ground 4 (the Article 8 ECHR arguments) is not reached.  The respondent
    in reconsidering this application and giving a lawful decision  thereon
    will take account of the appellant's section 120 response and  consider
    Article 8, having regard to all relevant factors,  including  the  fact
    that the appellant's wife is settled here.

28. Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

I allow the appellant's appeal to the extent that  his  application  remains
before the respondent for a lawful decision under the Immigration Rules.   I
make no  decision  on  Article  8  ECHR  as  that  will  form  part  of  the
respondent's consideration of the application when she makes her decision.

Signed:       Judith A J  C  Gleeson                         Date:  1  March
2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
