

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
                                                               IA/00211/2015
                                                               IA/00212/2015
                                                               IA/00213/2015
                                                               IA/00214/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Manchester  Piccadilly                                Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 18th March 2016                                               On  the
6th April 2016

                                   Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:
                                  MRS D. B
                                   MR P.B.
                                 MASTER K.B
                                MASTER K.D.B
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Miss Smith (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr Harris (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge M. Davies promulgated on 10th June 2015,  in  which  he
      dismissed all four Appellants' appeals  on  Article  8  grounds,  both
      under the Immigration Rules and outside of the Immigration Rules.


   2. Within the grounds of appeal it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge erred in respect of his approach to Article 8. Within ground one
      it is argued that the maintenance of an effective immigration  control
      is only relevant to  the  six  public  interest  considerations  under
      section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration Act 2002 and is not  part
      of the legitimate aim for the purpose of Article 8 (2) of the ECHR. It
      is argued that the only legitimate aim was the economic well-being  of
      the United Kingdom and that the Judge had failed to  take  account  of
      the undisputed documentary evidence of the First and Second Appellants
      in relation to the financial means.



   3. Within ground two it is argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      misdirected himself in his assessment of  the  public  interest  under
      section 117 B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and
      that the Third Appellant is a "Qualifying Child" for the  purposes  of
      Section 117D (1) as he was under the age of 18 and had lived in the UK
      for a continuous period of over 7 years and  it  is  argued  that  the
      Judge failed to give adequate reasons for his finding in  relation  to
      the public interest assessment under section 117B.


   4. Within the third ground of appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  evidence
      submitted before the Tribunal referred to  the  lack  of  medicine  in
      relation to treatment of conjunctivitis, rather than lack of treatment
      and that the Judge failed to give regard to the lack  of  medicine  of
      conjunctivitis in Mauritius.



   5. In ground four it is argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
      failed to give adequate or  sufficient  reasons  for  his  finding  in
      respect of section 55 other than at [40] stating  that  "there  is  no
      substance in the suggestion on the basis of section 55 that  it  would
      not be in the best interests of the children to  return  to  Mauritius
      with their parents" and that the Judge simply noted that he  read  and
      consider the submissions of the Appellants' solicitors,  but  had  not
      fully considered the same.



   6. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Keane on the 10th  September  2015,  on  the  grounds  the  Judge  had
      arguably erred in law by not mentioning  within  his  findings  the  9
      years that the Third Appellant had resided in the UK, longer than  the
      7 years envisaged by section 117D (1) (b) of the Immigration Act  2004
      and had thereby arguably not accorded due weight to a  most  important
      consideration.

   7. In her oral submissions before the Upper Tribunal, Miss  Smith  argued
      that the Respondent had conceded that there was a genuine relationship
      between the First Appellant and the Third  Appellant,  and  the  Third
      Appellant had been in the UK continuously for over 7  years,  and  had
      been in the UK in fact for 9 years as at  the  date  of  the  previous
      hearing.  He had been in the UK for a significant period of  his  life
      and it was argued had developed significant ties here. She argued that
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not properly considered the level of
      his integration into the UK and had failed  to  take  account  of  the
      statement/letter provided  by  the  Third  Appellant  himself,  school
      reports, letters from his school, and evidence of his social  activity
      such as attendance at scouts.

   8. Miss Smith submitted that the consideration is as to whether  not  the
      private lives of the Appellants were  formed  at  a  time  when  their
      immigration status was precarious was not a relevant consideration for
      the purpose of  a  consideration  as  to  whether  not  they  met  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules, and only fell to be taken  into
      account in respect of a freestanding Article 8 assessment. She  argued
      the Judge had  failed  to  take  account  of  the  evidence  from  the
      Appellant's teachers as to his friendships and  integration  into  the
      UK. She argued that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge had  simply  made  a
      bald and sweeping assertion that he would be able  to  pick  up  other
      languages without difficulty and that inadequate findings  were  given
      in this regard.

   9. Although there was no formal Rule 24 response, I did  give  Mr  Harris
      permission to raise arguments on behalf of the Secretary of  State  in
      response to the appeal,  given  the  wording  of  Rule  24  the  Upper
      Tribunal Procedure Rules simply indicates that the Respondent may file
      a Rule 24 reply, and does not actually make it  a  formal  requirement
      and does not explicitly exclude oral submissions if there is  no  Rule
      24 reply. In any event, I considered that it was in the  interests  of
      justice that the Respondent should be allowed to make oral submissions
      in reply to the grounds of appeal, but that time I ensured  was  given
      to Miss Smith given to respond thereto, in order  to  ensure  fairness
      and to ensure that the interests of justice were met.



  10. Mr Harris sought to argue that the Appellants however could not have a
      legitimate expectation to remain in the United  Kingdom.  However,  he
      conceded quite properly that he could not say that the Judge had taken
      account of all relevant evidence in his consideration of  the  private
      life of the Third Appellant in that the Judge had  not  mentioned  the
      letter from the Third Appellant himself, nor had he specifically dealt
      with the evidence in his school in  respect  of  his  friendships  and
      social activities.  He conceded that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davies
      had not included his usual standard paragraph indicating that  he  had
      taken all of the evidence into account.  He also considered  that  the
      Appellant's argument in respect of Section 55 had weight.

      My findings on error of law and materiality

  11.  The   Upper   Tribunal   in   the   case   of   Bossade   (ss.117A-D-
      interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC) made it clear that
      ordinarily a Court or Tribunal will, as a  first  stage,  consider  an
      Appellant's Article 8 claim by reference to the Immigration Rules that
      set out substantive conditions, without any direct reference  to  Part
      5A considerations under the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002 and that such considerations have no direct application to  Rules
      of this kind. Part 5A considerations only have direct application, the
      Upper Tribunal found, at the second stage of the Article  8  analysis.
      The Upper Tribunal made it clear that Part 5A had not altered the need
      for a two-stage approach to Article 8 claims and  that  this  was  not
      according priority to the  Rules  over  the  primary  legislation  but
      rather of recognising their different functions. Indeed, at  paragraph
      44, the Upper Tribunal specifically found that:


   "44. It is important to the foregoing analysis to emphasise the degree of
   overlapping subject matter between Part 5A and certain provisions of  the
   Rules. However, in light  of  what  we  have  just  said  about  Part  5A
   containing overarching statement of principle, it is  pertinent  to  note
   that some provisions of Part 5A find no precise equivalent in the  Rules.
   For example the rules do not contain a provision  stating  in  terms,  as
   does section 117(4)(a) that little weight is to be  given  to  a  private
   life that is established by a person at a time when the person is in  the
   UK unlawfully. That  only  goes  to  reinforce  the  two  legal  regimes,
   although complimentary, are different in kind, because the  private  life
   provisions of the Immigration Rules represent the  Secretary  of  State's
   weighting, without more, as to what conditions have to be  met  in  order
   for leave to remain to be granted on private life grounds."

  12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies at [37] found that any  private  life
      the Appellants had established in the UK been established  when  their
      immigration status was precarious.  However, he made this finding when
      considering the appeal under the Immigration Rules, and at the part of
      his decision where he was considering paragraph 276 ADE of the  rules.
      This was not a relevant factor for the  Judge  to  consider  initially
      when considering the Appellants' appeal's under paragraph 276  ADE  of
      the Immigration Rules. Although this was a relevant consideration  for
      his second stage assessment under the five stage test set  out  within
      the House of Lords case of Razgar v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department  [2004]  UKHL  27,  it  was  not  a  relevant  factor  when
      considering the appeals under paragraph 276 ADE.


  13. Simply having considered that any private life  was  established  when
      their immigration status was precarious, has led  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Davies into error, as was conceded by Mr Harris  on  behalf  the
      Respondent, in not considering within his determination  the  evidence
      from the Third  Appellant  himself  regarding  his  schooling,  social
      activities, friendships and integration into the UK, or  the  evidence
      from the Appellant's school regarding his  friendships  and  level  of
      integration into  the  UK.   There  is  simply  reference  within  the
      decision to the appellant doing well at school.  There  has  therefore
      been a failure to take account of material evidence in this regard  in
      respect of the Third Appellant's private life.



  14. The Judge's failure to take account of this evidence was  particularly
      important given that as was set out by the Upper Tribunal in  case  of
      Azimi Moayed and others (decisions affecting children-onward  appeals)
      (2015) UKUT 197, within the headnote at 1 (iii) "Lengthy residence  in
      a country other than the state of origin can lead  to  development  of
      social cultural and educational ties that it would be inappropriate to
      disrupt, in the absence of compelling reason  to  the  contrary.  What
      amounts to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
      policies have identified seven years as a relevant period."  The Upper
      Tribunal went on to note that 7 years from the age of 4 is more likely
      to be significant than the first 7 years of life.



  15. In this regard First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies also  failed  to  have
      regard in making his findings in respect of paragraph 276 ADE that the
      Third Appellant had arrived in the UK when aged 3 years  old,  and  by
      the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  been
      in the UK continuously from 9 years had thereby failed to  assess  the
      degree of  social,  cultural  and  educational  ties  that  the  Third
      Appellant had, in that light, when  considering  whether  not  it  was
      reasonable for him to return with his parents to Mauritius.  The Judge
      simply considered that the Third Appellant's private  life  should  be
      given little weight given that it was formed at a time when he was  in
      the UK and his  status  was  said  to  be  precarious.   Although  the
      decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies predated the reporting of
      the decisions in Bossade and Azimi-Moayed, his failure to take account
      of the propositions of law set out within those cases does amount to a
      material error, as the two cases simply set out how  section  117  and
      issues of private life for the  purposes  of  Article  8  respectively
      should be considered.  They did not seek to change the law, but simply
      clarified the existing law.  A failure to conform to these  principles
      therefore does amount to a material error of law on the part of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Davies.



  16. I do further find that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  failed  to
      give adequate reasons at [40]  for  his  finding  that  "there  is  no
      substance in the suggestion on the basis of section 55  that  it  will
      not be in the children's best interest to  return  to  Mauritius  with
      their parents" and that simply stating at paragraph [41] that  he  had
      considered the submissions made by the Appellants' solicitors  in  the
      letter 15th August 2015 does not indicate that he has  considered  the
      best interests of the children in light of the  fact  that  the  Third
      appellant had been in the UK for 9 years and in light of the  evidence
      produced regarding his integration into the UK,  his  friendships  and
      social activities.  The finding of the Judge in this regard  does  not
      explain to the losing party why they  have  lost  and  does  not  show
      consideration of all of the relevant evidence in this regard.



  17.  I therefore do find that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Davies does contain material errors of law, such that the decision  is
      set aside and the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      be heard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge M Davies.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M. Davies  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside;
The matter is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  de
novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge M. Davies.
Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed

R McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                  Dated
18th March 2016
