
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/00343/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th January 2016                 |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Muhammad Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Javed of Reiss Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Boyd  made
    following a hearing at North Shields on 13th April 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17th September 1990.  He
    applied for a residence card as a confirmation of a right to reside  in
    the UK but was refused on 10th December 2014 on the  grounds  that  the
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that  he  was  either  related  as
    claimed to the EEA national sponsor, or that he was dependent  upon  or
    residing with the sponsor prior to entering the UK and  that  since  he
    entered the UK he had continued to be so dependent.

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal in the appellant's  absence.   Later  in
    the day he was given a copy of a fax  seeking  an  adjournment  of  the
    proceedings on the basis that the EEA sponsor was  ill  and  could  not
    attend.  The judge said that there was no explanation for the  lack  of
    attendance of the appellant.  There was an affidavit from  the  sponsor
    in the documentation but in any event it was clear  from  the  evidence
    that the appellant was not in a position to establish dependency  prior
    to him entering the UK.

 4. He considered all of the evidence and dismissed the appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant was unrepresented and was unable to decide about what to  do.
    The sponsor had been taken ill and an emergency  prescription  from  an
    out of hours' doctor was sent to the Tribunal.  He had not received the
    respondent's bundle but he did have former evidence such as  remittance
    receipts and witness statements which he could  have  provided  at  the
    hearing in order to prove prior dependency.  Had the  appellant  turned
    up without the sponsor it would have been a wasted journey.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Phillips on the grounds  that
    it was arguably unfair to proceed with the appeal since there had  been
    an administrative error preventing the  judge  seeing  the  adjournment
    application prior to the hearing.

Submissions

 7. Ms Javed told me that the appellant had contacted their emergency  line
    on the Sunday before the hearing and discussed with them the option  of
    applying for an adjournment because his sister-in-law was  unwell.   He
    could have provided remittances since 2010 when his brother started the
    relationship with  her.   There  had  been  a  procedural  irregularity
    because the appellant had not had sight of the respondent's bundle  and
    wanted to have the opportunity to deny what had been said on his behalf
    in the past.

 8. Mrs Petterson submitted that there had not been  any  irregularity  but
    even if there had been it was immaterial because  the  appellant  could
    not establish dependency on his brother's wife prior to his arrival  in
    the UK.  The couple only married in 2011  some  six  months  after  the
    appellant's arrival here and it was only at that stage that she  became
    a part of his extended family.

Findings and Conclusions

 9. There is no error of law in this decision.

10. The judge was perfectly entitled to proceed in the appellant's absence.
     There was no explanation for his lack of attendance.  Although he says
    in the grounds that he was unable to decide what to do because  he  was
    unrepresented, he did in fact seek advice on the day before the hearing
    from his present representatives who were in a position to  advise  him
    about whether he should attend or not.  Furthermore a prescription from
    an out of hours' doctor is not in itself evidence that the witness  was
    unable to attend court.

11. Moreover, even if she had attended, the appellant could not  have  been
    in a position to establish dependency upon her prior to entering the UK
    because she only became a family member some six months afterwards.

12. It is clear that, the judge was entitled to conclude that he could  not
    have succeeded even if she had been a family  member.  The  grounds  of
    appeal state in terms that the appellant  had  been  dependent  on  his
    brother and his wife since 28th July  2011.   The  affidavit  from  his
    father makes no reference at all  to  any  dependency  before  he  left
    Pakistan.  Finally the covering letter from  the  appellant's  original
    representatives  suggest  that  the  appellant  has  been   financially
    dependent on his brother for a long time but only  makes  reference  to
    dependency on his brother and the EEA  national  at  the  time  of  the
    application.

13. Finally, as Mrs Pettersen pointed out, even dependency on  the  brother
    is in some doubt since the appellant himself  made  an  application  in
    January 2013 after his leave to remain as a student had expired  for  a
    residence card as the spouse of a Slovakian national which was  refused
    and he was later divorced.

14. Accordingly there is no error of law  in  this  determination,  firstly
    because it was entirely reasonable for the  judge  to  proceed  in  the
    appellant's absence and second because it  was  quite  clear  from  the
    documentation before him that this was not an appeal which  could  have
    ever succeeded.

15. The judge did not err in law.  His  decision  stands.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

