
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00643/2016
                                                               IA/00645/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 March 2018                              |On 12 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                       Mr Lianyi dou (First Appellant)
                        Ms hua wei (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr L. Rooney, Waltham Forest Citizens Advice
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are nationals of China and husband and wife, born  on  9
    August 1962 and 14 January  1963  respectively.   The  First  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom on 28 August 2001 as a student  and  further
    extended his leave  until  31  March  2016.   His  application  for  an
    extension was then refused.  He appealed against that decision and  his
    appeal was dismissed on 25 June 2006.  He then sought to remain on  the
    basis of his human rights, based on the fact that on 9 December 2003 he
    suffered a road traffic accident when he came off his  motorbike  as  a
    result of being hit by an object thrown  deliberately  at  him.   As  a
    consequence he was in intensive care at University College Hospital for
    a considerable period due to head injuries and underwent  a  number  of
    surgical operations including to his eyes.  His wife, due to  the  fact
    he was in a coma for five months, sought to join him  and  was  granted
    admission to the UK on 23 January 2004 where she sought  to  remain  as
    his dependant.

 2. The  First  Appellant's  human  rights  application  was  refused.   He
    appealed and his appeal came before Immigration Judge  Rintoul  (as  he
    then was) on 10 December 2007 along  with  that  of  his  wife.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 15 December 2007, Judge Rintoul  dismissed  the
    appeals.  However, the First Appellant and his wife remained in the  UK
    without leave and most recently applied for leave on 29 December  2014.
    This application was refused in a decision dated 18 January 2016,  with
    the right of appeal.

 3. The Appellants appealed and their appeal came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Mr R Hussain for hearing on 26 April 2017.  In a Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 20 June 2017 the judge dismissed the  appeal
    on the  basis  that  removal  of  the  Appellants  to  China  would  be
    proportionate.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought in time to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds in support of the application asserted that the judge erred:

      a) in failing to give adequate reasons for his findings and in failing
         in particular to consider fully the new medical evidence  presented
         at the appeal which constituted a fairly large bundle  of  evidence
         covering the period 3  December  2008  onwards,  including  medical
         reports  from  the  First  Appellant's   consultant   psychiatrist,
         clinical neuropsychologist and GP amongst others;

      b) in failing to assess Article  3  in  light  of  the  Grand  Chamber
         judgment in the case of Paposhvili v  Belgium,  application  number
         41738/2010;

      c) in concluding at  [13]  that  no  satisfactory  evidence  had  been
         submitted to suggest that  the  health  facilities  for  the  First
         Appellant's  treatment  in  China   are   either   unavailable   or
         inadequate, which was contrary to the evidence set out at pages  56
         through to 76 of the Appellants' supplementary bundle which set out
         the problems with healthcare in China and the limited mental health
         facilities available; and

      d) in his consideration of Article 8 outside  the  Rules  in  that  he
         failed to take account of the very exceptional circumstances  which
         had caused the First Appellant to be in his present predicament, in
         particular that the assault, as a consequence of which he  suffered
         traumatic head injuries which had in turn led to his serious mental
         health problems, had meant that he had not been able to  leave  the
         UK as intended and his partner would not have needed to  travel  to
         the UK to join him if he had not  been  assaulted  and  needed  her
         care.  He had no intention to become an overstayer.   His  injuries
         were not naturally occurring and were the results of the actions of
         an individual never apprehended in the UK when the First  Appellant
         was living here lawfully.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Resident  Judge  Appleyard  in  a
    decision dated 29 December 2017 on the following basis:-

         "3.  The grounds seeking permission to  appeal  are  all  arguable.
             They assert that the Judge has failed to give adequate reasons
             for his findings and failed to consider,  fully,  new  medical
             evidence.  Secondly,  that  the  Judge  failed  to  adequately
             consider the appeal under Article 3.  Thirdly, that  he  erred
             in coming to conclusions in relation to  the  availability  of
             health facilities in the Appellants'  country  of  origin  and
             finally in considering Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules
             the Judge did not fully  take  into  account  the  exceptional
             circumstances relating to the first Appellant.

         4.   As I say these are all arguable grounds."

     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me, I heard submissions from Mr Rooney on  behalf
    of the Appellants.   His  challenge  was  essentially  focused  on  the
    judge's finding at [13] of the decision, which provides:

         "In line with Devaseelan, I take the findings in the  determination
         of Judge Rintoul as a starting point.   Whilst  acknowledging  that
         the Appellant  had  suffered  serious  injuries,  he  concluded  at
         paragraph 4.9 that the Appellant's health condition  did  not  meet
         the threshold to engage Article 3.  The medical evidence  submitted
         in  the  current  appeal   does   not   suggest   any   significant
         deterioration such as to suggest that I can come to  any  different
         conclusion.   The  Appellant's  claim  was  encapsulated  by  Judge
         Rintoul at paragraph 4.18 in that the Appellant seeks to remain  in
         the UK to continue to receive medical treatment which he is  unable
         to afford in China.  On the evidence before me  the  basis  of  the
         Appellant's  claim  remains  the  same,  however  no   satisfactory
         evidence has been submitted to suggest that the  health  facilities
         for the Appellant's treatment in China are  either  unavailable  or
         inadequate.  Accordingly, I find that there  are  no  obstacles  in
         relation to the Appellants' integration back into China."

 7. Mr Rooney submitted that the judge entirely failed to consider that the
    First Appellant's mental health had deteriorated since the decision  of
    Judge Rintoul and that process had begun following the dismissal of his
    appeal  and  had  included  a  suicide  attempt  and  ongoing  suicidal
    ideation.  This was not evidence that was before Judge Rintoul and thus
    could not be taken into account by him since the  First  Appellant  had
    been under the care of psychiatrists since December 2007 as  was  clear
    from the expert medical evidence that was submitted before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Mr Rooney also sought to rely on his remaining grounds,
    albeit acknowledging in respect of ground 2 that the interpretation  of
    Paposhvili must now be considered in  light  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    judgment in AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64.

 8. In his submissions Mr Nath stated that the judge had  been  correct  to
    rely on Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702 as the starting  point  following
    Judge Rintoul's decision on 19 December 2007.  He accepted  that  there
    however had been a substantial passage  of  time  since  then,  but  he
    submitted that the judge encapsulated the  decision  at  that  time  in
    relation to Article 3 and Judge Rintoul's finding  at  [4.9]  that  the
    First Appellant's health condition did not  meet  that  threshold.   Mr
    Nath submitted that the judge clearly considered the First  Appellant's
    health condition in the round and does refer to  the  medical  evidence
    submitted in the current appeal, so it should  be  taken  that  he  has
    looked at it and that his findings were open to him.

 9. In his reply, Mr Rooney returned to the Judge's decision  at  [13]  and
    reiterated that none of the evidence now relied upon was  available  to
    Judge Rintoul so that when that judge came to the conclusion  that  the
    Article 3 threshold was not met, it was of course based on the evidence
    available to him at the time, at which time there was no suggestion  of
    suicide attempts or suicidal ideation which must clearly  constitute  a
    deterioration in his health overall.  Mr Rooney further submitted  that
    the First Appellant has been in the UK for almost seventeen  years  and
    would suffer very significant difficulties reintegrating  into  Chinese
    society pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the  Rules.   He  submitted
    that the judge had failed to consider this, despite the  fact  that  it
    was addressed in the Respondent's refusal decision and  raised  in  the
    skeleton argument.

My Findings

10. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mr R Hussain.  Whilst it is correct that the starting  point  for
    the judge's consideration was the previous decision by Judge Rintoul of
    19 December 2007, in light of the decision of Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702, the fact of the matter is that  by  the  time  the  appeal  came
    before him approximately nine-and-a-half years had passed and the First
    Appellant's medical situation is not the same as it was at the time  of
    the hearing before Judge Rintoul.  In particular, it is clear from  the
    medical  evidence,  in  particular,  the  reports  of  the   consultant
    psychiatrist, Dr Borrell, at pages 10  to  12  and  13  to  15  of  the
    Appellants'  bundle,  and   from   the   First   Appellant's   clinical
    neuropsychologist Dr Owen, at pages 19 through to 28,  that  the  First
    Appellant's mental health has clearly deteriorated since  the  time  of
    Judge  Rintoul's  decision.   I  find  accordingly  that  the   judge's
    conclusion at [13] that "The medical evidence submitted in the  current
    appeal does not  suggest  any  significant  deterioration  such  as  to
    suggest that I can come to any different conclusion"  is  unsustainable
    in light of the evidence that was actually before him.

11. I further accept Mr Rooney's submission also in relation to [13] of the
    judge's decision that in finding there  was  no  satisfactory  evidence
    that  health  facilities  for  the  First  Appellant's  condition  were
    unavailable or inadequate the judge failed to  take  into  account  the
    clear evidence of a lack of provision for mental  health  treatment  in
    China as set out at pages 56 to 76 of the supplementary bundle.

12. Thirdly, although it was not a point raised expressly in the grounds of
    appeal, I consider it is a Robinson obvious point that the judge  erred
    in finding there were no obstacles to the Appellants' integration  back
    into China in light of his errors in relation to the  medical  evidence
    and the background evidence as to mental health treatment in China.

     Decision

13. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R Hussain. I set it aside and remit the appeal for a  hearing  de
    novo before the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.

14. There is no anonymity order.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 9 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
