
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00799/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19th January 2018                  |On 7th March 2018                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                mr imran khan
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  his  human  rights
    claim was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi ("the judge")  in
    a decision promulgated on 29th March 2017.  The judge  found  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  ("the
    rules") for leave to remain.    The  Secretary  of  State  had  made  a
    finding that  the  appellant  obtained  a  TOEIC  result  by  means  of
    deception.  The judge found that the Secretary of State's case was made
    out in this regard and that  the  appellant's  explanation  by  way  of
    response was unsatisfactory.

2.   Assessing the Article 8 case outside the rules,  the  judge  took  into
    account the appellant's family circumstances,  including  the  presence
    here of two children.  Having regard to section 117B of the  2002  Act,
    the judge concluded that there were no  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant returning to Pakistan to apply for entry clearance  in  order
    to rejoin his wife and children here, or to the continuation of  family
    life in Pakistan.  As the appellant could not succeed under Article  8,
    the appeal was dismissed.

3.   Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the  judge  erred  in
    law in giving weight to  the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence  showing
    deception.  Some of the documentary evidence relied  upon  was  in  the
    name of an individual who was  clearly  not  the  appellant  and  there
    appeared to be some confusion in the Secretary of State's  case,  which
    may have led the judge astray,  regarding  the  location  of  the  test
    centre attended by the appellant.  There appeared to be two candidates,
    South Quay College and London Eastern College.

4.   Permission was refused initially but then granted by an Upper  Tribunal
    Judge, who found that it was arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    findings regarding deception.  Again, some of the documentary  evidence
    relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State  referred  to  a  different
    individual and although a statement was before the judge which referred
    to the appellant himself, it was unclear whether this was  provided  to
    the appellant  or  his  representatives,  arguably  giving  rise  to  a
    procedural error amounting to an error of law.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Mr Ahmed said that the  documentary  evidence  gave  rise  to  concern.
    Annex A in the Secretary of State's bundle related to a person who  was
    not  the  appellant.   In  the  course  of  the  hearing,  the  correct
    spreadsheet appeared  to  have  been  produced  but  it  was  not  made
    available to the appellant or his representatives.  As appeared in  the
    Secretary of State's rule 24 response, made  on  27th  July  2017,  the
    respondent accepted that Annex A referred to  someone  other  than  the
    appellant.  On the day of the hearing, what was  described  as  correct
    information was sent  by  fax.   The  appellant's  case  was  noted  as
    including a submission that the Home Office wrongly stated that he took
    his test at South Quay College, whereas he actually took it  at  London
    Eastern College.  It was acknowledged in the rule 24 response that  the
    additional evidence from the Secretary of State  arrived  only  on  the
    day.  Mr Ahmed said that in fact  it  arrived  ten  minutes  after  the
    hearing concluded.  During the hearing, submissions were  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf regarding the error in  the  location  of  the  test
    centre and the appellant's case that he sat at London  Eastern  College
    was clearly put.

6.   The judge should have made findings in this regard.

7.   The Secretary of State also relied on a  supplementary  statement  from
    Ms Hilary Rackstraw but this  included  errors  about  the  appellant's
    status.  At paragraphs 5 and 6 of her statement, mention was made of an
    application  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  refusal  of  that
    application but the appellant had never applied for leave of this sort.
      Although  the  heading  and  conclusion  of  Ms  Rackstraw's  witness
    statement referred to the appellant, the contents referred  to  someone
    else.

8.   The evidence before the judge did not link  the  appellant  with  South
    Quay College.   In the absence of evidence showing where the  test  was
    taken,  the  judge  might  well  have  concluded,  properly,  that  the
    Secretary of State had not discharged the evidential burden upon her.

9.   Mr Tufan said that there had been an administrative error in  collating
    the Secretary of State's bundle  but  that  was  rectified  within  ten
    minutes of the hearing and the judge was passed the  correct  evidence.
    The judge referred to  the  correct  document  in  the  decision.   The
    Secretary of State provided a supplementary bundle  which  included  Ms
    Rackstraw's witness statement.

10.  Mr Ahmed said  that  this  revealed  the  problem.   The  decision  was
    written without the appellant having an opportunity to  fully  consider
    the supplementary bundle, as it arrived late.  The  evidence  was  made
    available after the appellant and his representative had left.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.   Having  taken  into  account  the   helpful   submissions   from   the
    representatives, I conclude that procedural unfairness has been  shown.
    Paragraph 21 of the decision shows that the judge took into account the
    supplementary bundle from the Secretary of State.  That bundle includes
    a witness statement from Ms Rackstraw, which refers to the appellant as
    having applied for indefinite leave to remain.  As is readily  apparent
    from the decision letter, the appellant is not someone who has  applied
    for indefinite leave.

12.  At paragraph 7 the judge noted  that  it  "became  apparent"  that  the
    respondent's evidence in relation to the English language test referred
    to someone other than the appellant and was attached in  error.   There
    is then the following: "That was replaced  during  the  course  of  the
    morning with the correct attachment."  With great respect to the judge,
    that sentence rather suggests that the correct attachment was not given
    to the appellant and his advisers in the course of the hearing,  or  in
    time to be taken into account in submissions.   The  rule  24  response
    supports this analysis.  The  Presenting  Officer's  minute,  parts  of
    which are set out in the response, includes the following:

         "Annex A ... made reference to someone other than the appellant.  I
         contacted (MS) and she confirmed that this had been done in  error.
         Hilary Rackstraw amended Annex A  and  faxed  through  the  correct
         information.  I supplied a copy to the IJ  through  her  clerk  ...
         around 10 min (sic) after the hearing."

13.  The judge noted the appellant's case that he took his  test  at  London
    Eastern College, and not South Quay  College.   At  paragraph  27,  she
    found on a balance of probabilities that he sat the test at South Quay.
     The supplementary bundle, containing Ms Rackstraw's witness statement,
    is one which contains errors, capable of bearing on the  weight  to  be
    given to the statement and, perhaps, the other evidence tending to show
    the venue of the test  as  South  Quay  College.   Procedural  fairness
    required the appellant and his advisers to be given an  opportunity  to
    properly assess all the evidence, including the material that was given
    to the judge after the hearing.

14.  In a brief discussion on the appropriate venue if an error of law  were
    found, Mr Ahmed and Mr Tufan agreed that the decision should be  remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside,  as  containing  a
material error of law.  The  decision  will  be  remade  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal at Taylor House, before a judge other than Judge Obhi.


Signed                                  Date  5th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal Judge sensibly made an anonymity order,  under  Rule
13 of the 2014 Procedure Rules.  I maintain that order, taking into  account
the members of the family who are minor children.


Signed                                  Date  5th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell





