
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00006/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 January 2018                        |On 16 January 2018                |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                             Kamladevi Veersamy
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Jaufurally, instructed by Callistes Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge White promulgated 6.4.17, dismissing his appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 11.12.15, to  refuse  her
    application made on 29.4.14 for LTR on  human  rights  grounds  as  the
    partner of a person settled in the UK.   Both  the  appellant  and  her
    partner are of Mauritian nationality.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 21.3.17.

 3. The matter came before me on 9.1.18 as an appeal in the Upper Tribunal.



Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found no error of law in the making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require it to  be
    set aside.

 5. The appellant entered the UK in 2004 as a family visitor and was  later
    granted LTR as a student. Her  last  leave  expired  in  2011.  Further
    applications for LTR were refused. However, she has a right  of  appeal
    against the latest refusal decision (RFR) on human rights grounds only.



 6. It was accepted in  the  RFR  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship with her settled partner,  Preetam  Mungrah,  having  been
    granted ILR in 2013. However, the Secretary of  State  considered  that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to  the  continuation  of  their
    family life outside the UK.

 7. The argument put before the First-tier Tribunal  was  that  there  were
    indeed insurmountable obstacles in that  the  appellant's  partner  had
    been charged with conspiracy to import Class A  controlled  drugs  into
    the UK. He had pleaded not guilty and was at that time awaiting  trial.
    He was on bail with a condition that he may not leave the UK.

 8. I was told that Mr Mungrah has  now  been  convicted  after  trial  and
    remanded in custody in October 2017 pending eventually sentence,  which
    may be some time off, as there are other co-conspirators  still  facing
    trial. Given the serious nature of the  offence,  the  likely  sentence
    will be significant and measured in terms of years.

 9. However, I am considering whether there was an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and thus I have to  deal  with  the
    matter on the basis of the circumstances  prevailing  at  the  date  of
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with the  partner  having  pleaded
    not guilty and having been granted bail. Judge White considered that he
    had to presume that the partner was innocent until  proved  guilty  and
    thus that on conclusion of the trial and end of his bail conditions  he
    would be free to join or accompany  the  appellant  in  Mauritius.  The
    judge considered at [15] that there might be a separation, but it would
    only be a temporary one and thus  not  an  insurmountable  obstacle  to
    continuing family life. The judge  went  on  to  consider  family  life
    outside the Rules under article 8 ECHR, but concluded that  there  were
    no compelling circumstances that would make removal  of  the  appellant
    disproportionate.

10. As the judge noted, the only right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
    was on human rights grounds, although the extent of qualification under
    the Rules was relevant to the proportionality balancing exercise.

11. Mr Jaufurally submitted that there is no  distinction  in  EX1  between
    temporary  or  permanent  circumstances  amounting  to   insurmountable
    obstacles to continuing family life. However, there is nothing  in  the
    wording to the contrary, and nothing to suggest that both parties  have
    to be able to leave the UK at the  same  time.  The  issue  is  whether
    family life will be able to continue outside the UK. As defined in EX2,
    insurmountable obstacles means the very significant difficulties  which
    would be faced by either applicant or partner in continuing family life
    together outside the UK, and which  could  not  be  overcome  or  would
    entail very serious hardship for the applicant  or  their  partner.  As
    Judge White  also  observed,  there  might  be  some  hardship  in  the
    immediate future during a  period  of  temporary  separation,  but  the
    appellant's removal would not,  in  due  course,  prevent  family  life
    together continuing. This was  obviously  on  the  basis  that  on  the
    presumption  of  innocence  and  the  temporary  nature  of  the   bail
    conditions.

12. I agree with Judge White's assessment. The temporary  separation  might
    well meet the description of hardship, but given that at  the  time  of
    the consideration of the First-tier Tribunal it had to be assumed  that
    it would be  but  temporary,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  a  temporary
    separation  pending  completion  of  the  trial   qualifies   as   very
    significant difficulties or very serious hardship. It had to be assumed
    that the hardship would be temporary and  would  be  capable  of  being
    overcome.

13. Had the conviction and sentence already taken place by the time of  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, the judge might well have concluded
    that there was  no  longer  any  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and her partner. In any event, it would seem very
    likely that the partner will be the subject of deportation proceedings.



14. I also find it difficult to contemplate that  a  person  could  have  a
    stronger claim to remain in the UK on the basis  of  criminal  activity
    and subsequent proceedings against a partner. Recalling that the appeal
    has to be considered on the basis of article 8 human rights, and thus a
    proportionality balancing exercise between the rights of the  appellant
    and her partner to be able to continue family  life,  set  against  the
    public interest in both  immigration  control  and  public  safety  and
    security, I would find it difficult to conclude  other  than  that  the
    decision  to  refuse  the  appellant's  application  remains   entirely
    proportionate.

Conclusion & Decision

15. For the reasons summarised  above,  I  find  that  the  making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                  Dated

