
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00510/2014
                                                               IA/00521/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th July 2014                               |On 1st September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                     mr Mazhar hussain, first appellant
                    mrs parveen Akhter, second appellant
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms H Aspinall, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan  born  respectively  on  5th
    September 1979 and 6th September 1985.  The  first  Appellant  on  28th
    October 2013 made a combined application for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the  points-
    based system and for a biometric residence permit.  On  the  same  date
    the second Appellant made an application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    dependent partner of the  first  Appellant.   Their  applications  were
    refused by the Secretary of State  by  Notices  of  Refusal  dated  5th
    December 2013.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Fox hearing the appeals on the papers at Glasgow on  13th
    March 2014.  In a determination promulgated  on  18th  March  2014  the
    Appellants' appeals were dismissed.

 3. On 24th March 2014 the Appellants lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.   Those grounds contended:-

      i) that the Immigration Judge had failed to properly consider material
         which was before him;

     ii) that the conclusions of the Immigration Judge  were  insufficiently
         reasoned insofar as they did not take into account the private life
         established by the Appellants; and

    iii) that the Immigration Judge had failed to give proper  consideration
         to the Appellants' personal circumstances  in  the  UK  insofar  as
         failing to consider those circumstances at the date of hearing.

 4. On 25th April  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.  In granting permission he noted that  in
    relation to Article 8 there is an absence of analysis  in  relation  to
    education as an aspect of the first Appellant's private life.

 5. A Rule 24 response was served by the Secretary of State  on  17th  June
    2014.  It is on that basis  that  the  appeal  comes  before  me.   The
    Appellants are represented by their  instructed  Counsel  Ms  Aspinall.
    The Secretary of State is represented by  her  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Mr Diwnycz.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Ms Aspinall takes me to her skeleton argument  pointing  out  that  the
    Appellants' immigration history and in particular the first Appellant's
    academic history is set out in considerable detail  in  the  Notice  of
    Refusal.  The fact remains that the first Appellant was  granted  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom as a student on  11th  September  2004  and
    that leave has been extended five subsequent times prior to the subject
    matter of the present appeal.  As to the  colleges  the  Appellant  has
    attended I am referred to paragraphs 5 and 6 of Ms Aspinall's skeleton.
      She  submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in   his
    consideration of the Appellant's appeal and in  his  interpretation  of
    the Immigration Rules in  particular  paragraph  245ZX(ha).   Paragraph
    245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules states as follows:-
         "If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of  leave  to
         remain the applicant is seeking must  not  lead  to  the  applicant
         having spent more than 5 years in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Migrant, or as a Student, studying courses at degree level or above
         unless:


         (i)  the applicant has successfully completed a  course  at  degree
             level in the UK of a minimum duration of 4 academic years, and
             will follow  a  course  of  study  at  Master's  degree  level
             sponsored by a Sponsor that is a Recognised Body or a body  in
             receipt of public funding as a  higher  education  institution
             from the Department of Employment  and  Learning  in  Northern
             Ireland, the Higher Education Funding Council for England, the
             Higher Education Funding Council for  Wales  or  the  Scottish
             Funding Council, and the grant of leave  to  remain  must  not
             lead to the applicant having spent more than 6 years in the UK
             as a Tier 4 (General)  Migrant,  or  as  a  Student,  studying
             courses at degree level or above."

 7. Ms Aspinall refers me to the authority of Mirza (ACCA Fundamental level
    qualification - not a recognised degree) [2013] UKUT 00041 (IAC)  which
    is authority for stating that the ACCA does not  have  degree  awarding
    powers and the qualifications which it awards  are  not  UK  recognised
    degrees.  This approach was endorsed by the High Court in  Syed  [2013]
    and by the Court of Appeal in Syed [2014].  She submits  the  Appellant
    has consequently not spent five years on a degree course and  that  the
    Appellant therefore meets the Immigration Rule.

 8. I am considerably assisted in this  matter  by  the  acceptance  of  Ms
    Aspinall's submissions by Mr Diwnycz.  He concedes that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made a material error of law in  his  determination  and
    that the appeal should be allowed.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. Firstly it is clear that there is for all the above reasons a  material
    error of law in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.   I  thus
    set aside that determination and proceed to remake the decision.  It is
    further  clear  in  the  light  of  the  authorities   that   an   ACCA
    qualification is not a UK recognised degree.  In the present case,  the
    first Appellant has only ever studied ACCA courses during his  time  in
    the United Kingdom with the exception of the  present  global  MBA  and
    finance  and  business  training  course.   In  accordance   with   the
    authorities such courses are not UK recognised degrees and accordingly,
    the first Appellant has not spent more  than  five  years  studying  at
    degree level or above for the purposes of paragraph 245ZX(ha).  In such
    circumstances the first Appellant satisfies  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the Secretary of State was wrong  to  refuse  his
    application.

12. I also note, having spoken to the first Appellant, that  he  needs  the
    current extension of his visa in order for him to be awarded his degree
    under the new Rules in particular paragraph 245(zy).  I therefore allow
    the appeal (with the consent of Mr Diwnycz) to 18th October 2014.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
The decision is set aside and on hearing submissions the decision is  remade
allowing both Appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  No  application
is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


