
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00635/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th July 2017                            |On 23rd August 2017           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                              miss tong zhuang
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make no anonymity order neither party requesting the same  and  there
    being nothing apparent in the papers or evidence  indicating  the  need
    for such an order.

Introduction

 2. The Appellant is a Chinese national born on 11th January  1987.   I  am
    not aware of the date of her arrival but some time after she was issued
    with a student entry clearance valid from 4th September 2008 until 31st
    October 2009, and during its currency, she entered the United  Kingdom.
    Leave was subsequently extended on the same basis  until  31st  January
    2014.  Shortly before, on 27th January 2014, she  applied  for  further
    leave to remain supporting her application  with  a  TOEIC  certificate
    from Educational Testing  Service  (ETS)  providing  the  same  to  her
    Sponsor to be provided with a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Study
    (CAS).  Further leave was then granted until 27th October 2014.

 3. On 23rd September 2014, the Appellant applied for leave to remain as  a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  On 14th January 2016,  the  application  was
    refused on the basis that there was significant  evidence  to  conclude
    that her English language certificate was fraudulently obtained using a
    proxy test taker.  Thus, ETS had cancelled the scores  from  the  tests
    taken on 1st January 2014 at International School of Business  Studies.



 4. The Appellant appealed on standard unparticularised grounds,  asserting
    that the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules, was
    unlawful because it was incompatible with her ECHR rights, was  not  in
    accordance with the  law,  and  that  a  discretion  should  have  been
    exercised differently.  The date of lodgement  is  29th  January  2016.
    The appeal came before Judge  Rodger  on  31st  March  2017,  when  the
    Appellant attended with her Counsel Mr Raw.  No bundle had been  served
    by or on her behalf. Mr Raw told Judge Rodger that he was not going  to
    call the Appellant to give evidence and that the appeal  would  proceed
    on submission only.  The Respondent relied on her bundle served on 16th
    November 2016 which included a witness statement of Peter Millington, a
    witness statement of Rebecca Collings, an  ETS  invalid  test  analysis
    document containing the Appellant's details, an ETS  SELT  source  data
    document. Mr Raw submitted that the documentary evidence  submitted  by
    the  Respondent  in  the  bundle  was  insufficient  to  establish  the
    Respondent's position to the point that there had been no shift in  the
    evidential burden, there was  nothing  for  the  Appellant  to  answer,
    consequently nothing could flow from the absence of  a  bundle  or  the
    lack of any oral evidence/witness statement.

 5. The  judge  found  that  the  evidence  was  sufficient  to  shift  the
    evidential burden of  proving,  to  the  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities, that she did not cheat, to  the  Appellant.   The  judge
    found that in the absence of any evidence, there being  no  bundle  and
    the Appellant not giving any evidence and not being tendered for cross-
    examination, the Appellant had failed to meet the burden upon her,  and
    dismissed the appeal.

 6. Judge Rodger considered the case law of SM and  Qadir  v  SSHD  (ETS  -
    evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229  (IAC)  as  well  as  the
    earlier case of R (Garvey) v SSHD (ETS - judicial review) (IJR)  [2015]
    UKUT 327 (IAC), MA (ETS -  TOEIC  testing)  [2016]  UKUT  00450  (IAC),
    Muhandiramge (Section S-LTR1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675  (IAC),  as  well  as
    SSHD v Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

 7. Judge Rodger found at paragraph 25:

         "I am satisfied that the respondent had sufficient cause  to  raise
         the allegation of the certificate being fraudulently obtained and I
         am satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  generic  evidence,
         combined with her evidence particular to this  appellant,  suffices
         to discharge the evidential burden of proving that the  appellant's
         TOEIC speaking certificate had been procured  by  dishonesty.   The
         ETS  Invalid  Tests  Analysis  makes  specific  reference  to   the
         appellant's details and is an analysis of the ETS SELT Source  Data
         document which is also within the respondent's bundle of documents.
          The test date said to be 01/01/2014, which  is  the  date  on  the
         appellant's TOEIC speaking test certificate and there is a specific
         reference to the Test being invalid.  The generic  evidence  relied
         upon by the respondent explains the process  by  which  someone  is
         identified as someone who had sought to obtain leave  by  deception
         through use of a fraudulently obtained English language certificate
         and looking at matters  in  the  round  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         respondent has discharged the evidential burden of proving that the
         certificate was obtained by fraud."

 8. And at Paragraph 26:

         "Save for production of her TOEIC certificates and  previous  IELTS
         Test Results and a certificate of a Master of  Arts  for  Marketing
         and Information dated August 2014,  there  is  an  absence  of  any
         further evidence adduced by the appellant and  she  has  failed  to
         raise an innocent explanation of any element  of  the  prima  facie
         case of deception established against her.  She did not  provide  a
         witness statement to confirm that she had sat the test in issue and
         there was no oral evidence from her to confirm such matters and the
         respondent were not able to test her case that her certificate  had
         not  been  obtained  fraudulently  or  in  relation  to  the  other
         documents that she produced via her counsel at the oral hearing.  I
         accept that the appellant has  previously  been  granted  Leave  to
         Remain following English speaking tests that have not  been  raised
         in issue or as fraudulently obtained.  I also acknowledge that  her
         test scores for all four parts of the  tests  taken  in  2014  were
         extremely high and I  accept  that  she  was  in  possession  of  a
         certificate for a Master of Arts  from  Anglia  Ruskin  University.
         However, in the absence of any written or oral  evidence  from  the
         appellant to confirm her account as to  her  previous  studies  and
         tests obtained and in the absence of any evidence regarding whether
         she had actually sat the speaking test on  01/01/2014,  I  was  not
         able to be satisfied that the  appellant  had  raised  an  innocent
         explanation or had satisfied me that she had sat the test  herself.
         It follows that there is  no  further  transfer  of  proof  to  the
         Secretary of State.  The appellant has provided no explanation  for
         the invalid test result save for broad criticisms of  the  evidence
         relied upon by the respondent and the evidence that she is not  the
         sort of person who would use a proxy test taker.   I  am  satisfied
         that the respondent discharged its initial burden of  showing  that
         there was a fraud and that the appellant has failed to provide  any
         persuasive  explanation  to  show  that  her  certificate  was  not
         obtained fraudulently.  The respondent was not  able  to  test  her
         account made through submissions that she did not  need  to  use  a
         proxy test taker or that she did not do so."

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Grounds of Appeal assert  that  the  judge  relied  merely  on  the
    generic evidence of Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings and  that  it
    was not enough because it could  not  avoid  the  occurrence  of  false
    positives and there was no evidence that there had been any  individual
    consideration of the Appellant's  case.   Further  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had provided a number of academic certificates including  the
    satisfaction of other parts of the English language  test  relating  to
    reading and such like from the same date, and in any event, she  had  a
    certificate of Master of Arts from Anglia Ruskin University.  In  short
    there was other evidence before the Tribunal, so  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to say there was nothing else and to criticise the Appellant  for
    failing to give testimony.  In  any  event  given  that  there  was  no
    transfer of proof to the Appellant it was maintained that there was  no
    need for her to give such evidence.

10. On 9th June 2017 Judge Andrew granted permission on the  basis  of  the
    ground that the generic statements were not supported by  any  evidence
    referring specifically to the Appellant and accordingly there had  been
    no shift of the evidential burden.

11. In a rule 14 response the Secretary of State reminds  that  her  bundle
    contains evidence specific to the Appellant at documents B and  C,  and
    relied on the Respondent having satisfied the test in SM  and  Qadir  v
    SSHD.

12. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by Mr Malik  who
    apologised for his late arrival as a result of involvement  in  another
    case. He indicated  that  he  resiled  from  the  grounds  as  pleaded,
    acknowledging that there is no merit in the ground on which  permission
    was granted: that Judge Rodger had had insufficient before him to shift
    the  burden  because  plainly  there  was   individual   consideration.
    Instead Mr Malik, without any written amendment to the  grounds,  asked
    me to find an error of law on a different basis.  He submitted that the
    Appellant must have been poorly represented as any  professional  would
    have known how important it was to bring forward evidence to rebut  the
    dishonesty allegation, so, he enjoined me, I should be  sympathetic  to
    his informally enlarging the grounds. He argued that the judge had made
    an error of law firstly in his approach to  the  burden  of  proof  and
    secondly in the way in which he approached the evidence as to  the  ETS
    allegation.

13. Mr Malik, reiterating that the evidential burden  had  been  met  by  a
    combination of the generic witness statements and the  look  up  tools,
    pointed out the judge next had to look to see if the Appellant provided
    a  plausible  innocent  explanation.   It  was  not  necessary  for  an
    Appellant to provide a "good or persuasive" explanation,  so  that  the
    judge misdirected himself at paragraph 26 when he says:

         "The appellant has failed to provide any persuasive explanation  to
         show that her certificate was not obtained fraudulently."

14. Judge Rodger had set the standard too high.  The error  was  compounded
    when at paragraph 27 the judge states:

         "The appellant has failed to  provide  any  persuasive  explanation
         such as to transfer the burden back to the respondent."

15. Further evidence of the error, Mr Malik argued, was that the  statement
    opening paragraph 27:

         "I find that she has failed  to  prove  that  her  application  was
         wrongly rejected or that she otherwise fell within the  Immigration
         Rules."

16. Mr Malik argued the judge had misunderstood, there was no  burden  upon
    the Appellant to show that her application was wrongly  rejected.   The
    burden was  on  the  Respondent.   The  judge  has  confused  plausible
    explanation with persuasive.  The Appellant was represented and it  was
    plain that by bringing the appeal she was making  the  submission  that
    she was innocent.  In  all  the  circumstances,  bearing  in  mind  the
    examination certificates, the judge should have proceeded to the  third
    stage, accepting that the Appellant had raised an innocent explanation,
    and found the legal burden on the Respondent was not discharged.

17. Mr Melvin relied on the rule 24 response and the findings of the judge.



18. I am satisfied that there is no error. I leave  aside  the  speculative
    point as to whether the Appellant was poorly represented which depends,
    not least, on her instructions to her representatives and  Mr  Raw.  At
    best, it is right to  say  the  submission  Mr  Raw  made  was  legally
    hopeless.  Even allowing the enlargement of the grounds  embarked  upon
    by Mr Malik the new grounds reveal no error but  dance  on  a  semantic
    pinhead. Reading the decision as a whole, and  as  the  extracts  above
    show, it is clear that the judge has given  detailed  consideration  of
    the correct legal test to be  applied  and  completely  understood  his
    task.  Whilst the words relied upon by Mr Malik appear in the judgment,
    and in isolation appear infelicitous, they must be read as part of  the
    whole. When the judgement is read in its entirety they do  not  detract
    from the judge's clear statement that the problem with the  Appellant's
    case  was  that  she  faced  an  evidential  burden  and   offered   no
    explanation.

19. The grounds of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal do not include  an
    evidential assertion that the Appellant took the test.  Contrary to  Mr
    Malik's submission, at paragraph 26 of his decision, Judge Rodger makes
    clear that what he is concerned about is that the Appellant  failed  to
    raise any innocent explanation of any element of the prima  facie  case
    of deception.  She did not provide a witness statement confirming  that
    she had sat the test in issue, and there was no oral evidence from  her
    to confirm such matters, and the Respondent was not able  to  test  her
    case that her certificate had not been  obtained  fraudulently,  or  in
    relation to the other documents that she produced via  her  Counsel  at
    the oral hearing.  In these circumstances, it is a nonsense to  suggest
    that the judge did not appreciate that by bringing the appeal  she  was
    asserting that she had not obtained the test result  fraudulently,  and
    was thereby proffering or asserting  an  innocent  explanation,  to  be
    inferred from the evidence of her MA from Anglia Ruskin University  and
    the other, reading and writing, as opposed to the speaking part, of the
    test results of 2014.  As the case of SM and Qadir clearly sets  out  a
    bare assertion, let alone an implication to be inferred from  the  fact
    of an MA from Anglia Ruskin and high  test  marks  in  respect  of  the
    remaining three examination papers taken on the same date, fall so  far
    short of amounting to a plausible  explanation,  so  as  to  shift  the
    burden back to the Respondent, that to conclude so  would  be  arguably
    perverse.

20. It follows that this last-minute challenge, even had it  been  properly
    brought forward as amended grounds,  does  not  give  succour  to  this
    unmeritorious appeal.

21. No issue was taken  with  the  judge's  dismissal  of  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 claim.

22. I note for completeness that both representatives were of the view that
    jurisdiction  in  this  appeal  had  been  provided   by   transitional
    provisions although neither was able to take me to them at the time.



Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals no  error  of  law  and
    stands.


Signed

[pic]
                                Date 22 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 22 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
