
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/00553/2015
                                                               IA/00557/2015
                                                               IA/00559/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On October 6, 2015                   |On October 13, 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ma
                                     aoa
                                     faa
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Singh (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellants are all nationals of Nigeria.  The  background  to  this
    case is that the  first-named  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally on February 6, 2002. She subsequently  married  in  2005  and
    gave birth to the second-name appellant on September 27, 2006  and  the
    third-named appellant on July 31, 2008.

 3. In January 2010 she married an EEA national and on September  24,  2011
    she applied for a residence card for herself and her  two  children  as
    dependents. This application was rejected on February 17, 2012 and  she
    separated from her husband.

 4. On May 19, 2012 she made an application for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds but this was refused on April 12, 2013 without  a  right
    of appeal.

 5. A further application was made on October 14, 2013 but  this  was  also
    refused on February 17, 2014 without a right of appeal.  That  decision
    was judicially reviewed and in a consent order dated  October  3,  2014
    the respondent agreed to reconsider her decision.

 6. In a decision  dated  December  8,  2014  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellants' applications. Removal decisions were issued in  respect  of
    each appellant and the appellants appealed those decisions on  December
    22, 2014 under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.

 7. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Birrell
    on March 23, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on April  8,  2015  she
    allowed the  first  and  second-named  appellant's  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules (Paragraph 276ADE) and  the  third-named  appellant's
    appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 8. The respondent applied for permission  to  appeal  on  April  23,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred  by  failing  to  factor  the  public
    interest in maintaining firm and fair immigration control.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Zucker on June 8, 2015.

10. A Rule 24 response was filed by Mr Singh in which he argued  there  was
    no material error.

11. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  pursuant  to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I  extend
    that order.

ERROR OF LAW ISSUES

12. Having read the Tribunal's decision and having sought the views  of  Mr
    Harrison I am satisfied that there is no error in law.

13. The first-tier Tribunal was  fully  aware  of  the  background  and  in
    particular the first-named appellant's immigration history.

14. The respondent's representative at the First-tier hearing, Miss Horren,
    referred the Tribunal to the adverse immigration history of the  first-
    named appellant and the fact that she had been in  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally since she arrived in 2002 and she  argued  the  family  could
    return to Nigeria together.

15. The Tribunal properly acknowledged that the children's interests were a
    primary consideration but not determinative to the case.  The  Tribunal
    accepted it was in their best interests to remain with their mother  as
    their father had played no role in their life. The Tribunal  was  fully
    aware of the first-named appellant's poor immigration history but  took
    into account how long the first-named appellant had been here  as  well
    as the fact the children had been born here and the  eldest  had  lived
    here over seven years as at the date of application.

16. The challenge to the Tribunal's decision  was  that  the  Tribunal  had
    failed to fact the public interest when considering the maintenance  of
    firm and fair immigration control. The grounds  noted  that  the  first
    named appellant's adverse immigration history could (not  must)  amount
    to strong reasons to counter the presumption that the child  should  be
    allowed to remain.

17. The Tribunal correctly identified that the first-named appellant  could
    only satisfy Section EX.1 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Referring itself to the IDIs the Tribunal reminded itself that stronger
    reasons would be required to refuse a case with continuous residence of
    more than seven years.

18. From paragraph [42] onwards of its  decision  the  Tribunal  considered
    those circumstances  and  concluded  that  although  the  first  named-
    appellant had been here illegally the respondent must also  share  some
    of the blame for her being here so  long  because  she  had  failed  to
    remove the appellant either in April 2013 or February 2014.

19. The Tribunal then had regard to the fact that the eldest child had been
    born in the United Kingdom and  was  in  full-time  education  and  had
    demonstrated that she was well settled, had many friends and  was  well
    liked by her teachers.  She noted language and cultural issues.

20. The Tribunal found,  with  reasons,  why  the  first  and  second-named
    appellants should succeed under the Rules (Section EX.1  and  paragraph
    276ADE respectively). The reasons she gave were clearly open to it. The
    public interest test is a test more appropriate to an  article  8  ECHR
    proportionality assessment. By  allowing  the  first-named  appellant's
    appeal under Section EX.1 (an exception  to  the  Rules)  the  Tribunal
    correctly did not let the first named appellant's  adverse  immigration
    history affect her decision under paragraph 276ADE.

21. The findings the tribunal came to in respect of the  first  and  second
    appellants was clearly open  to  it.  It  therefore  follows  that  the
    finding in respect of the third named appellant was  also  open  to  it
    because it would be disproportionate to require the youngest sibling to
    leave.

22. In the circumstances there was no material  error.  All  findings  were
    open to the tribunal and I therefore dismiss this appeal.

    DECISION

23. There was no material error.  I uphold the original decision.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no alteration to the fee award as the respondent's  appeal  has  been
dismissed.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
