
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00656/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 7 July 2014                                  |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 30 July 2014            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               gerrad akowuah
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Anyene, Counsel instructed by Wellbeck Anin
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal.  I shall, however, refer to Mr
    Akowuah as the appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was  born  on  10  June  1988.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 7 July 2008, on a visit visa, valid until
    20 November 2008 and thereafter overstayed.  He  made  an  unsuccessful
    application for an EEA residence card  on  9  October  2012.   He  then
    applied on 5 June 2013, once again for an EEA residence  card,  whereby
    he sought confirmation that he was residing in the United Kingdom as  a
    family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the United
    Kingdom.  It was on the basis that he had gone through a proxy marriage
    which was in accordance with Ghanaian law and as such he  was  entitled
    to recognition of the fact that he was the spouse of a Union citizen, a
    citizen of Belgium, and thereby entitled to a right to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. There were a number of matters which were raised by way of challenge by
    the Secretary of State.  Not only was  the  validity  of  the  marriage
    challenged but also whether the appellant spouse was exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom and therefore came within  the  protection
    which is  afforded  under  the  Regulations  and  the  Directive.   The
    difficulty faced by the appellant emerges in the case of Kareem  (proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC).  This was a decision  that
    was made by the Tribunal in January 2014 and it therefore predates  the
    decision of Judge Aziz which decision was promulgated on 23 April  2014
    after consideration without a hearing which took place at Hatton  Cross
    on 14 April 2014.

 3. The position of European citizens is dealt  with  particularly  in  the
    summary provided in the italic words in these terms:

         "(e) In such an appeal the starting point will be to decide whether
             a marriage  was  contracted  between  the  appellant  and  the
             qualified person according to the  national  law  of  the  EEA
             country of the qualified person's nationality.

         (g)  It should be assumed that  without  independent  and  reliable
             evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the  laws
             of the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took
             place, the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
             sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the  burden
             of proof.  Mere production of legal  materials  from  the  EEA
             country or country where  the  marriage  took  place  will  be
             insufficient evidence because they will rarely show  how  such
             law  is  understood  or  applied  in  those  countries.   Mere
             assertions as to the effect of such  laws  will,  for  similar
             reasons, carry no weight."

 4. The consideration that was provided by the  Tribunal  in  the  case  of
    Kareem  was  concerned  with  spouses'  rights  of  free  movement  and
    residence derived from a marriage having been contracted and  depending
    upon it.  In light  of  the  connection  between  the  rights  of  free
    movement and residence and the nationality laws of the member state the
    Tribunal concluded that in a situation where the  marital  relationship
    was disputed the question of whether there was a  marital  relationship
    had to be examined in accordance with the laws of the member state,  in
    this case Belgium, and from which therefore that  citizen  derived  his
    free movement rights.  In paragraph 18 of  the  decision  the  Tribunal
    said:

         "The same conclusion may readily be reached by a  different  route.
         Within EU law it is essential that  Member  States  facilitate  the
         free movement and residence rights  of  Union  citizens  and  their
         spouses.  This would not be achieved if it  were  left  to  a  host
         Member State to decide whether a Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
         marriage.  Different Member States would be able to reach different
         conclusions about the Union citizen's marital status.   This  would
         leave Union citizens unclear as to whether their spouses could move
         freely with them; and might even mean that the Union citizen  could
         move with greater freedom to one Member State (where  the  marriage
         would be recognised) than to another (where it might not be).  Such
         difficulties would be contrary  to  fundament  EU  law  principles.
         Therefore, we perceive EU law as requiring  the  identification  of
         the legal  system  in  which  a  marriage  is  said  to  have  been
         contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the  Union  citizen's
         marital status is not at risk of being  differently  determined  by
         different  Member  States.   Given  the  intrinsic   link   between
         nationality of a Member State and free movement rights, we conclude
         that the legal system of the nationality of the Union citizen  must
         itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted."

 5. The contention made on behalf of the appellant in this appeal  is  that
    it is not necessary to look to the second stage in what is said to be a
    two-stage process where it has been accepted that the marriage has been
    validly performed in accordance with the law of the country  where  the
    marriage was celebrated.  It is only where that remains in  doubt  that
    one needs to go on to consider whether it would be  recognised  in  the
    country from which the spouse derives her European citizenship.  In  my
    judgment that is a misinterpretation of what is said in Kareem where it
    is clear that what is required is a pan-European recognition system  of
    marriages which are conducted in another  state  outside  the  European
    Union so that there is a European-wide recognition of that marriage  in
    order to enable the free movement rights of spouses to be properly  put
    into effect.  It would make no sense in my judgment if there were to be
    such a partial scheme as is suggested by the appellant in this  appeal.
    Accordingly there was no  proper  consideration  of  what  Belgian  law
    thinks about this particular marriage and the case was doomed to  fail.
    In those circumstances I apply Kareem and conclude that the application
    for a residence card had to be dismissed.   In  those  circumstances  I
    allow the Secretary of State's appeal against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aziz  who  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

DECISION

    The Judge made  an  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  I  substitute  a
    determination  allowing  the   Secretary   of   State's   against   the
    determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   I  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the  appeal  of  Mr  Akowuah  on  all  the  grounds
    advanced.


                                                                       [pic]

                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
