
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00210/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2018                          |On 08 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                lakhbir kaur
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Awan of MT UK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gribble promulgated on 10 July 2018 in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 6 June 2017  refusing  leave
    to remain in the UK and making  a  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant
    pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006, was dismissed.


2.   The Appellant entered the UK on  4  November  2011  pursuant  to  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 student. She was granted further leave to  remain
    on 23 April 2013.  On 9 June 2014 she  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain  including  her  husband  and  son  as  her  dependants.    This
    application was refused on 23 March 2015.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC. The appeal was allowed on the  basis
    that the Respondent's decision had not been in accordance with the law:
    see decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated on 6 November
    2015 (ref. IA/12581/2015).  The Respondent was thereafter  required  to
    consider exercising discretion to allow the Appellant 60 days to find a
    fresh educational institution to act  as  her  sponsor  and  to  sit  a
    further English language test.


4.   The Appellant was duly given a period  of  60  days  to  expire  on  21
    October 2016.  Thereafter she was given a further period of 60 days  to
    make arrangements to undertake an English language test - this  further
    period of 60 days to run  from  11  January  2017  to  13  March  2017.
    However, during these periods the Appellant was unable either  to  pass
    an English language test or to obtain a CAS - the latter necessarily so
    in consequence  of  her  failure  to  obtain  the  appropriate  English
    language qualification.


5.   Before  the  expiry  of  the  latter  60  day  period  the  Appellant's
    representative wrote to the Respondent by way of letter dated  9  March
    2017 (Respondent's bundle Annex U).  The letter sought a further period
    of time in order for the Appellant to seek to pass an English test  and
    to obtain a CAS.  The letter states in part:

         "After going through a huge hardship finally she  was  accepted  to
         take English Test at one of the recommended test centre at Croydon,
         however, she was unable to pass it in the first attempt.


         We have instructions from our client that  she  was  not  satisfied
         with the test centre.  She believes that she  had  done  enough  to
         satisfy her English proficiency.  She also confirms  that  she  has
         been in the United Kingdom as a student for almost 6 years and this
         much of time is sufficient for a student  to  comply  with  English
         speaking and understanding this language.  Our  client  wants  Home
         Office to provide her further time to prove her English  through  a
         different venue or centre.


         Now, while our client has been  through  all  these  odds  to  seek
         further leave to remain,  it  is  requested  to  kindly  allow  her
         further time to appear again to complete the English Language  Test
         and or consider her application for further leave  by  taking  into
         account her previously submitted English Language tests."


6.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for reasons set  out
    in a combined Notice of Immigration Decision and 'reasons for  refusal'
    letter dated 6 June 2017.  The substantive application was refused with
    reference in particular to paragraph 245ZXA of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The decision letter also gives consideration to the  request  contained
    in the letter dated  9  March  2017.   In  this  regard  the  following
    appears,


         "This process of delaying consideration for  60  days  is  now  the
         Secretary of State's standard policy for applicants who  find  that
         through no fault of their own,  their  sponsor  has  been  revoked.
         This has been arrived at following a High Court ruling which stated
         that it would be fair to allow all applicants to have  60  days  in
         which to address this change of  circumstance,  whereas  previously
         the application would have been refused.


         Therefore the Secretary of  State  is  not  prepared  to  give  any
         additional time as 60 days has been deemed to be suitable  and,  in
         order to be fair and consistent, this is  applied  to  everyone  in
         that situation.  As you have not complied with this request  within
         the 60 day period we are refusing your application ...


         The Secretary  of  State  has  considered  whether  the  particular
         circumstances of  your  case  merit  the  exercise  of  discretion.
         Having considered those circumstances the  Secretary  of  State  is
         satisfied that the refusal remains appropriate and is not  prepared
         to exercise discretion in your favour."

    The letter also states:


         "In a letter dated 09 March 2016 your  representatives  ...  stated
         that you had  taken  an  English  language  test  at  "one  of  the
         recommended test centres in Croydon".  The letter did  not  specify
         which test centre you attended and did not enclose any evidence  of
         your test result.  The letter went on to state "...however she  was
         unable to pass it in the first attempt.  We have instructions  from
         our client that she was not satisfied with the test centre."


         While it is noted that your representatives have requested  further
         time for you to re-sit your English language test, it is considered
         that having been provided with an extension to your initial 60  day
         deadline (09 December 2016 - 14 day extension to arrange  a  test),
         together with a further 60 day extension from 11 January 2017 to 13
         March 2017, you have been given a sufficient opportunity to sit  an
         approved English language test."


7.   The Respondent's decision  advised  the  Appellant  of  her  rights  of
    appeal - which were pursuant  to  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006. It was indicated to the  Appellant  that  she
    had available to her the grounds of appeal as they pertained  prior  to
    the amendments of the Immigration Act 2014.


8.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


9.   The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out  in  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble.


10.  The Appellant then made an application for permission to  appeal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert  on  8  October  2018.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble had misunderstood the  scope  of  the
    appeal, and had thereby wrongly limited  it  to  human  rights  grounds
    because he had failed to identify that the Appellant's appeal fell  for
    consideration under the pre-Immigration Act  2014  regime.   This  pre-
    amendment regime applied because the Appellant's  original  application
    was made on 9 June 2014 notwithstanding that the decision under  appeal
    was made on 6 June 2017.


11.  There does indeed appear to be a misapprehension on  the  part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge as to the scope of appeal.  This  is  evident
    at paragraph 11 of the decision which opens in these terms,  "Only  one
    ground of appeal is available: is the decision contrary to Section 6 of
    the Human Rights Act 1998?"


12.  The grounds of challenge upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted
    plead in aid the following,

         "Most crucially, the available grounds of  appeal  included  (inter
         alia) whether the decision-maker could  have  exercised  discretion
         differently properly reviewable by the Tribunal under Section 85 of
         the NIAA 2002.   That  in  turn  also  begs  the  question  whether
         discretion was exercised at all for the impugned decision to be  in
         accordance with the law..."


13.  It may be observed at this stage  -  as  indeed  Mr  Awan  acknowledged
    during the course of submissions -  that  the  first  section  of  this
    passage, which purports to reference section 84(1)(f) of the 2002  Act,
    is misconceived: the discretion referred to under the  legislation  was
    required to be a  discretion  available  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    rather than a discretion at large.  It was clearly the  case  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,
    and  no  issue  of  discretion  under  the  Immigration  Rules   arose.
    Accordingly, it is the latter part  of  the  quotation  above  -  which
    references section 84(1)(e) - that is pertinent to the substance of the
    challenge: i.e. that but for the Judge's error the Tribunal could  have
    considered whether the Appellant could avail  herself  of  an  argument
    that the Respondent's decision was 'not in accordance with the law'.


14.  However, the grounds of appeal do not further articulate  in  what  way
    it might be contended that the Respondent's decision was impugnable  on
    such a ground.


15.  In context the only possibility would be in respect  of  the  rejection
    of the representations in the letter of March 2017 requesting a further
    period of grace in order to pass an English test.   However,  from  the
    passages I have quoted above from the decision letter, it is manifestly
    the case  that  the  Respondent  gave  consideration  to  the  request;
    further, in so doing, as well as having regard to the  general  policy,
    gave consideration to whether to make use of his  wider  discretion  to
    favour the Appellant.  In  such  circumstances  Mr  Awan  realistically
    acknowledged that he recognised that the challenge was in  difficulties
    in substance if not in form - i.e. that although  there  was  technical
    merit in the 'jurisdiction' challenge, the Appellant  did  not  have  a
    subsequent case of merit to advance within the wider  jurisdiction  the
    First-tier Tribunal should have adopted.


16.  The Appellant's difficulty in is regard is reinforced  by  the  limited
    way in which her case was put before the First-tier Tribunal.


17.  It is apparent from paragraph 7  of  the  decision  that  reliance  was
    placed only on Article 8 of the ECHR. It was not expressly  articulated
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the appeal should be allowed on the
    basis that the Respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law.


18.  Nonetheless I note that as an aspect of the Article 8  case  the  issue
    of exercise of discretion was raised albeit in a  very  limited  sense:
    "[The Appellant's representative] had instructions to submit  that  the
    failure to exercise  discretion  is  a  breach  of  her  private  life"
    (paragraph 9).  However, as I have already noted,  this  point  has  no
    merit: the Respondent considered the  discretion  and  elected  not  to
    exercise it in the Appellant's favour.


19.  Moreover, and in any event  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  expressly
    found that there was no unfairness in the procedures:

         "She was granted a number of further periods to find a college  and
         sit an English test further to a successful appeal. She failed that
         test and there is no satisfactory evidence of unfairness in  either
         the process or the test to allow me to  conclude  the  Home  Office
         behaved unfairly in not allowing further time" (paragraph 14).

    See also:


         "There has been no unfairness in her treatment" (paragraph 22).


20.  In the circumstances it seems manifestly clear that even if the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had been alert to the wider jurisdiction  the  only
    basis of appeal that the Appellant  could  possibly  have  advanced  in
    respect of the decision being  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  had
    absolutely no merit whatsoever.  Indeed, Mr Awan  does  not  press  the
    point with any vigour, but frankly recognises the  difficulty  for  the
    Appellant.


21.  In the circumstances, whilst I accept that  there  was  a  misdirection
    such that the Judge failed to identify and recognise the extent of  the
    jurisdiction to be exercised in considering the Appellant's  appeal,  I
    decline to set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    exercise of my discretion under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal accordingly stands.


Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law.
    However, in exercise of the discretion under section  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  the  decision  is  not  set
    aside and accordingly stands.


23.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


24.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 4 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

