

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/00534/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22 January 2018                         |On 14 February 2018            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                           ME BALASINGAM KUGATHAS
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 8th of August 1979. He
      appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 22nd  of  December
      2015 to refuse his application for a permanent residence card  in  the
      United Kingdom pursuant  to  Regulation  15  (1)  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations")  as
      amended. His appeal was allowed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Amin sitting at Taylor House on 15th of  March  2017.  The  Respondent
      appeals with leave against that decision and for the reasons  which  I
      set out below I have found a material error of law in the decision  at
      first instance and have set it aside. Although this appeal came before
      me in the first place as an appeal by the Respondent I  have  for  the
      sake of convenience continued to refer to the  parties  as  they  were
      known at first instance.

The Appellant's Case

   2. The Appellant stated that he underwent a religious marriage on 8th  of
      April 2006 with Ms PY a German citizen ("the sponsor") and he  started
      living with her following this marriage.  The  marriage  was  formally
      registered in the United Kingdom on 5th of October 2007 and  a  couple
      had a baby girl born on 13th of September 2009. The marriage ran  into
      difficulties following the birth of their  daughter  and  the  sponsor
      left the Appellant in February 2011. The  marriage  was  dissolved  on
      16th of August 2012, the  Appellant  claiming  that  he  had  suffered
      domestic violence at the hands of  his  sponsor.  The  Respondent  had
      refused the application on the grounds  that  the  Appellant  had  not
      provided evidence that either he or the sponsor  had  resided  in  the
      United Kingdom in accordance with the 2006 Regulations during a 5-year
      period.

The Decision at First Instance

   3. At [17] the Judge gave her reasons why she was  allowing  the  appeal.
      The marriage had lasted from 5th of October 2007 until 16th of  August
      2012 when the marriage was dissolved. The marriage therefore lasted at
      least 3 years prior to the initiation of the divorce  proceedings  and
      the Appellant had retained a right of residence since the  dissolution
      of the marriage. She found the  Appellant  had  met  the  requirements
      under Regulation 10(5). He only had to satisfy one of the requirements
      in subsection (5) (d) and this he could do because  the  marriage  had
      lasted for at least 3 years and the couple had lived at least one year
      of that time in the United Kingdom.


   4.  The Judge also found that the Appellant had  resided  in  the  United
      Kingdom in accordance with  the  2006  Regulations  for  a  continuous
      period of 5 years and was at the end of that a family member  who  had
      retained the right of residence pursuant to Regulation 15(1)(f).  They
      Appellant had sought to rely on alternative limbs of Regulation 10 but
      the Judge did not consider she needed to decide those as the Appellant
      succeeded as indicated. She allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

   5. The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing that  the  Judge
      had made a material misdirection in law. The Appellant had  said  that
      his sponsor left the United Kingdom  in  February  2011  and  was  not
      resident in the United Kingdom at the time the divorce  was  finalised
      in August 2012. The Appellant could not therefore meet the  provisions
      of Regulation 10(5)(b) and his  application  was  therefore  correctly
      refused. As the Appellant could not satisfy subsection (5)(b), that he
      was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with the  Regulations
      at the date of the termination of the marriage, it mattered  not  that
      he  could  satisfy  subsection  (5)(d),  three-year  duration  of  the
      marriage. The sponsor had left the United Kingdom before the  divorce.
      The Appellant had not provided sufficient evidence  to  qualify  under
      Regulation 15 and the Judge did not  appear  to  have  considered  the
      Respondent's argument on that point.


   6. The application for permission to appeal came  on  the  papers  before
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Frankish 8th  of  November  2017.  In
      granting permission to appeal he commented  that  the  Respondent  may
      have brought this decision upon herself  with  slapdash  photocopying.
      The grounds however were arguable. The Appellant did not file  a  rule
      24 response to the grant.

The Hearing Before Me

   7. At the hearing before me it was conceded by counsel for the  Appellant
      that there had been an error  in  the  First-tier  determination.  The
      application form submitted by the Appellant had said that the  sponsor
      left the United Kingdom in February  2011.  At  section  8.25  of  the
      application form the Appellant indicated that the sponsor had left the
      United Kingdom at the date of divorce and returned  to  Germany.  This
      point was clarified in a covering letter  from  the  Appellant's  then
      legal advisers Linga and Co who wrote "in February 2011 [the  sponsor]
      left [the Appellant] without informing him.  She  took  [the  couple's
      daughter]  with  her.  She  took  everything  that  belonged  to  [the
      daughter] and all her photos so that  [the  Appellant]  did  not  have
      anything of her." Counsel conceded that if the Judge had not  realised
      that the sponsor was not in the United Kingdom at  the  relevant  time
      then it was a material error to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  could
      satisfy  Regulation  10  in  the  circumstances   set   out   in   the
      determination.

Findings

   8. The Judge had found as a fact at [13] that the sponsor  had  left  the
      Appellant in February 2011. However, the Appellant had to show that he
      was residing in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  2006
      Regulations at the date of termination. Since the sponsor was back  in
      Germany by then the Appellant could  not  have  retained  a  right  of
      residence under Regulation 10. This was because  the  Appellant  could
      not show that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights at the date  of
      termination, he did not appear to know where she was or what  she  was
      doing.


   9.  The marriage had lasted for at least 3  years  during  which  for  at
      least one year the Appellant and  sponsor  had  lived  in  the  United
      Kingdom (in fact rather more than one year) and the Appellant  himself
      was in employment, according to his application form but the important
      point was the status of the sponsor. On the basis of  the  Appellant's
      own case,  as  found  by  the  Judge,  he  could  not  show  that  the
      requirements of the 2006 Regulations  were  met.  The  Judge  had  not
      directed herself on the contents of the refusal letter. The  important
      page was page 2 which as Judge  Frankish  pointed  out  had  not  been
      copied in the Respondent's bundle. There was however a  full  copy  on
      file because it had been annexed to the notice of appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision submitted by the previous representatives.


  10.  Unfortunately, the Judge, although indicating that there  were  other
      possibilities whereby the Appellant's appeal might succeed, had not in
      fact gone on to deal with the case on that basis in  the  alternative.
      The separation and the return of the sponsor to Germany meant that the
      issue of whether the Appellant could show that the  sponsor  had  been
      working for a continuous 5-year period was not  properly  decided.  At
      [16] the Judge noted the five-year requirement and at [19] stated  she
      was satisfied it  was  met  but  this  was  inadequately  reasoned.  I
      considered whether I should proceed to rehear the appeal  but  as  the
      hearing at first instance had proceeded on the basis of a  mistake  of
      fact by the Judge the appeal had not properly taken place and it would
      not be right therefore for me to make a final decision at this stage.


  11. I bear in mind the Senior President's direction  in  relation  to  the
      remittal of appeals back to  the  First-tier.  There  may  be  further
      evidence which the Appellant wishes to submit  to  indicate  that  the
      sponsor was exercising treaty rights  and/or  that  he  can  otherwise
      satisfy the Regulations. For example, he may wish to pursue his  claim
      of being a sufferer of domestic violence (which  was  not  adjudicated
      upon at first instance) or provide better evidence  of  the  Sponsor's
      employment for a continuous five-year period. As this is an EEA appeal
      the Appellant can submit further evidence at the  re-hearing  even  if
      that is post decision. I find the determination contained  a  material
      error of law and I remit this appeal back to the First-tier to be  re-
      determined de novo with no findings preserved. Any further evidence to
      be relied upon by the Appellant must be filed and served at  least  14
      days before the final hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I remit the appeal back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be reheard, with no findings  of  fact  preserved,  by  any
    Judge save Judge Amin

Respondent's appeal allowed to the limited extent above

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 9th of February 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge









TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have set the determination aside on the grounds of  material  error  of
law, I also set aside the decision to make a fee award  in  this  case.  The
issue of the fee  award  will  have  to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal when this appeal is reheard.

Signed this 9th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
