



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/00026/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House               |          Decision and Reasons         |
|                                    |Promulgated                            |
|On: 2 October 2017                  |          On: 18 October 2017          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                             Mr Mubashar Hassan
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie, counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on  16  March  1992.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Lingam promulgated on 16 January  2017,  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent  dated  11  December  2015,  to
      refuse to vary his leave to remain under the Tier 4 (General)  Student
      Migrant Rules, with  reference  to  paragraph  322(1A)  for  using  an
      invalid TOEIC pursuant to paragraph 245ZX(a), and to remove him  under
      s.47 of the 2006 Act. The appellant did not appear at the  hearing  of
      his appeal on 3 January 2017.

   2. Judge Lingam noted at [13-14] that his application fell to be  refused
      under the general provision of paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules. ETS had
      declared the appellant's TOEIC as invalid on the evidence that in 2012
      he had used a proxy to pass the oral part of the  English  test  paper
      that was used to further his leave to remain for his  studies  in  the
      UK. That test took place on 21 February 2012.

   3. She set out the relevant authorities including  Qadir  v  SSHD  [2016]
      UKUT 00229 (IAC). She had regard to the evidence  relied  on  by  both
      parties filed at the hearing. She properly directed herself as to  the
      burden of proof at [26].

   4. She noted that the appellant had requested an oral hearing but  failed
      to attend that hearing. She was satisfied that his unexplained absence
      was highly unhelpful because "...it could reasonably infer his lack of
      interest in  his  appeal  and  more  importantly,  the  appellant  has
      forfeited an opportunity to avail himself to be cross examined by  the
      respondent's representative".  Even so, she had regard to his  grounds
      of appeal when assessing the allegation of fraud - [29].

   5. It was  contended  in  his  grounds  that  the  respondent  failed  to
      discharge the legal burden  of  proof  that  his  TOEIC  was  obtained
      fraudulently. However, he neither provided any counter evidence to the
      allegation nor that he actually sat for his own English  spoken  test.
      She was satisfied that his  silence  on  this  serious  allegation  is
      indicative of his own inability to counter the respondent's allegation
      made under paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules - [29].

   6. She was thus satisfied 'on a balance' that the appellant had failed to
      demonstrate that he has the English language  skill  to  complete  the
      spoken part of his test taken in 2012. The  evidence  adduced  by  the
      respondent was therefore sufficient to show  that  he  had  previously
      gained leave  with  a  fraudulently  obtained  English  language  test
      certificate - [30].

   7. With regard to his CAS, she was satisfied that even  if  the  document
      were valid at application, his appeal fell to  be  refused  under  the
      first appeal ground of the general refusal, paragraph 322(1A). He thus
      failed to make out his ground that he should be  granted  60  days  to
      find a replacement sponsor [31].

   8. She had regard to the appellant's grounds  advancing  Article  8.  She
      took account of his failure to comply with the consent order sealed on
      11 December 2014  to  provide  a  recent  statement  of  his  personal
      circumstances of private and family life in  the  UK.  The  respondent
      noted in the reasons for refusal that he had failed  to  provide  such
      information for consideration [32].

   9. It was not disputed that his Article 8  ground  related  only  to  his
      private life [33].

  10. She found that the  appellant  had  failed  to  offer  a  satisfactory
      explanation that the mandatory requirement under S-LTR.1.1 of Appendix
      FM did not relate to him. His Article 8 ground "falls here" [34].

  11. She noted that the respondent took account that the  appellant  relied
      on a fraudulent document and decided not to exercise  her  discretion.
      She 'rejected him leave' under paragraph S-LTR.2.2. Based on that,  it
      was concluded that the appellant failed to meet paragraph 276ADE(1) of
      the Rules. She was satisfied that he had failed to provide any grounds
      regarding the refusal [37].

  12.  She  noted  that   the   respondent   nevertheless   considered   his
      circumstances under the remaining sub-paragraphs of 276ADE  [38].  His
      nationality and period of five years' presence in the UK was accepted.
      However there was no evidence of any very significant  obstacle  under
      paragraph  276ADE(vi),  regarding  his  re-integration  into  life  in
      Pakistan - [38].

  13. The appellant also failed to offer  good  reasons  for  not  providing
      proper evidence regarding his life in the UK since 2012 either to  the
      respondent or  at  the  hearing  itself.  She  concluded  that  it  is
      reasonable that he may no longer  have  an  interest  in  his  current
      appeal or that he lacked sound evidence to make out his  private  life
      on Article 8 grounds [39]. She was satisfied that he  would  therefore
      not suffer very significant obstacles if required to  resume  life  in
      Pakistan after six years in the UK [39].

  14. The Judge stated  at  [44]  that  having  considered  the  appellant's
      overall circumstances, the respondent was satisfied that there were no
      exceptional  circumstances.  She  was  also  satisfied  that  no  such
      exceptional circumstances were identified in the grounds.  There  were
      accordingly no good grounds warranting consideration of his Article  8
      grounds outside the rules.

  15. On 27  July  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. He stated that the grounds  of  appeal
      asserted that the Judge failed properly to consider his  appeal  under
      Article 8 and to apply the five stage test  set  out  in  Razgar.   He
      noted that the decision was dated 11 December 2015.  Accordingly,  the
      only relevant ground of appeal was that the decision was unlawful  and
      contrary to s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Accordingly although the
      Judge had considered the Article 8  claim  through  the  lens  of  the
      Immigration Rules, she should still have applied the five stage  test.
      It was not open for her to find that  the  Immigration  Rules  were  a
      complete code for assessing the Article 8 claim.

  16. Mr Otchie referred  to  the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  in  the
      permission application.  He submitted on his  behalf  that  the  Judge
      failed to make any finding  in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  -
      incorrectly referred to at paragraph 8 of the grounds as sub paragraph
      (iv).

  17. He submitted that the Judge failed to make a clear  finding  regarding
      private life.  The  relevant  step  by  step  analysis  had  not  been
      undertaken.

  18. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Isherwood noted that there had been no
      challenge to the ETS finding. Moreover the appellant failed to  attend
      the hearing. She referred  to  the  letters  sent  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal from Morgan Mark Solicitors, who represented the appellant at
      the time. In a letter dated 3 January 2017 the solicitors enclosed the
      appellant's appeal bundle noting that by a letter  dated  20  December
      2016, the appellant had requested that his appeal be  decided  on  the
      papers.

  19. The appellant's witness statement was produced.  With  regard  to  the
      TOEIC/ETS English test, he contended at paragraph 12 that his case  is
      similar to SM and Qadir.

  20. Ms Isherwood referred to the decision of the Judge from [32]  onwards.
      The Judge did consider paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), finding that there was
      no evidence of any significant obstacles affecting his  re-integration
      into life in Pakistan after five years. She referred  to  his  witness
      statement in which he  complained  that  he  had  not  been  given  an
      opportunity of 60 days to provide a fresh CAS letter from a new Tier 4
      sponsor after his Tier 4 sponsor had its licence  revoked  during  the
      currency of his  application.  Moreover  he  also  asserted  that  the
      decision  of  the  Home  Office  was  unfair  and   unreasonable   and
      constituted an arbitrary exercise of discretion.

  21. She submitted that at paragraph 12 of his statement he  simply  relied
      on the judgment of SM and Qadir, contending that his case is  similar.
      No evidence however was produced in relation to the  allegations  made
      by the respondent. He contended at paragraph 13 of his statement  that
      even though the applicant cannot qualify under  the  Rules,  there  is
      always a power to make a favourable decision outside  the  rules  when
      justified. Given that he has not completed his studies  and  that  his
      parents have spent substantial amounts on his studies in the UK he was
      not granted a visa to complete them  He will face an irreparable loss.
      He requested the Judge to consider his appeal on human rights  grounds
      so that he can complete his ongoing studies "outside  the  immigration
      rules to enable my return home country with an advanced  qualification
      from the UK."

  22. Ms Isherwood submitted that the appeal should be dismissed.

  23. In reply, Otchie referred to paragraph [44] of the decision where  the
      Judge was satisfied that no exceptional circumstances were  identified
      in the grounds and that the rules are a complete  code  for  assessing
      his Article 8 claim.

  24. The appellant had referred to matters constituting  the  circumstances
      that fell outside the rules. The Judge required "further consideration
      and perhaps a further paragraph". He submitted that the question comes
      down to whether or not there has been a material error.

      Assessment

  25. The appellant did not appear at his appeal before the Tribunal, having
      requested that his appeal be considered on the papers. On the  day  of
      the scheduled hearing the solicitors enclosed an  appeal  bundle.  The
      Judge noted that there was no show by  the  appellant  and  his  legal
      representatives. The Judge also stated in  the  record  of  proceeding
      that no reason was given for their absence.

  26. However, as noted, Ms Isherwood  has  very  properly  referred  me  to
      letters faxed to the Tribunal on 20  December  2016  and  again  on  3
      January 2017 noting that the appellant had requested that  his  appeal
      be decided on the papers. That information  had  apparently  not  been
      relayed to the Judge.

  27. In the grounds seeking permission  there  is  no  reference  to  those
      letters. The grounds relied on Article 8, contending that his  removal
      would breach the private life component of Article  8.  Similarly  the
      Judge failed to make any finding with regard to paragraph  276ADE(vi).
      It was contended that the Judge did  not  undertake  a  step  by  step
      analysis referred to in Razgar.

  28. However, as submitted by Ms Isherwood  it  is  only  where  there  are
      exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  not  dealt  with  in   the
      Immigration Rules that it is appropriate for the Tribunal to  consider
      Article 8 outside the Rules.

  29. He appealed against the decision to refuse his application  to  remain
      as a student and submitted a notice of appeal. The Judge noted at [4],
      that in the grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  he
      contended that the respondent failed to discharge the burden of  proof
      relating to the TOEIC being a forgery. He also relied  on  common  law
      fairness,  contending  that  the  respondent  has  not  acted  fairly.
      Further, he asserted that he had a legitimate expectation to  complete
      his studies in the UK and his proposed removal was against  legitimate
      aims of the immigration control and was unjustified.

  30. It was not contended in the grounds seeking permission to appeal  that
      there was any procedural irregularity in proceeding with the appeal on
      3 January 2017.  Nor has it been contended that  there  was  an  error
      relating to the Judge's  finding  that  his  TOEIC  English  test  was
      invalid. As noted, she found that the silence on  this  allegation  is
      indicative of his inability to counter the respondent's allegation.

  31. Accordingly her findings at [29-30]  that  he  had  previously  gained
      leave with a fraudulently obtained English language  certificate,  has
      not been disputed. In his witness statement dated 30 December 2016 the
      appellant did  not  challenge  the  respondent's  assertion  that  his
      English speaking certificate  was  fraudulently  obtained.  He  simply
      stated that he relies on the recent judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal
      refusing the respondent's appeal against the Upper Tribunal's decision
      in SM and Qadir, contending that his case is similar to that decision.



  32. Apart from that assertion however, he has provided no evidence in  his
      witness statement in support of his assertion.

  33. In his witness statement he also submitted that the respondent  failed
      to consider the issue of proportionality. Even if an applicant  cannot
      qualify under the Rules there  is  the  power  to  make  a  favourable
      decision outside the rules.  Given  that  he  had  not  completed  his
      studies and that his parents had spent substantial amounts on them, he
      would be at an irreparable loss if not granted a visa to complete  his
      studies.

  34. It is on that basis that he asked the Judge to consider his appeal  on
      human rights grounds. He submitted that the appeal should  be  allowed
      and that the respondent be directed to grant him a  visa  to  complete
      his ongoing studies  so  that  he  could  return  home  with  advanced
      qualifications from the UK.

  35. I have had regard to the appellant's detailed grounds of appeal before
      the First-tier Tribunal. There it was asserted that the respondent had
      not discharged the burden of proof  relating  to  the  allegations  of
      deceit. Further,  the  respondent  has  not  acted  fairly.  There  is
      reliance  on  various  Tribunal  decisions  including  Thakur;   Patel
      (revocation of sponsor licence  -  fairness)  and  Naveed  (Student  -
      Fairness).

  36. As noted, he also contended that he had a  legitimate  expectation  to
      complete his course, and  has  paid  his  tuition  fees,  built  up  a
      relevant  connection  with  the  course,  the  institution   and   the
      educational  sequence  for  the  ultimate  professional  qualification
      sought. He also referred to having established social ties during  the
      period of studies.  Cumulatively  this  may  amount  to  private  life
      deserving of respect.

  37. The appellant has however provided no  evidence  substantiating  these
      latter assertions.

  38. He has contended that applying the above legal principles to the facts
      of his case, his compassionate circumstances provide sufficient weight
      which  outweighs  the  legitimate   interests   of   the   immigration
      authorities in enforcing immigration control. On those facts, his case
      is compelling and compassionate enough to attract the attention of the
      Tribunal to consider his case on a human rights basis.

  39. In his witness statement dated 30 December  2016,  the  appellant  has
      relied on the same matters.

  40. In Patel and Others [2012] EWCA Civ 960 at [57] the  Court  of  Appeal
      stated that it is important to  remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a
      general dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the secretary
      of state's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
      which may be unrelated to any protected human right.

  41. Judge Lingam  found  that  the  appellant  had  not  demonstrated  any
      compelling   circumstances    warranting    allowing    the    appeal,
      notwithstanding that the Rules were not satisfied.

  42. That claim had to be assessed in the context of  her  finding  that  a
      false document had been  produced  by  the  appellant  at  an  earlier
      application. She had proper regard to  the  appellant's  circumstances
      and his submissions.  She  was  satisfied  that  no  such  exceptional
      circumstances were identified in the grounds.

  43. Even though the Judge did not conduct the Razgar five step test, given
      the paucity of evidence before her, the Judge  would  inevitably  have
      come  to  the  same  conclusion,  namely   that   the   decision   was
      proportionate in the circumstances. Any error made by  the  Judge  was
      therefore not material.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date   16 October 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer












