


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00684/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |         Decision & Reasons       |
|                                           |Promulgated                       |
|On 15 December 2015                        |         On 23 December 2015      |
|                                           |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              YUSUF GIWA PALASA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sharma of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. Mr Palasa is a Nigerian national born on 5 March 1976. The Secretary
       of State refused his application for Indefinite Leave to Remain on 9
       December 2013. His appeal against that decision was allowed by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Majid ("the Judge") following a  hearing  on  24
       September 2014. For the sake of consistency with the decision in the
       First-tier Tribunal I will hereafter  refer  to  Mr  Palasa  as  the
       Appellant and to the Secretary of State as the Respondent.
    2. At a hearing on 3 November  2015  I  determined  that  there  was  a
       material error of law in that determination and set it aside. When I
       indicated that it was my intention to re-hear the case  immediately,
       Mr Bramble submitted that he was  not  in  a  position  to  properly
       represent the Respondent if the matter was be  re-heard  immediately
       as he did not have the 178 page bundle  of  evidence  filed  by  the
       Appellant that was before the Judge.

    3. I accepted that there was insufficient time for Mr Bramble  to  read
       the bundle and prepare cross-examination (it by  then  being  2.50pm
       and there being another case in the list) and in  the  interests  of
       fairness, the matter would have to be adjourned. The only  remaining
       issue was the appropriate forum.

    4. Mr Bramble submitted that it was appropriate  to  remit  the  matter
       back to the First-tier Tribunal as there had been no findings.  Miss
       Butler agreed as.  I indicated that I would remit the matter back to
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    5. Upon reflection and having considered the papers in much more detail
       and having considered the President's  Practice  Direction  in  more
       detail I formed the view that it was more appropriate to retain  the
       matter in the Upper Tribunal.

    6. I therefore directed that the  matter  be  set  down  on  the  first
       available date with a time estimate of 3 hours given the  number  of
       potential witnesses. No interpreter was required.

    7. Since then Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
       EWCA Civ 1175 was promulgated which states  that  decisions  in  the
       Upper Tribunal are effective as soon as judges uttered the words and
       could not be reconsidered or reversed, even if the judge had omitted
       to consider something properly.

    8. It will however be noted that firstly I initially said I  would  re-
       hear the case. It only had to be adjourned because of  Mr  Bramble's
       difficulty. If therefore it was a decision I had no power to  change
       my mind. Secondly if it was not a decision I could change my mind as
       to venue having reflected further on the submissions as to venue  as
       it did not dispose of proceedings.

    9. In my judgement it was not a decision but a  case  management  power
       and direction that I could set aside in accordance with paragraph  5
       of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  bearing  in
       mind paragraph 2 of those rules  and  the  overriding  objective  of
       dealing with the  case  fairly  and  justly  and  in  this  case  in
       particular avoiding delay. The matter was therefore relisted  before
       me as originally stated.

   10. Further submissions were made by Mr Duffy and Mr Sharma  neither  of
       whom had the other's bundle. The matter was stood down for  them  to
       be copied. They both sought to persuade me that  as  there  were  no
       preserved  findings   of   fact,   given   the   wholly   inadequate
       determination of Judge Majid, the most  appropriate  course  was  to
       remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  to  enable  onward
       appeal rights for both to be preserved.

   11. Given the lack of time they had to  prepare,  and  their  desire  to
       preserve onward appeal rights, I decided to remit the matter back to
       the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing to be heard by a Judge
       other than Judge Majid. For ease of reference I incorporate here  by
       findings from the hearing of 3 November 2015 in full  subject  to  a
       typographical amendment regarding the paragraph numbers in what  was
       my paragraph [19, 20, and 21] where  I  referred  to  Judge  Majid's
       paragraph [8] instead of [10]. Those amendments are now to be  found
       at my paragraph [29, 30, and 31] below.

The error of law hearing on 3 November 2015


   12. In her refusal  letter  the  Respondent  noted  that  the  Appellant
       claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 31  January  1996.  He
       applied on 7 October 2011 for Indefinite Leave to Remain. His appeal
       against the refusal  of  that  application  was  dismissed  and  his
       applications for permission to  appeal  against  that  refusal  were
       finally dismissed on 19 November 2012. This application for Leave to
       Remain outside the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules  HC395
       (the rules) was made on 28 March 2013.


   13. The basis of the refusal (9 December 2013) was that;

          1) there was no provision within the rules for such an application
             and it therefore was refused  under  paragraph  322(1)  of  the
             rules,
          2) there was no evidence to  support  his  claimed  fear  for  his
             safety if he returned to Nigeria,
          3) the previous  Tribunal  had  found  there  to  be  insufficient
             evidence to establish he had been in the United  Kingdom  prior
             to 2001,
          4) his ownership  of  a  property  here  was  not  a  sufficiently
             compelling reason to warrant a grant of Leave to Remain,
          5) there was no reason his partner could not return to Nigeria she
             being a Nigerian citizen with no Leave to Remain here,
          6) his partner is not a British citizen or settled here,  and  she
             has neither refugee status nor humanitarian protection,
          7) their children (born on 13 October 2010 and  17  December  2011
             respectively) have not resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  7
             years,
          8) he does not have sole responsibility for the children,
          9) there would be no obstacles in the children leaving the  United
             Kingdom with their parents,
         10) the children are young enough to adapt to life in Nigeria given
             their tender ages,
         11) there are no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  whole  family
             returning to Nigeria,
         12) he has not lived here continually for 20 years,
         13) he has resided in Nigeria for the majority of his life,
         14) he has not severed all social,  cultural,  or  family  ties  to
             Nigeria, and
         15) taking all the above into account there are  no  compelling  or
             compassionate circumstances to justify allowing him  to  remain
             in the United Kingdom outside the rules.

The grant of permission


   14. First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted permission  to  appeal  (22
       June 2015) on the grounds that;


          "it appears that there are arguable errors of law in respect of an
          apparent failure to give adequate reasons for his findings and  to
          address Section  117B"  (that  being  s117B  of  the  Nationality,
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).


Discussion


Ground 1 - "adequacy of reasons"

   15. In the determination the Judge said;


        [2] "I have read this refusal notice carefully and have taken  into
        account its text in assessing this case, paying specific  attention
        to the justifications advanced for the negative  decision  appealed
        against."

        [5] "ex parte Gondolia [1991] Imm A.R..591 ...advises junior judges
        not to give reasons for every finding of fact and  waste  paper  in
        detailing obvious reasons..."

        [9] "It is not incumbent upon me to isolate every single  piece  of
        evidence and indicate whether I  have  found  it  relevant  to  the
        issue. I am  only  obliged  by  the  superior  precedents  to  give
        "sufficient and adequate" reasons and I am  not  under  a  duty  to
        refer to each and every piece of evidence and it therefore does not
        follow that because I have not referred to certain specific  facts,
        they have not been taken into account."


        [10] "In this Determination  I  am  confining  my  reasons  to  the
        dispositive aspects of the case. I am particularly affected by  the
        following facts:-
              a) The previous IJ was misled by the Home Office which had not
                 given the "additional papers"  to  him  to  show  that  the
                 Appellant was in this country in 1998.
              b) I  had  at  my  disposal  in  the  Appellant's  bundle  the
                 "additional papers" which  were,  as  I  was  told  by  the
                 Appellant in the oral evidence, in the control of the  Home
                 Office,
              c) I have carefully  read  the  Appellant's  statement  of  22
                 September 2014. Indubitably, it registers a powerful  human
                 story inspiring  any  judge  to  exercise  discretion  with
                 utmost compassion.
              d) As in Paragraph 3 of the Statement of 22 September 2014 the
                 Appellant confirms he has been away from Nigeria  for  over
                 20 years."


   16. The Appellant's account  which  the  Judge  extracted  [16]  can  be
       summarised in this way. He came here in 1996 (with the assistance of
       an agent - that being clear from the  Solicitor's  letter  26  March
       2013) having lived in Germany for 2 years. He studied  in  2004  and
       from  2008  to  2011  obtaining  various  business   qualifications.
       Documentary evidence of  being  here  from  1998  to  2001  was  not
       presented to the  previous  Tribunal  by  the  Home  Office  or  his
       previous Solicitor or Barrister. The electricity bills from November
       1998 show he was in the United Kingdom then. He has developed  close
       friendships here. His wife and children are here. His  father,  step
       mother, step siblings and their families are here, all of  whom  are
       British. He has a strong private and family life here.


   17. The Judge stated;

        [17] "From the preceding extract it is clear that the Appellant has
        two children and the "best interest"  of  the  children  cannot  be
        ignored. The Appellant's father in his supporting letter  has  also
        talked about the enjoyable presence of his grandchildren."


   18. The Judge summarised aspects of the law regarding Article 8 and  s55
       of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 [18 to 29].


   19. The Judge stated;

        [30] "Accordingly, in view of my  deliberations  in  the  preceding
        paragraphs and having taken  into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
        documentary evidence as well as the submissions at my  disposal...I
        am  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  merits  the  benefit  of   the
        Immigration Rules HC395, as amended  and  the  protections  of  the
        ECHR."


   20. Miss Butler produced a copy of Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:  set
       aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)  which  was  followed  by  Budhathoki
       (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) which guides  me  to
       the view that it is generally unnecessary and unhelpful  for  First-
       tier Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised  in
       a case. This leads to judgments becoming overly  long  and  confused
       and is not a  proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.  It  is,
       however, necessary for Judges to identify and resolve key  conflicts
       in the evidence and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,
       so that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.


   21. I note here that the Judge made no reference to the contents of  the
       previous  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Robinson
       (IA/14073/2012)  or  evidence  contained  within  it.  He  makes  no
       reference to Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2002] UKIAT 00702, or [2003] UKIAT 00053 B (Pakistan) which  guides
       me to  the  view  that  the  Devaseelan  principle  applies  to  all
       categories of appeals. I note also Rajaratnam v Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 8 which states that previous
       findings can be set aside if fresh evidence casts doubt on them.

   22. It is of note that First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson recorded  that
       the Appellant stated that;

        [8]  "his  elderly  mother  and  a  few  brothers  were  living  in
        Nigeria...he had entered the UK with the assistance of an agent and
        had no passport...After he came to the UK he worked in his father's
        letting agency...he had no documents regarding his life  from  1998
        to 2001 as his parents were in control and did not let him go out",
        and


        [9] "he was earning �780 per month at the minicab office  where  he
        has worked since 2008",


        and his wife stated that;


        [10] "her husband's relationship with his family in the UK was  not
        as strong as it should be as they had a commercial crisis", and


        [11] "she did not  live  with  her  husband  because  of  financial
        problems".

   23. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson noted;


          1) the absence of oral or written evidence  from  the  Appellant's
             father, step mother or other relatives here [21 and 24], or  of
             having lived in Germany from 1994 to 1996 [22],


          2) they became a couple when his immigration status was precarious
             [32] (I note here that that is not correct  as  it  has  always
             been unlawful),

          3) his wife is an educated woman who worked in  Nigeria  [32]  and
             had been here unlawfully since 2010 [28], and

          4) the Appellant was not living with his wife  and  children  [33]
             although there was a genuine relationship [32].


   24. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson;


          1) considered at length the best interest of the children [35],

          2) considered at length his private and family life here [36],

          3) considered at length  their  ties  to  Nigeria  [37],  and  the
             economic burden on the state [38], and

          4) found that the proportionality balancing exercise fell  against
             the Appellant [39/40].

   25. Miss Butler (with commendable tenacity) submitted that the Judge was
       not required to give full reasons. The facts were not complex. There
       was no real conflict of evidence. There were  no  adverse  findings.
       The Judge focussed on 4 pieces of evidence and adopted entirely  the
       Appellant's witness statement. He  looked  at  the  children's  best
       interest. He applied the "primacy" test  despite  referring  at  one
       point to the "paramouncy" test. He looked at Article 8  through  the
       lens of  the  rules.  He  was  entitled  to  find  that  there  were
       compelling and exceptional circumstances. Miss Butler conceded  that
       the Judge does not deal with the individual matters  of  concern  to
       the Respondent but dealt with them generally.  Mr  Bartle  submitted
       that the Respondent's concerns were not dealt with at all.

Ground 2 - Section 117B

   26. Miss Butler produced a copy of Dube  (ss117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90
       (IAC) and AM (s117B) Malawi [UKUT] 0260 (IAC).  She  submitted  that
       the Judge referred to s117 and looked at the matter through the lens
       of the Human Rights Act.


   27. In response to my observation that  the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal
       under the rules when no such application was made under  the  rules,
       Miss Butler said that she had no idea why he referred to them as the
       whole tenor of the judgement focussed on Article 8.  He  dealt  with
       compelling circumstances. It was a fact sensitive  case.  The  Judge
       heard the evidence. He did not have to set out s117 but  dealt  with
       the relevant part. He was entitled to find that the  maintenance  of
       an effective immigration control did not outweigh the best  interest
       of the children.

Decision on Ground 1

   28. The Judge's determination is wholly inadequate. The  Judge  entirely
       failed to engage with the Respondent's case and the concerns I  have
       identified at [3] above. The exposition of legal principles  in  the
       Judgement [18 to 29] is not a substitute for analysing the  evidence
       and making findings on contested core issues in the case. The  final
       sentence of [27] is utterly irrelevant.


   29. In particular, regarding the specific "facts" the  Judge  relied  on
       [see 10 above] the Judge found  that  the  Home  Office  misled  the
       previous Judge [10(a)] whilst ignoring the evidence that was  before
       that Judge from the Appellant himself who had said that  he  had  no
       documents regarding his life from 1998 to 2001 as his  parents  were
       in control [see 12[8] above]. If the  Appellant  did  not  have  the
       papers, he could not have given them to  his  legal  representatives
       and they could  not  have  sent  them  to  the  Home  Office  (which
       additionally fatally undermines the "fact" referred  to  in  [10(b)]
       above) and neither could have sent them to the Judge. The finding of
       the Home Office misleading the  Judge  in  those  circumstances  was
       perverse and the criticism of his previous representatives  entirely
       without merit.

   30. With regards to "fact" [10(c)], the suggestion that the  Appellant's
       statement of 22 September  2014  indubitably  registers  a  powerful
       human story inspiring any judge to exercise discretion  with  utmost
       compassion, is, with as much  respect  as  I  can  muster,  complete
       nonsense and perverse. It does not engage with the Respondent's core
       concerns (and upon which the Judge made  no  findings  despite  them
       being contentious) that the Appellant had failed  to  establish  his
       residence here since 1996, that he had come illegally and had always
       been here unlawfully, he had worked illegally,  he  had  significant
       family ties to Nigeria namely  his  mother  and  his  brothers,  his
       family ties here had not been established to be as close as claimed,
       his wife had always been  here  precariously  and  unlawfully  since
       2010, she was Nigerian and had worked in Nigeria, the children  were
       very young (even today the oldest is just 5), and the  whole  family
       could return to Nigeria without there being any  undue  hardship  in
       doing so let alone insurmountable obstacles.

   31. With regards to "fact" [10(d)] of the Appellant having left  Nigeria
       20 years ago, the Judge entirely failed to note the previous finding
       [16(1) of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson's  determination]  that
       there was no evidence the Appellant had been in Germany from 1994 to
       1996. There was still  no  subsequent  evidence  to  undermine  that
       finding. In those circumstances it was not a  finding  open  to  the
       Judge on the evidence without further analysis and was perverse.

   32. For all these  reasons,  in  my  judgement  there  was  therefore  a
       material error of law in the manner in which the  Judge  dealt  with
       the Respondent's  concerns  as  he  simply  ignored  them,  and  the
       Respondent had no idea why she had lost.  Gondolia, Budhakothi,  and
       Shizad do not provide an exemption for a Judge to  ignore  the  core
       disputes in the case, make findings upon them,  or  ignore  previous
       findings.

Decision on Ground 2


   33. The Judge made no reference to s117. The only oblique  reference  to
       it is in the reference to  the  Immigration  Act  2014  [29  of  the
       Judge's determination]. There is no analysis of  the  provisions  of
       s117 or how it applies to this  case.  In  my  judgement  there  was
       therefore a material error of law in the manner in which  the  Judge
       dealt with S117.


Summary of decision on error of law


   34. The making of the decision by the Judge did involve the making of an
       error on a point of law for the reasons I have already given on both
       grounds contended.


   35. I set aside the decision.

   36. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  hearing
       to be heard by a Judge other than Judge Majid. The time estimate  is
       3 hours. No interpreter is required.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
15 December 2015
