
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00931/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 March 2016                          |On 5 April 2016                     |
|Oral judgment                            |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                              Ms Supinder Kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Awan, Legal Adviser, Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is a challenge by the appellant to a determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hosie promulgated following a hearing at Hatton Cross on
    20 July 2015.  The appellant, Ms Supinder Kaur, was born  on  20  April
    1987 and is a national of India who entered the United  Kingdom  on  28
    November 2010 as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant with leave valid to
    28 June 2014.

2.   On 27 June 2014 the appellant obtained a CAS from  Zaskin  College  and
    applied online for an extension of her student leave  to  remain  under
    the points-based system and also for a biometric  residence  permit  to
    enable her to undertake  further  study  in  hospitality,  tourism  and
    management.  This application was refused by a notice of refusal  dated
    10 December 2014.  The reason for the refusal is said to  be  that  the
    appellant failed to produce the necessary documents or  other  evidence
    to establish her claim for leave to remain. As a result her application
    was refused pursuant to paragraph 245ZX(c) with reference to  paragraph
    116(c) of Appendix A and paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Immigration Rules.

3.   The appellant challenged that decision on appeal  and  the  judge  sets
    out at paragraphs 6 to 11  of  the  determination  the  nature  of  the
    evidence that was raised before her  including,  in  paragraph  9,  the
    statement that the appellant's representative submitted  that  reliance
    be placed upon the appellant's evidence as  contained  in  her  witness
    statement and also the case law produced.  The  respondent's  decision,
    it was submitted, is unlawful and unfair.  The appellant contended  the
    cases of Patel (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India  [2011]
    UKUT 211  (IAC)  and  Thakur  (PBS  decision  -  common  law  fairness)
    Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 151 (IAC) are not limited only to  circumstances
    where a college licence is revoked.  Both cases give  general  guidance
    on what the requirements of fairness  demand.   When  an  applicant  is
    unaware of something which has happened between the  Home  Office,  the
    college and the sponsor it is only  fair  to  allow  the  applicant  to
    provide a replacement CAS or to otherwise address any issues.

4.   The judge was clearly aware of the thrust of the submissions that  were
    made and noted in relation to the Rules that it was  accepted  that  in
    the absence of a CAS an application for a  student  migrant  visa  must
    fail.  The submission made to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was,  it  was
    submitted today, that what is engaged here is a matter  of  common  law
    fairness.  The judge sets out the findings at paragraphs 12, 13 and  14
    of the decision, paragraph 14 referring to Article 8 ECHR and the other
    two paragraphs referring to a consideration of  the  application  under
    the Rules.

5.   In paragraphs 12 and 13 the judge makes the following findings:

         "12. I noted that the appellant's representative accepted that  the
             appellant does not meet the Immigration Rules in  the  absence
             of a valid CAS at the time of the application.  I  accept  the
             respondent's submission that the withdrawal of the CAS by  the
             college is a matter between the  college  and  the  appellant.
             The appellant did know the reason why her  CAS  was  withdrawn
             when she was due to commence studies and she was told  by  the
             college that she could not start her course without  her  visa
             extension.  This was her evidence.  In the absence of her visa
             extension  being  forthcoming  her  CAS  was  withdrawn.   The
             appellant does not qualify in terms of the  Immigration  Rules
             as detailed in the respondent's notice of refusal.  There  has
             been  no  misinterpretation  of  the  law  and  there  is   no
             discretion afforded to the respondent.  It  is  therefore  not
             possible  to  remit  the  case  for  reconsideration  by   the
             respondent in light of mitigating circumstances.


         13.  I considered the submissions  made  in  terms  of  common  law
             fairness in light of the case law referred to.  I do not  find
             that there is an issue of common law  fairness  arising  here.
             The appellant has been in the UK in terms of  a  student  visa
             for four years.  She was aware of the requirements of the visa
             and the CAS system.  I accept the respondent's  position  that
             the reason for the withdrawal of a CAS from  a  student  is  a
             matter between the student and the college  and  there  is  no
             obligation on the respondent to communicate  that  information
             nor would the respondent necessarily be in possession of  that
             information.  The appellant was in touch with her college  and
             she knew that in order  to  commence  studies  she  needed  an
             extension of her leave.  She did not have  this  and  in  fact
             only applied for her visa extension shortly before her  course
             was due to start.  The cases of Patel and Thakur are not on  a
             par in the  present  circumstances,  on  the  appellant's  own
             evidence."


6.   The judge found the decision proportionate in relation to Article 8.

7.    The  appellant's  grounds  for  permission  to  appeal  set  out   the
    chronology of the  matter  and  challenge  the  decision  on  two  main
    grounds.  One relates to the Naved (Student - fairness) point  claiming
    that the judge erred in law in not finding that there was an obligation
    upon the Secretary of State and, as such, that she did not act  fairly,
    and in paragraph 4 a reference to the difference between the two  forms
    of making an application, the "in person same day premium  service"  or
    the postal application service that was employed by  the  appellant  in
    relation to this matter.

8.   The grounds refer to the decision of Basnet (validity of application  -
    respondent) [2012] UKUT 113 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal are said  to
    have noted at paragraph 31: "We are however sufficiently  impressed  by
    the marked difference in treatment between the postal  application  and
    the personal application to indicate that it has  every  appearance  of
    substantive unfairness."  That was an observation, no more, in relation
    to Basnet and it was confirmed by Mr Awan this was not an issue  raised
    previously.

9.   I make an observation,  and  no  more,  at  this  time  which  is  that
    although the procedures adopted by the Secretary of State  in  relation
    to a postal application or for those who turn  up  in  person  for  the
    premium service, for which they pay a little more,  may  be  different,
    there is no restriction upon  the  individual  concerned  as  to  which
    method of application they choose.  If  a  person  chooses  to  make  a
    postal application they have no legitimate expectation other than  that
    their application will be considered in  the  same  way  as  all  other
    postal  applications  in  accordance  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
    published guidance and instructions to its caseworkers.  A  person  who
    makes a postal application has no legitimate expectation that they will
    be treated in the same way as a person who makes  a  same  day  premium
    service application.  As I have stated, that was not raised before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and is not a matter that  establishes  legal  error
    before this Tribunal today.

10.  Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  on  20
    January 2016 on  the  basis  it  was  arguable  that  the  respondent's
    decision is not fair and that the  respondent  should  have  given  the
    appellant a period of leave to enable her to obtain a replacement  CAS.
    The position is that  the  appellant's  leave  previously  granted  had
    expired at that time although was continued by virtue  of  Section  3C.
    The suggestion further leave should be granted would have required  the
    Secretary of State to effectively grant a fresh period  of  leave  just
    for the purpose of making an application to obtain a CAS.

11.  In any event, the matter before us today appears to be a fairly  narrow
    issue.  A skeleton argument has been filed by Mr Awan on behalf of  the
    appellant and in the course of his earlier discussions and  submissions
    a number of concerns arose.  The fact that Mr Awan is  a  solicitor  is
    totally irrelevant.   The  law  relating  to  the  obligation  owed  by
    representatives  to  the  Tribunal  applies  whether  a  person  is   a
    solicitor, a barrister, a legal executive, a litigant in person,  or  a
    self-represented person.

12.  The obligations imposed upon the Upper Tribunal are clearly set out  in
    the 2007 Act in relation to applications of this  nature,  namely  that
    the Tribunal has to ascertain whether  it  has  been  established  that
    there is a legal error, an error of law as we call it, material to  the
    decision made by the judge as  the  first  step.   The  way  the  Upper
    Tribunal assess that error and the arguments put  forward  is  to  look
    primarily at the evidence that was before the judge and the submissions
    that were raised before  the  judge  hearing  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal.

13.  It is of concern that  an  experienced  solicitor  would  think  it  is
    acceptable to raise in his grounds of appeal  something  that  was  not
    raised before the First-tier Judge as if that somehow  suggested  error
    in the decision that was made by the judge.  That  trend  continued  in
    relation to the approach taken before the Upper Tribunal  in  which  Mr
    Awan originally tried to run an argument  that  EK  (Ivory  Coast)  was
    wrongly decided and should not  be  followed  for,  he  said,  arguable
    reasons. This was a matter not only not raised  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal but also a matter not contained within his  skeleton  argument
    or grounds upon which permission to appeal had been sought.  That was a
    clear attempt to ambush both the Secretary of State  and  the  Tribunal
    and I consider such conduct by a solicitor or any legal  representative
    to be wholly unacceptable. These are not 'Robinson obvious' points.

14.  In addition, within the skeleton argument is set out an argument  based
    upon the application of Section 116C of the Immigration Rules  and  the
    lawfulness of the decision to withdraw a CAS.  This is at paragraphs 12
    and 13 of the skeleton argument.  These again are matters that  do  not
    appear to have been raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and,  of
    greater concern, the judge clearly records that it was accepted  before
    the First-tier that in the absence of  a  CAS  the  application  for  a
    student visa must fail.  It appears on the face of it that having  said
    one thing to the First-tier Tribunal another completely different thing
    has been said to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Whilst  it  is  accepted  that
    grounds can be raised and applications can be made at various stages of
    the proceedings to  amend  pleadings,  for  which  permission  will  be
    considered and granted or refused, it is not acceptable practice for  a
    legal adviser to effectively attempt ambush in this manner.

15.  When Mr Awan was given time after his preliminary submissions had  been
    raised to draft an application to amend his grounds if that is what  he
    was seeking to do and to set out the basis  on  which  he  believed  he
    could support a case that EK (Ivory Coast) was incorrectly decided,  he
    returned to the Tribunal and indicated that he was not proceeding  with
    that argument.  If that argument was  as  important  and  clear  as  he
    initially submitted one is  entitled  to  expect  that  it  would  have
    appeared  in  the  earlier  pleadings  and,  having  been   given   the
    opportunity to go and right the wrong which had been created,  that  he
    would have taken the opportunity to set out the basis of his claim  and
    make such an application as was required, but he did not choose  to  do
    so.  I understand why he did not. The reason being,  in  simple  terms,
    that such an application has no arguable merit.

16.  The issue of whether those points were Robinson obvious  and  could  be
    inferred from the submissions made also arose during the course of  the
    submissions but I do not find that these points are  Robinson  obvious.
    It is arguable that Robinson obvious  points  are  only  applicable  to
    asylum cases, in any event, which is where the issue  initially  arose,
    but even if one  extends  the  principle  generally  to  all  types  of
    immigration appeals it has not been established on the facts  that  the
    points Mr Awan attempted to raise fall within the relevant criteria.

17.  The Tribunal is therefore left needing to consider the matter on  which
    permission was granted, namely that more should have happened, i.e. the
    First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  found  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law as  a  result  of
    the failure of the Secretary of State to go back to  the  appellant  to
    say this is what had happened and inviting her to  put  matters  right.
    It was accepted that the time that this decision was made was at a time
    when the jurisdiction existed within the First-tier Tribunal for such a
    finding to be made, if appropriate.

18.  The importance of EK (Ivory Coast) is that this was a case in which  it
    was held that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  responsible  for  a
    college's  administrative  error  in  withdrawing  a  Confirmation   of
    Acceptance for Studies before an application for leave  to  remain  had
    been determined under the points-based system.  When the  Secretary  of
    State saw that the CAS had been withdrawn the general public  law  duty
    of fairness had not obliged her to adjourn any  decision  to  give  the
    claimant notice of the problem and an opportunity to rectify it.

19.  Two points arise from that.  The first one is that in the  guidance  to
    Tier 4 sponsors it is clearly stated  that  if  a  Tier  4  sponsor  is
    withdrawing a CAS  that  they  give  notice  directly  to  the  student
    applicant. In this case Judge Hosie makes a specific finding  that  the
    applicant was aware that the CAS had been withdrawn.  The second point,
    although there is criticism that permission was  not  granted  on  this
    point, is that the judge was in fact  right  to  make  a  finding  that
    issues in relation to the grant and withdrawal of  a  CAS  are  matters
    between the college, the education provider, and  the  student  because
    that is not a matter in relation to which the  Secretary  of  State  is
    involved.

20.  The whole purpose of the Tier 4 system,  and  the  guidance  issued  to
    those on the Tier 4 sponsors register approved  for  providing  Tier  4
    services, is that the obligation to ensure compliance  has  been  moved
    from the Secretary of State  to  the  Tier  4  sponsor.   It  is  their
    responsibility to ensure that the requirements of the Rules are met and
    to decide whether to issue a CAS or not.  In this case it appears  that
    what happened is that at the date when the appellant's course  was  due
    to start she possibly did have a valid CAS  because  it  had  not  been
    withdrawn at that point, but she did  not  have  an  extension  of  her
    leave.  Therefore she was not permitted to start  the  course  and  the
    college withdrew the CAS.

21.  The second decision is a far more recent one of the  Court  of  Appeal.
    This is Kaur v Secretary of State [2015] EWCA Civ 13 in  which  it  was
    held that the respondent had no obligation to give notice either to  an
    applicant  for  leave  to  remain  or  to  their  sponsoring   academic
    institution that she  considered  there  to  be  a  deficiency  in  the
    Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  document  before  making  an
    adverse decision on that basis.

22.  The importance of the case of Kaur, which was an appeal  to  the  Court
    of Appeal against a decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul,  is  that
    in that case Zane Malik, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors who  are  the
    solicitors in this case, raised two points.  The first related  to  the
    meaning of paragraph 120A, which is not a live issue.  The second point
    is summarised by the Court  of  Appeal  in  paragraph  2(ii)  of  their
    judgment in Kaur given by Lord Justice Burnett in the following terms:

         "Even if the Secretary of State did not have to accept the  CAS  as
         confirming academic progress,  she  was  obliged  to  make  further
         enquiries  of  the  academic  institution   before   refusing   the
         application on the basis of Naved v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC), which was applied  by  analogy  in
         Pokhriyal."


23.  If this is an attempt by Mayfair Solicitors to  re-run  arguments  that
    Zane Malik put before the Court of Appeal  on  instructions  from  this
    firm, as if they are trying to seek a different or alternative outcome,
    i.e. to go behind the decision of the Court of Appeal,  that  is  again
    wholly unprofessional and unacceptable in terms of  their  professional
    conduct.  I make no finding in relation to whether that is their intent
    because I did not ask Mr Awan to make any comment on the point.  I make
    a general observation and no more.

24.  What we can be satisfied about is that Mr Malik  would  have  done  his
    level best to persuade the Court of Appeal that decisions  such  as  EK
    and the other cases considered were wrongly decided, but the  Court  of
    Appeal were clearly not with him.

25.  I refer to the court's decision in relation to what they class  as  the
    second question at paragraphs 38, 39, 41 and 42 of the judgment of  the
    Court of Appeal where they state the following:

         "38. The very brief reference to Naved in  the  course  of  Jackson
             LJ's judgment founds Mr Malik's submission that there was,  in
             this case, an obligation upon UKBA to go back to Citizen  2000
             to seek clarification of the CAS.  The reach of Naved has been
             considered twice  in  this  court  since  Pokhriyal  in  cases
             concerning Tier 4 Students and deficiencies in  the  CAS:  see
             Rahman v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
             EWCA Civ 11 [2014] 1 WLR 3574 and EK (Ivory Coast) v Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1517.   In
             neither case was Pokhriyal  cited  nor,  as  it  happens,  was
             Rahman cited in EK (Ivory Coast). Be that as it may,  in  both
             cases this court distinguished Naved and concluded that when a
             Tier 4 sponsor fails to provide the evidence via a  CAS  which
             is required to enable the  student  to  secure  the  necessary
             points, there is  no  obligation  founded  in  fairness  which
             obliges the Secretary of State further to investigate with the
             sponsor or to inform the student.


         39.  The head note in Naved, drafted by UTIAC itself, states that


                  'fairness requires the  Secretary  of  State  to  give  an
                  applicant an opportunity to address grounds  for  refusal,
                  of which he did not know and could not have known  failing
                  which the resulting decision may be set aside on appeal as
                  contrary to law ...'


             In EK Sales LJ, with whom Briggs LJ agreed, decided  that  the
             head note  set  out  a  bald  proposition  which  was  not  of
             universal application in the  field  of  immigration  decision
             making.  They did not question the decision in  Naved  itself.
             The facts of  Naved  were  such  that  UKBA  bore  substantial
             responsibility for an error which had occurred and resulted in
             leave being refused.  The applicant had  provided  information
             about his course.  Without telling him,  UKBA  approached  his
             college  for  confirmation  of  his  having  studied  on   and
             completed the  course.   The  college  replied  identifying  a
             different person and said he had  not  completed  the  course.
             Neither the college nor UKBA noticed  the  mistake.   The  two
             students shared the same surname.  The applicant had  in  fact
             completed the course successfully."


26.  At paragraph 40 the court in Kaur found:

         "40. In Rahman the application for leave to remain was  refused  on
             the basis that the sponsor  had  failed  to  confirm  academic
             progress.  Richards LJ, who gave the only  reasoned  judgment,
             considered  expressly   the   question   whether,   in   those
             circumstances, the Secretary of State was obliged as a  matter
             of fairness to give the applicant an  opportunity  to  address
             the deficiency in the CAS before the decision was made.  There
             was some uncertainty whether the applicant was  aware  of  the
             deficiency but either way,  the  answer  was  no.   EK  (Ivory
             Coast) reached the same conclusion on  different  facts.   The
             applicant in that case relied upon a CAS  which  she  supplied
             with her application.  Between the date of her application and
             the date  upon  which  UKBA  made  its  decision  the  sponsor
             withdrew the CAS, it appears by mistake.   The  applicant  was
             unaware of that.  Her application was refused.  Sales LJ (with
             whom Briggs LJ agreed in a  separate  judgment)  distinguished
             Naved and concluded that in the context  of  the  points-based
             system there was no obligation  to  inform  the  applicant  to
             enable her to make good the deficiency. "


27.  In paragraphs 41 and 42 the court found:

         "41. The points-based system for determining whether to grant leave
             to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom,  which  applies  to
             students as well as a number of other categories of applicant,
             is  designed   to   achieve   predictability,   administrative
             simplicity and certainty.   It  does  so  at  the  expense  of
             discretion,  that  is  to  say  it   is   prescriptive.    The
             consequence is that failure to comply with  all  its  detailed
             requirements will usually lead to a failure to earn the points
             in question and thus refusal: see e.g. Sullivan LJ in  Alam  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 960
             at  [44],  Davis  LJ  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2 at [100]; Sales LJ in
             EK (Ivory Coast) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 at [28] and Briggs LJ at  [59].   It  was
             that important background which informed the  decision  in  EK
             (Ivory Coast).


         42.  By contrast, the issue  was  not  elaborated  or  reasoned  in
             Pokhriyal.  In any event, the reference  to  an  analogy  with
             Naved was an obiter dictum.  It appears to have been mentioned
             by Jackson LJ because UTIAC  had  referred  to  Naved.   UTIAC
             observed that if  UKBA  had  asked  the  Tier  4  sponsor  for
             clarification of the CAS before refusing AH's application,  no
             confirmation of academic progress would have been forthcoming.
              That was because in UTIAC's view the subsequent letter  of  4
             June failed to do so.  It follows, in my judgment,  that  both
             Rahman and EK (Ivory  Coast)  are  binding  authority  on  the
             question whether the Secretary of State should, as a matter of
             fairness, give notice to an applicant for leave to  remain  or
             the Tier 4 sponsor that she considers there to be a deficiency
             in the CAS before making an adverse decision  on  that  basis.
             There is no such obligation."


28.  Not only are the three decisions of the Court  of  Appeal,  Rahman,  EK
    (Ivory Coast) and Kaur, binding on that court, they are decisions of  a
    higher court binding upon this Tribunal.  In this  appeal  it  has  not
    been made out that the judge made any arguable legal error  based  upon
    the points she was asked to consider when dismissing the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules.  The common law duty of fairness was  not  found
    to be engaged on the basis of the facts and the law, such as  to  place
    any obligation upon the Secretary of State to consult the appellant. No
    arguable unfairness in the procedure adopted is made out in relation to
    the decision on the basis of the material,  pleadings  and  submissions
    available to the First-tier Tribunal or to this Tribunal today.

29.  In relation to Article 8, that has not been the subject of a  grant  of
    permission but if one takes as  a  starting  point  that  there  is  no
    arguable  legal  error  in  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, having looked at the Article 8 issue myself prior to
    coming down to hear submissions today, had that been  a  ground  before
    this Tribunal it would have been found that  no  arguable  legal  error
    material to the decision to dismiss the appeal on human rights  grounds
    has been made out.

30.  For these reasons this decision shall stand and the appeal shall fail.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

