
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00595/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 September 2014                          |On 10 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                SAMUEL AGYEI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms L G Tetteh instructed by A J Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant, a national of Ghana, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
  against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  to  issue  him
  with a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the  UK  as
  the spouse of an  EEA  national.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan
  dismissed the appeal and the appellant now  appeals  with  permission  to
  this Tribunal.

2. The appellant claims to have married Charlotte Gyimah  (the  sponsor),  a
  Dutch national, by  proxy  marriage  in  Ghana  on  20  March  2013.  The
  respondent did not accept the marriage certificate as  proving  that  the
  appellant is married to the EEA national because it had  not  been  shown
  that the customary marriage was undertaken in  accordance  with  Ghanaian
  law.  The  respondent  further  decided  that  the  appellant   had   not
  established that he and his spouse were in a durable relationship  so  as
  to satisfy regulation 8 (5) of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
  Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).

3. The appellant and the sponsor gave evidence at the hearing in the  First-
  tier Tribunal. The Judge did not find them to be credible  or  consistent
  witnesses and found their evidence to be vague and evasive.  He relied on
  a number of inconsistencies in the oral evidence including the fact  that
  the appellant said that the dowry included a suitcase whereas the sponsor
  did not mention a suitcase; the appellant said  that  he  had  given  the
  sponsor a gold ring however the ring was not gold; and the appellant said
  that he told his wife that he had gone to  visit  his  friend  Afifra  in
  Croydon on the Saturday before the hearing whereas the sponsor said  that
  she did not know what he had done on Saturday. The Judge found  that  the
  appellant had not provided evidence that  the  people  who  attended  the
  proxy  marriage  were  related  to  him  as  claimed  and  the  statutory
  declaration was  not  in  accordance  with  Ghanaian  law  therefore  the
  documents did not meet the Ghanaian requirements for  a  proxy  marriage.
  Further the Judge found that the appellant had not produced  evidence  to
  show that his marriage would be recognised under Dutch law in  accordance
  with the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)  Nigeria  [2014]
  UKUT 24 (IAC). The Judge found that, as there were no documents addressed
  to the appellant and sponsor in their joint names at the same address, it
  had not been established that they were in a durable  relationship  under
  regulation 8(5).

4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal do not challenge the  Judge's
  findings in relation to the  validity  of  the  customary  marriage.  The
  grounds  of  appeal  challenge  the  Judge's  findings  in  relation   to
  credibility and that the appellant is not in a durable  relationship.  It
  is contended that the  Judge  inaccurately  recorded  some  of  the  oral
  evidence and failed to take account of all of the  oral  and  documentary
  evidence.

5. The grounds contend  that  the  Judge  failed  to  record  the  sponsor's
  evidence accurately and that counsel's note indicated  that  the  sponsor
  had in fact said that a suitcase was among the items  in  her  dowry.  Ms
  Tetteh submitted a copy  of  counsel's  notes  which  indicate  that  the
  sponsor did say that the dowry included a suitcase. I told her  that  the
  Judge's note does not  include  reference  to  a  suitcase.  Mr  Whitwell
  submitted that the appellant could not properly challenge the accuracy of
  the Judge's recording of the proceedings without adducing  evidence  from
  counsel who represented the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.
  He submitted that the appellant had not  produced  a  statement  or  oral
  evidence from counsel and could not therefore succeed in this part of the
  challenge. I agree that without more the appellant cannot succeed on this
  ground. In any event this was not the only  finding  which  informed  the
  Judge's conclusions. All of the findings need to be read together and one
  cannot be taken in isolation.

6. Ms Tetteh submitted that the Judge was shown the sponsor's  ring  and  he
  concluded that it was not gold even though it is gold coloured. Ms Tetteh
  submitted that the sponsor said in cross-examination that  the  appellant
  had gone to see a friend on the Saturday before the hearing and she  said
  that he always goes to see Afifra so it could  have  been  inferred  that
  this include the previous Saturday. Ms Tetteh submitted  that  the  Judge
  should have taken the documentary evidence into account. She referred  to
  TV  licensing  documentation  and  a  Halifax  bank  statement   in   the
  appellant's name.

7. Mr Whitwell submitted that the  Judge  did  not  take  these  matters  in
  isolation. He submitted that the Judge  took  a  range  of  factors  into
  consideration including the discrepancies in oral evidence and  the  lack
  of  documentary  evidence.  He  submitted  that  there  was  insufficient
  documentary evidence before the Judge and that he was entitled  to  reach
  the conclusions he did on the basis of all of the evidence.

8. I agree that the decision needs to be read as a whole. There  is  nothing
  further to support the submission that the Judge was  wrong  to  conclude
  that the ring was not gold when the appellant had said that it was. Again
  there is nothing from counsel who appeared at the hearing and no evidence
  in relation to the ring. The Judge heard evidence from the appellant  and
  the sponsor and decided that they were  not  credible.  He  set  out  his
  reasons for so doing including the inconsistencies in their evidence  and
  his view that they were vague and evasive throughout their oral evidence.
  The Judge heard the witnesses and was entitled to omen to this conclusion
  for the reasons given.

9. The documentary evidence before the Judge in relation to the  appellant's
  claim to have been living with  the  sponsor  was  limited  to  a  recent
  Halifax Bank statement and TV licence letters in  his  sole  name.  There
  were three photographs and no record of any oral evidence as to when  and
  where these were taken. The Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
  documentary evidence was not sufficient to demonstrate  that  the  couple
  were living together in a durable relationship. In fact it  is  difficult
  to see how the Judge could have concluded otherwise on the basis of  this
  evidence.

10. In summary I am satisfied that the Judge did not err in his approach  to
  the evidence and that he made a decision which was open to him on all  of
  the evidence before him.

Conclusion:

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

Signed
                            Date:  10 November 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


