


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00170/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|on 7 December  2015                    |                   On 4 January 2016  |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SUZATA THAPA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant present:         No legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as above, but  to  avoid  confusion  the  rest  of  the
    determination refers to the appellant as the SSHD and to the respondent
    (who was the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal) as the claimant.

 2. The claimant applied on 31 October 2014 for further leave to remain  as
    the partner of a Tier 2 Migrant under the Points  Based  System  (PBS).
    The SSHD refused that application on 22 December 2014 and required  the
    claimant to state any additional grounds under section 120 of the  2002
    Act.

 3. The claimant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Her  grounds  of
    appeal say that in her "unique circumstances" the decision is "contrary
    to the provisions of the European Convention of Human Rights Act".   No
    particulars are given, and the rest of her grounds  are  rather  vague.
    The section of the appeal form calling for a  statement  of  additional
    grounds "including any reasons relating to the ECHR" is left blank.

 4.  Judge  J  C  Grant-Hutchison  allowed   the   claimant's   appeal   by
    determination promulgated on 8 July 2015.

 5. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

    Material misdirection in law

                 1. It is clear from the determination that  the  [claimant]
                    cannot succeed under PBS Rules and  that  she  will  not
                    succeed under this category if  she  applied  for  entry
                    clearance in this category.

                 2.  The  FTTJ  therefore  considers  whether  or  not   the
                    [claimant] would succeed under  the  Appendix  FM  route
                    (paragraph 20).  It is unclear  how  she  has  concluded
                    that the  [claimant]  would  meet  the  requirements  of
                    Appendix  FM,  particularly  Appendix  FM-SE,  when  the
                    relevant   documents   (payslips,    bank    statements,
                    employer's letter) were not before the court.  SSHD v SS
                    (Congo)  &  Ors  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  sets  out   the
                    importance of the evidence Rules:

        1. In our judgment, the approach to Article 8 in the light  of  the
           Rules in Appendix FM-SE should be the same as in respect of  the
           substantive LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM.  In  other  words,
           the same general position applies, that compelling circumstances
           would have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or LTR  where  the
           evidence Rules are not complied with.

        2. This is for 2 principal reasons.  First, the evidence rules have
           the same general objective as the substantive rules,  namely  to
           limit the risk that someone is admitted into the United  Kingdom
           and then becomes a burden on public resources, and the Secretary
           of State has the same primary function in relation to  them,  to
           assess the risk and put  in  place  measures  which  are  judged
           suitable to contain it within acceptable bounds.  Similar weight
           should be given to her assessment of what  the  public  interest
           requires in both contexts.

        3.  Secondly,  enforcement  of  the  evidence  rules  ensures  that
           everyone applying for LTE or LTR is treated equally  and  fairly
           in relation to the evidential requirements  they  must  satisfy.
           As well as keeping the costs of administration within reasonable
           bounds, application of standard rules is an  important  mens  of
           minimising the risk of arbitrary  differences  in  treatment  of
           cases arising across the wide range of officials, tribunals  and
           courts which administer the system of immigration controls.   IN
           this regard, the evidence Rules  (like  the  substantive  Rules)
           serve as a safeguard in relation to  rights  of  applicants  and
           family members under Article 14 to equal  treatment  within  the
           scope of Article 8: compare AJ  (Angola),  above,  at  [40]  and
           Huang, above at [16].  ("There will,  in  almost  any  case,  be
           certain general considerations to  bear  in  mind:  the  general
           administrative desirability of applying known rules if a  system
           of  immigration  control  is  to   be   workable,   predictable,
           consistent and fair as between one applicant  and  another;  the
           damage to good administration and effective control if a  system
           is perceived by applicants internationally to be unduly  porous,
           unpredictable or perfunctory; ... the need to discourage  fraud,
           deception and deliberate breaches of the law; and so  on  ...").
           Good reason would need to be shown why  a  particular  applicant
           was entitled to more  preferential  treatment  with  respect  to
           evidence other than applicants would expect to receive under the
           Rules.  Moreover, in relation to the  proper  administration  of
           immigration  controls,  weight  should  also  be  given  to  the
           Secretary of State's assessment of the  evidential  requirements
           needed to ensure prompt and fair application of the  substantive
           Rules: compare Stec v United Kingdom, cited  at  paragraph  [15]
           above.  Again, if an applicant says that they  should  be  given
           more preferential treatment with respect to  evidence  than  the
           Rules allow for, and more individualised consideration of  their
           case, good reason should be put forward to justify that.

                 3. It is further submitted that the  FTTJ  has  incorrectly
                    considered the Chikwamba principle because firstly it is
                    submitted that the Rules could not be met at the date of
                    hearing  and   secondly   there   was   no   significant
                    interference with family life by temporary removal.  See
                    R (On the application of Chen) v Secretary of State  for
                    the  Home  Department)  (Appendix  FM  -   Chikwamba   -
                    temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015]  UKUT
                    00189 [39].  In my  judgment,  if  it  is  shown  by  an
                    individual (the burden being upon him or  her)  that  an
                    application for entry clearance  from  abroad  would  be
                    granted and that there would be significant interference
                    with family life by temporary removal, the weight to  be
                    accorded to the formal requirement  of  obtaining  entry
                    clearance is reduced.

                 4.  At  paragraph  21,  the   FTTJ   considers   that   the
                    [claimant's] parents may not give her  consent,  so  she
                    may not be able to return, however  there  has  been  no
                    consideration in  relation  to  whether  the  [claimant]
                    would need to return to her parents and  the  fact  that
                    she could stay elsewhere whilst seeking entry clearance.

                 ...

 6. The claimant was not represented, but with her were her partner Mr T  B
    Khasiya and a Mr Dinesh, who described himself as a "Mackenzie  friend"
    or as a colleague and friend of the couple.  He confirmed that  he  was
    not being paid.  I permitted him to assist the claimant and to  address
    the tribunal.  The following points were advanced  on  her  side.   Her
    case might have succeeded under the rules, although it appeared to have
    been conceded by her representative in the First-tier Tribunal that she
    could not, and although that  had  not  been  put  forward  by  way  of
    response to the grant of leave.  The judge was right to  conclude  that
    the financial circumstances met the requirements of the  rules.   There
    were good reasons why her case should be allowed without  insisting  on
    any requirement to leave the UK.  It would not be right to  expect  her
    to separate from her partner, even temporarily, or to return  to  Nepal
    in the aftermath of the earthquakes.

 7. I reserved my determination.

 8. On the authority cited in the grounds, the judge would have had  to  be
    satisfied by admissible evidence that not only financial limits but the
    documentary requirements of the rules were met.  There was no  evidence
    before the tribunal to justify the conclusion at paragraph 20 that "for
    all intents and purposes the appellant would meet the rules  ...  under
    Appendix FM."  That is enough to establish that the determination  must
    be set aside.

 9. The grounds point out that the claimant need not return to her parents.
     Mr Matthews said that the determination ignores several other  obvious
    alternatives.  She need not return to Nepal at all.   She  might  apply
    from India, her partner's home country.  Even  more  conveniently,  she
    has the option of applying without leaving  the  UK,  under  provisions
    which disregard overstaying of 28  days  or  less  for  such  purposes.
    There was no reason why it might be disproportionate to expect  her  to
    make an application from within the UK; or to apply from abroad, if she
    had to; or for family life to be carried  on  in  India  or  Nepal,  if
    matters reached that stage.

10. The claimant alleged vaguely that her appeal might have succeeded under
    the rules as a tier 2 dependant partner but she did not construct  that
    case in any intelligible detail, she conceded to the  contrary  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and she did not advance the issue as  required  in
    response to the  grant  of  permission.   I  am  unable  to  reach  any
    conclusion in her favour by reference to those rules.

11.  I am satisfied by the grounds and by the submissions for the SSHD that
    the determination must be set  aside  for  legal  error  and  that  the
    outcome must be reversed.

12.  The  claimant's  appeal,  as  originally  brought  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, is dismissed  both  under  the  rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

13. No anonymity order has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            18 December 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




