
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00096/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 September 2014                          |On 2 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                            alston bosco barretto

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  him  with
    a "permanent residence card" was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Tully ("the judge") in a determination promulgated on 9 June 2014.

2.   The appellant claimed to be the family member of an  EEA  national  and
    to  fall  within  regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006   Regulations").    The
    Secretary of State found that he had not provided evidence that the EEA
    national he relied upon had resided in the United Kingdom in accordance
    with the 2006 Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years.
    Similarly, he had not provided evidence showing  that  he  had  resided
    with a family member for the same period.  There were no other  adverse
    findings.

3.   The judge determined  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary
    evidence before her, in the light of the appellant's indication in  his
    notice of appeal that he did not require a  hearing.   She  noted  that
    although the appellant had completed a notice of appeal, he had  failed
    to complete parts of the notice  showing  why  he  disagreed  with  the
    Secretary of State's decision.  Further, no evidence was  submitted  in
    support of his case.  The judge dismissed the appeal.

4.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal,  stating  that  he  did
    not understand why his appeal was not linked to an  appeal  brought  by
    his father, Mr Luzitano Barretto (IA/51557/2013).  The two appeals were
    brought at  the  same  time  and  all  of  the  supporting  documentary
    evidence, showing the family circumstances and  periods  of  residence,
    were sent with his father's appeal.

5.   His father's  appeal  was  allowed  by  a  judge,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 19 May 2014.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted on 4 august 2014, on  the  basis  that
    there may have been  procedural  unfairness.   The  appellant  and  his
    father made a joint application to the respondent.  Both  were  refused
    by the Secretary of State on 18 November 2013.  The appellant's  appeal
    was decided on the papers at the  Stoke  Hearing  Centre,  whereas  his
    father's case was decided at Hatton Cross.

7.   In a Rule 24 response from the Specialist Appeals Team, made on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State on 13 August 2014,  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    advised that the matter had been referred to "European  Litigation"  as
    it appeared that there  was  merit  in  the  argument  that  procedural
    unfairness had occurred.

Error of Law

8.   Mr Alston Barretto appeared in  person.   He  was  accompanied  by  his
    father, Mr Luzitano.  Mr Jarvis said that he had spoken to  the  author
    of the Rule 24 response.  No reply had yet been received from  European
    Litigation and the Secretary of State had not taken a view on issuing a
    residence card to the appellant.  It was  clear  that  the  appellant's
    case was determined after his father's and that there were attempts  to
    get the matters linked.  The documents sent in support of Mr Luzitano's
    case were not present in his son's case and were not seen by the  judge
    determining his appeal.  There may have been unintentional unfairness.

9.   The appellant said that he wanted his case  joined  with  his  father's
    and the documents they relied upon were provided in his father's  case.
    The two cases should have been dealt with together.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  I find that there has been unintentional,  procedural  unfairness.   It
    is clear that the appellant and his father made their applications  for
    a residence card on the same occasion and that they intended to rely on
    the  same  evidence  in  support.   The  Secretary  of  State  properly
    considered the two applications together and made adverse decisions  in
    each case on 18 November 2013.  The applications were  refused  in  the
    absence  of  evidence  showing  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the 2006 Regulations.  For  no  apparent  good  reason,
    once the appeals were lodged, the files were separated.  Mr  Luzitano's
    case was determined at Hatton Cross in March 2013 and  the  appellant's
    case in Stoke-on-Trent on 5  June.   All  the  evidence  the  appellant
    wished to rely upon was before the judge at Hatton Cross.  Mr  Luzitano
    was issued with a  residence  card  on  8  September  2009  and  sought
    permanent residence as the family member of an EEA national, his  wife,
    in  September  2013.   The  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  12  of  the
    determination in  Mr  Luzitano's  case  that  the  supporting  evidence
    related to the EEA national sponsor and to Mr Luzitano and his son,  Mr
    Alston.  That evidence  included  bank  statements  relating  to  joint
    accounts, and wage slips and P60s showing the employment  histories  of
    the sponsor, Mr Luzitano  and  Mr  Alston.   There  were  also  tenancy
    agreements showing the shared occupation of premises by the sponsor and
    Mr Luzitano and P60s and letters showing that Mr  Alston  occupied  the
    same premises (two in all, over a period of time) as his father and the
    sponsor.  The judge carefully weighed that evidence and concluded  that
    Mr Luzitano's  appeal  fell  to  be  allowed  as  the  requirements  of
    regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations were met.

Re-making the Decision

11.  Mr Jarvis said that the Secretary of State had made only one  objection
    in the appellant's case.  There appeared to be  a  lack  of  supporting
    evidence.  Mr Alston said that he relied on the same documents as  were
    before the Tribunal in his father's case.  Mr Luzitano  said  that  the
    documents relied upon in his case were the only ones they had.

12.  Mr Luzitano's file was also before me.  It  contained  the  documentary
    evidence he  relied  upon  in  his  appeal,  determined  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Seifert in March 2013.  Her determination is  thoroughly
    reasoned.  I have taken into account her favourable findings  of  fact,
    as I have the documentary evidence before her, which formed  the  basis
    of  her  assessment.   I  find  that  the  evidence  shows   that   the
    requirements of regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations  have  been
    met in Mr Alston's case.  He has shown that he has resided with the EEA
    national he relies upon for a continuous period of five years and  that
    his father's wife has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
    the 2006 Regulations for the same, continuous, period.

13.  The appeal is allowed.

DECISION

14.  The appeal is allowed:  the appellant has shown that  the  requirements
    of regulation 15(1)(b) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 have been met.

15.  There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In re-making the decision, the Upper Tribunal may make any order  which  may
have been made in the proceedings by the First-tier  Tribunal.   As  I  have
allowed the appeal, I make a whole fee award in respect of the fee  paid  or
payable in these proceedings.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
