

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/00413/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision and Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 28 February 2018                       |  On 05 March 2018               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                                 IMRAN ZAHID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Miss M. Atcha of Ebrahim & Co.
For the respondent:          Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The following history can be gleaned from the limited evidence  before
    the Upper Tribunal. The appellant  says  that  he  entered  the  UK  in
    January 2001 with entry clearance as  a  student.  He  married  an  EEA
    national and was issued with a  five-year  residence  card  in  January
    2004. The appellant applied for a permanent residence card in  November
    2008. The  appellant  became  divorced  from  his  wife  in  2009.  The
    respondent refused the application on 01 February 2010.  The  appellant
    lodged an appeal against the respondent's decision.

2.     First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Meah  dismissed  the  appeal  under  The
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the   EEA
    Regulations 2006") in a decision promulgated on 07 May  2010.  However,
    the appellant had raised human rights issues in the appeal, which Judge
    Meah found needed to be considered by the  respondent.  In  respect  of
    this issue the appeal was allowed to the limited extent that  the  case
    was 'remitted' to the respondent  to  consider  a  human  rights  claim
    within the context of paragraph 395C of the immigration rules.

3.    Although this was an unorthodox way of dealing with the  matter  given
    that the appellant had not made a formal  human  rights  claim  to  the
    respondent, it is accepted that  the  respondent  subsequently  made  a
    decision to refuse leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  on  02
    October 2013 and that this gave rise to a right of appeal under section
    82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA
    2002"). The appellant did not lodge the  appeal  against  the  decision
    until 2016. The First-tier Tribunal agreed to extend time.  The  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal was  therefore  an  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse a human rights claim.

4.    The appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Obhi  in  a
    decision promulgated on 15 June 2017.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant had failed to produce any evidence to show that he was  in  a
    relationship with his claimed partner.  Although  paragraph  7  of  the
    decision states that she gave evidence,  at  the  hearing  today,  Miss
    Atcha confirmed that his partner did not in fact  attend  the  hearing.
    The appellant's evidence was that his partner was  a  Pakistani  asylum
    seeker whose application had been refused and was  the  subject  of  an
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. The judge concluded that  there  was
    very little evidence to support the  claimed  relationship,  and  apart
    from the birth certificates, no evidence relating to the children.

5.    The judge noted that no human  rights  application  was  made  to  the
    respondent after the matter was sent back to the  respondent  following
    the appeal in 2010. There was no evidence to show  that  the  appellant
    asked  the  respondent  to  consider  the  claim  on  grounds  of  long
    residence. Nor was there any evidence to show that he  had  raised  the
    issue of his relationship with his partner or  the  fact  that  he  had
    children in the UK.

6.    The judge concluded that she could not make a decision in relation  to
    10 years' lawful residence  because  the  appellant  had  not  made  an
    application to the respondent. There was no statement from his  partner
    and limited evidence relating to the  children.  The  appellant  didn't
    even mention them  in  the  witness  statement  he   prepared  for  the
    hearing. In any event, the judge concluded that there was  insufficient
    evidence to show that the appellant had 10 years' lawful  residence  or
    to show that he met  the  private  life  requirements  under  paragraph
    276ADE or the family life requirements under Appendix FM. She  directed
    herself to the public interest considerations contained in section 117B
    of the NIAA 2002, but concluded that little weight could  be  given  to
    the appellant's private life, which was  established  in  recent  years
    when his private life was  precarious.  The  appeal  failed  due  to  a
    manifest lack of evidence.

Decision and reasons

7.    Given that the appellant claimed that he had a  partner  and  children
    in the UK for the first time at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  for
    the avoidance of doubt, Mr Jarvis confirmed that consent was  given  to
    the Upper Tribunal to consider the issues as a  'new  matter'  for  the
    purpose of section 85(6) of the NIAA 2002.

8.    The grounds of appeal made general  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    substantive issues without, in my assessment, even raising any arguable
    errors of law. At the hearing Miss  Atcha  continued  to  make  general
    assertions about the appellant's  length  of  residence  and  expressed
    general disagreements with the outcome of the appeal. She asserted that
    the appellant had leave under section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971
    following the appeal in 2010 and  therefore  accrued  a  period  of  10
    years' lawful residence. When pressed to  concentrate  on  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal made an error of law she said that the judge should
    have applied the 'old rules' but failed to make any arguments as to why
    this should be the case.

9.    The judge was correct to say that there was no evidence to  show  that
    the appellant had made an application for leave to remain on grounds of
    10 years' lawful residence. It is inadequate simply to make  a  general
    assertion about the appellant's length of residence.  The  requirements
    of paragraph 276B of the immigration rules must be satisfied. A  proper
    application should be  made  with  supporting  evidence.  A  period  of
    residence under European law is not 'lawful residence' for the  purpose
    of  paragraph  276A(2)  of  the   immigration   rules,   although   the
    respondent's guidance says that she will consider whether  to  exercise
    discretion. An essential element of the assessment  of  an  application
    for Indefinite Leave to Remain on grounds of 10 years' lawful residence
    is the respondent's assessment of whether, having regard to the  public
    interest, there are no reasons why  it  would  be  undesirable  for  an
    applicant to be granted leave to remain. Other evidential  requirements
    must be satisfied relating to English language and knowledge about life
    in the UK. In other words, it is necessary for a formal application  to
    be made and for the respondent to consider discretionary matters before
    it can be considered on an appeal.

10.   The correspondence sent to the  respondent  following  the  appeal  in
    2010 was extremely limited and amounted to nothing more than a  general
    request for leave to be granted. The judge  was  correct  to  say  that
    there was no evidence to show that a proper application  was  made  for
    leave to remain on grounds of 10 years' lawful residence. Nor was there
    any evidence to show that submissions were  made  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's new partner or their children or that any meaningful  human
    rights submissions were made to the respondent.

11.   Miss Atcha's assertion that the judge should have considered the  'old
    rules' was vague and unparticularised. She did not even  identify  what
    rule should have been considered. It is trite law that  the  respondent
    is entitled to consider the rules in place at the date of decision.  No
    application was made for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds.  At
    the date of  the  decision  in  2013,  the  respondent  was  unarguably
    entitled to consider the human rights issues with reference to the 'new
    rules' introduced after 2012: see Singh & Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
    74.

12.   The appellant had not produced any evidence to support  his  claim  to
    have 10 years' lawful residence to the respondent or to the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In the absence of a formal application for leave to remain it
    was not possible for the First-tier Tribunal to determine  the  matter,
    nor was there any evidence to support the appellant's  bare  assertions
    about his length of lawful residence.  It  is  not  arguable  that  the
    appellant's leave was extended under section 3C of the Immigration  Act
    1971 because it only applies to a  person  who  has  limited  leave  to
    remain who applies to vary their leave. The first  appeal  was  decided
    under the EEA Regulations 2006. The  appellant  did  not  have  limited
    leave to remain and had not applied to vary his leave to  remain  prior
    to the appeal. Section 3C did not apply on the facts of this case.

13.   It was open to the judge to conclude that the appellant had failed  to
    discharge the burden of proof given that there was so  little  evidence
    to support a human rights claim. The appellant did not  have  20  years
    continuous residence for the purpose of the  private  life  requirement
    contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the  immigration  rules  and
    there was no evidence to show that  he  would  face  'very  significant
    obstacles' to integration if he returned to Pakistan for the purpose of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The  appellant  claimed  that  he  was  in  a
    relationship with a Pakistani national, but  produced  no  evidence  to
    support the claim. In any event, if she had  no  leave  to  remain  the
    appellant could not hope to meet any of the  family  life  requirements
    contained in Appendix FM of the immigration rules.

14.   Although the appellant produced copies of two birth  certificates,  it
    was open to the judge to note that there was no other evidence to  show
    where the best interests of the children lay. Neither  child  had  been
    resident in the UK for a continuous period of seven  years.  They  were
    not qualifying children for the purpose of section 117B(6) of the  NIAA
    2002. Even if the appellants' evidence was taken at  its  highest,  his
    partner does not have leave to remain in the UK. There was no  evidence
    to show that the  couple  could  not  continue  their  family  life  in
    Pakistan. There was no evidence to show  that  the  children's  welfare
    would not be catered for if they returned to Pakistan as a family.  The
    preparation of the appeal was simply inadequate. In the  circumstances,
    the judge's findings were lawful  and  open  to  her  to  make.  It  is
    understandable that the appellant disagrees with the decision but it is
    not arguable  that  the  judge's  findings  were  outside  a  range  of
    reasonable responses to such inadequate evidence.

15.   For these reasons, I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    did not involve the making of an  error  of  law.  The  decision  shall
    stand.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 28 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


