
.
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
IA/00923/2016

                                                   IA/00924/2016

                                                   IA/00925/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 February 2018                       |On 27 April 2018                    |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MS ZHANG HAO
                               MR YI LING HAO
                                  ZHIBO LI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Mak, Solicitor, Lisa's Law Solicitors, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are citizens of China  born  on  22  September  1975,  2
    October 1978 and 13 April 2010 respectively.  The  first  appellant  is
    the wife of the second appellant and the third appellant is their  son.
    They are appealing against the  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  1
    February 2016 refusing the first appellant leave to remain  in  the  UK
    under the Tier 1 points based  system  route.   The  second  and  third
    appellants are her dependents.  The refusal was  also  based  on  human
    rights issues.


 3. Their appeals were heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Wright  on
    26 May 2017 and allowed in a decision promulgated on 19 July 2017.


 4. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  by  the  respondent
    and permission was granted by Judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  Martin
    on 5 January 2018.  The permission states that  the  first  appellant's
    application was refused on the basis that the respondent found that she
    had cheated in an English language test.  The Judge allowed the  appeal
    on the basis that the respondent had not satisfied the burden of  proof
    relating to this as she had failed to follow the guidance in SM & Qadir
    [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) now amended by the Court  of  Appeal  in  SM  &
    Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167.  The permission states  that  arguably  the
    Judge ought to have found  the  burden  shifted  to  the  appellant  to
    proffer an innocent explanation for the respondent's finding.


 5. There is no Rule 24 response.


 6. As the first appellant was accused of deception in her English language
    test the burden was on the respondent and the standard  of  proof,  the
    balance of probabilities, however it was then up to  the  appellant  to
    give an innocent explanation.  If the  Judge  accepts  this  the  legal
    burden goes  back  to  the  respondent  to  be  addressed.   The  first
    appellant's certificate has also been withdrawn so the basis  of  leave
    has been removed.

The Hearing

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is relying on the  grounds  of
    application.  He referred to  the  burden  of  proof  shifting  to  the
    appellant who, when the accusation was made against  her,  should  have
    given an innocent explanation and did not do so.

 8. He submitted that the Judge referred to a statement by Mona Shah who is
    a member of the Presenting Officers' Unit but the Judge does not  refer
    to the supplementary bundle that was before him, in  which  there  were
    two statements and an expert report from Professor French  relating  to
    many reported cases where deception was used  in  an  English  language
    test.  The Judge made no reference to any of these and  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that this is significant  and  that  the  appellant's
    test results were found to be invalid.


 9. I was referred to the case of MA [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC)  which  refers
    to the Excel spreadsheet listing thousands of test certificates and  he
    submitted that the ETS assessment of the score recorded  by  the  first
    appellant is that it is invalid.


10. He submitted that what was before the Judge should have  satisfied  her
    that this assessment was reliable but the Judge ignored this.


11. I was then referred to Professor French's report and the said  case  of
    MA, the case of Nawaz [2017] UKUT 00288 (IAC)  and  Professor  French's
    conclusion therein at paragraphs 37 and 38.  I was also referred to the
    case of Veronica Gaogalalwe [2017] EWHC 1709 (Admin) at  paragraph  34,
    which deals with whether the Secretary of  State  can  meet  the  legal
    burden of showing, on the balance of probabilities, that  deception  in
    fact took place.  He submitted that the respondent has met this  burden
    and the Judge has not taken this into account  at  all.    I  was  also
    referred to paragraphs 44 and 45 of the said case of  Gaogalalwe  which
    refer to the powerful evidence  provided  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    pointing to a conclusion that the claimant's test result  was  obtained
    by fraud against the weak evidence provided by the  claimant  that  her
    English language skills would have been  sufficient  to  make  cheating
    unnecessary.  It goes  on  to  state  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    argument is irresistible and that the Secretary of State has  made  out
    her case that the claimant used fraud to obtain leave to remain.


12. He referred to the said case of Nawaz and head-note  (e).  This  states
    "Evidence obtained by use of the "look up  tool"  and  subject  to  the
    human verification procedure is an adequate basis for the Secretary  of
    State's deception finding in these  cases  in  the  light  of  Flynn  &
    Another [2008] EWCA Crim 970 and the evidence of both Dr  Harrison  and
    Professor French."  The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has
    ignored all of this and has not given proper reasons for believing  the
    appellant over the respondent.  He submitted that this case is  of  the
    same type as these other cases referred to herein  and  there  must  be
    material errors of law in the Judge's decision as she did not  consider
    the Country Guidance caselaw and other evidence properly.


13. With regard to the third appellant being aged 7 and, according  to  the
    appellant being entitled to remain in the United Kingdom, he  submitted
    that this does not come into  play  if  it  is  found  that  the  first
    appellant cheated.


14. I was referred to Section 117B (vi).  The Presenting Officer  submitted
    that when the 7 year old child is considered his parents' history  also
    comes into his claim and he submitted that  the  fact  that  the  first
    appellant cheated in her English exam outweighs the child's rights.


15. I was asked to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision and I was asked to overturn it.


16. The appellant's representative made his submissions.  I was referred to
    the generic evidence and the particular evidence of the test taker.   I
    was referred in particular to paragraph 24 of  the  First-Tier  Judge's
    decision.  This  states  that  the  only  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    respondent is an entry on a spreadsheet referred to in paragraph  6  of
    the witness statement of Mona Shah at Annex A.  The Judge then goes  on
    to refer to the limited evidence from the respondent in respect of  the
    actual test taken by this appellant.  She states  that  the  burden  of
    proof has not been discharged by the  respondent.   The  representative
    submitted that the Judge has found that the evidential burden has  been
    discharged by the appellant and there has  been  no  deception  by  the
    appellant.


17. The representative submitted that on the day the test was taken, 70% of
    the test-takers used a proxy and 30% did  not  and  he  submitted  that
    there is nothing to indicate that our appellant did not  form  part  of
    the 30%.


18. The Presenting Officer broke in to submit that that  is  not  accurate.
    70% used a proxy and 30% were  questionable.   He  submitted  that  the
    Judge refers to  the  supplementary  bundle  and  must  have  seen  the
    respondent's evidence but she does not appear to have looked at the two
    statements from the Civil Service employees or Professor  French.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that had the Judge  considered  these  she
    would have found that the respondent had discharged the legal burden.


19.  The  representative  submitted  that  the  Judge  has   accepted   the
    appellant's innocent explanation and at paragraph 10  of  the  decision
    makes reference to the said case of  SM  &  Qadir  and  that  when  the
    respondent states that it  is  not  credible  that  the  appellant  was
    unaware of any cheating going on, this  is  only  an  opinion,  nothing
    more.


20. He submitted that the  Judge  found  the  legal  burden  had  not  been
    discharged by the respondent and he submitted that because some of  the
    evidence is not mentioned in her decision, this does not mean that  the
    Judge did not consider it.  At paragraph 24 of the decision  the  Judge
    refers to there being limited evidence from the respondent  in  respect
    of the actual test taken by the appellant and because of  this  limited
    evidence, the burden of proof has not been  discharged.   He  submitted
    that there are no errors of law in the  First-Tier  Tribunal's  Judge's
    decision and because there may be one or two  immaterial  errors,  this
    does not mean that the whole decision is incorrect.


21. He submitted that with regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act the Judge
    finds that there has been  no  deception  and  if  there  has  been  no
    deception then the fact that the child is 7 years old  and  has  always
    been in  the  United  Kingdom  must  be  relevant,  and  it  cannot  be
    proportionate to remove the appellant and her family  from  the  United
    Kingdom.


22. The representative submitted that there are no errors  in  the  Judge's
    decision relating to Article 8.


23. The Presenting Officer again submitted that  relating  to  the  English
    test results, 70% were found to be invalid and 30%  were  found  to  be
    questionable.  I was referred to page 4  of  the  supplementary  bundle
    which breaks down the test results as 70% invalid, 30% questionable and
    0%  valid.   He  submitted  that  the  appellant's  representative  has
    referred to the legal burden on the respondent not being discharged but
    I was asked to look at paragraph 24 of the decision in which  there  is
    no mention of the word 'legal'.  He submitted that paragraph 24 of  the
    decision is wrong as there was  not  limited  evidence  from  the  Home
    Office.  The issue is that the Judge did not consider all the  evidence
    provided by the respondent.


24. He submitted that if there was deception, although the child  has  been
    in the United Kingdom for seven years, the parents' immigration history
    has to be taken into account and if there has been deception there  can
    only be one outcome and that is that the appeal is dismissed.


Decision and Reasons

25. I have noted all the evidence that was before the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Judge about the first appellant's deception  relating  to  her  English
    test.  It is clear from the decision that the  Judge  had  all  of  the
    respondent's  documentation  before  him  which  included  the  witness
    statement of Rebecca  Collings  and  the  witness  statement  of  Peter
    Millington.  It is also clear from the decision that the Judge saw Mona
    Shah's statement, the ETS results and Professor Peter French's  report.
    The conclusions in the report  refer  to  the  stringent  criteria  for
    verification by trained listeners and the wide range of speech features
    on  which  to  base  their  decisions  other  than  just  vocal   tract
    resonances.  He estimates the number of false positives emanating  from
    the overall process of ASR  analysis  followed  by  assessment  by  two
    trained listeners, to be very small.

26. The appellant's representative submitted that of the  pupils  who  took
    the test at the same time as the appellant 70% of the tests were  found
    to be invalid.  What the representative does not appear to  have  taken
    into account  is  the  fact  that  the  other  30%  were  found  to  be
    questionable and 0%  were  found  to  be  valid.   This  has  not  been
    considered properly by the Judge although she  did  have  the  relevant
    evidence before her.


27. The said case of SM & Qadir  makes  it  clear  that  the  SSHD  generic
    evidence, combined with evidence particular to an appellant, discharges
    the evidential burden of proving a TOEIC certificate has been  procured
    by dishonesty.  Reference is made in that case to the two statements of
    Ms Collings and Mr Millington and based on what was before  the  Judge,
    on the balance of probabilities, this appellant employed deception.  At
    paragraph 24 of the decision the Judge refers to the  limited  evidence
    from the respondent  in  respect  of  the  actual  test  taken  by  the
    appellant and states that the only evidence relied on by the respondent
    is an entry on a spreadsheet referred to in paragraph 6 of the  witness
    statement of Mona Shah.  It is clear from this that the Judge  has  not
    considered all the evidence before her or has  misinterpreted  it.   He
    has not properly considered the relevant  case  law.  This  appellant's
    English language test has been invalidated.


28. The situation therefore is  that  the  respondent  has  discharged  the
    evidential burden of proof in respect of deception and the burden  then
    shifts to the appellant to give an  innocent  explanation.   There  has
    been no innocent explanation given by the  appellant.   The  Judge  has
    failed to give proper reasons for preferring the  appellant's  evidence
    over that of the respondent.


29. The First-Tier Judge also refers to having had difficulty understanding
    the appellant and yet her English language ability score was 190 out of
    200.


30. The evidential burden fell  on  the  appellant  to  offer  an  innocent
    explanation and it is clear that this has not been  satisfied  and  had
    the Judge properly considered the evidence produced by the Home  Office
    relating to  deception,  the  Judge  would  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion.  In this case the certificate has  been  withdrawn  so  the
    basis of the leave is removed.


31. I find that the Judge has made material errors of law relating  to  the
    first appellant using deception in her  English  test  and  when  human
    rights are considered, because of this, although the third appellant is
    7 years old and has been in the United Kingdom for over  7  years,  the
    claim cannot succeed on a human rights basis because of this deception.
     When proportionality is assessed public  interest  must  succeed.  The
    three appellants can return to China as a family unit.


Notice of Decision

There are material errors of law in the First-Tier Judge's  decision  and  I
direct that the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is set aside.

I remake the decision.  The appeals of all three appellants are dismissed.

Anonymity has not been directed.






Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
