

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/00087/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                          |                            |
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 20 November 2015                       |On 8 December 2015          |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                     K J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:        Mr T Royston counsel instructed by SMK
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. An anonymity order was  previously  made  and  shall
   continue.
2. The Appellant was born on 2 August 1967 and is a  national  of  Pakistan.
   He is 48 years old.
3. This is the resumed hearing of an appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Respondent dated 8 December 2014 to refuse  the  Appellant's  application
   dated 18 November 2014 for leave to remain based on his relationship with
   his unmarried partner MW, a 71 year old British citizen. The Secretary of
   State refused the Appellant's application by reference  to  Appendix  FM,
   EX.1 and 276ADE and also considered  whether  there  was  any  basis  for
   granting discretionary leave outside the Rules.
4. The Appellant appealed the decision and his  appeal  came  before  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Nichol on 20 March 2015 and  he  allowed  the  appeal
   under Appendix FM and under Article 8 outside the Rules.
5. The  Respondent  appealed  that  decision  and  after  a  hearing  on  18
   September 2015 I set aside that decision as  it  contained  a  number  of
   errors of law. The matter was adjourned for me to re hear the  appeal  in
   relation  to  EX.1  as  the  Appellant  could  not  otherwise  meet   the
   requirements of Appendix FM for an unmarried partner and alternatively in
   relation to  Article 8.
6. Mr Royston indicated that he did not intend to call his clients  to  give
   evidence relying on the preserved findings and the  documentary  evidence
   in the bundle. Mr Harrison indicated that he was content with that as  he
   had no questions for either the Appellant or his partner.
Submissions
7. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Harrison  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :
   a) He relied on the reason for refusal letter.
   b) The issue in relation to EX.1 was whether the Appellant and his
      partner faced 'insurmountable obstacles' to family life with the
      partner continuing outside the UK.
   c) He argued that the appellant could return to Pakistan and make an
      entry clearance application for return to the United Kingdom.
   d) The relationship was established at a time when the Appellant's leave
      was precarious.
   e) The Appellant's partner has medical conditions which are common in
      Pakistan -diabetes, heart disease. It was not correct that these
      issues could not be addressed.
   f) This was an attempt to circumvent the Rules using Article 8 and it was
      an application for leave by blackmail as they said they would not
      marry.

8. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Royston submitted that :

   a) The Appellant's partner MW is a 71 year old British citizen. The  test
      under Ex.1 is whether  the  Appellant  and  MW  would  suffer  serious
      hardship if they lived together in Pakistan.

   b) MW is a retired British national with no connection to Pakistan  other
      than with her partner. She has health problems.

   c) The most significant risk that the parties would face is as  unmarried
      partners in Pakistan. The Respondent suggests that the Appellant could
      return alone to make an entry clearance application but  the  test  is
      whether family life can continue with them living together in Pakistan
      not whether the Appellant could make  an  application  from  there  to
      rejoin MW in the United Kingdom.

   d) The Respondent suggests that the  parties  could  marry.  This  was  a
      matter of high constitutional importance: can the state determine  how
      people enjoy family life. He drew the analogy  with  the  case  of  HJ
      (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31 (07
      July 2010) in that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  would  only  be
      marrying to avoid the threat of persecution.

   e) He suggested that the Judge in the first appeal did not make a finding
      that the parties would marry eventually but that this was a couple who
      were not minded to marry.

   f) The state could not dictate what should be an enduring form of  family
      relationship.

   g) EX.1 and 2 had to be considered against this background.

   h) The poor health of the sponsor MW also had to  be  considered  in  the
      light of the care and support provided by the Appellant for  MW.  MW's
      diagnosis and complex treatment regime were relevant to the  issue  of
      serious hardship.

   i) He had to accept for the purpose of the Rules that the  personal  care
      provided by the Appellant would continue if they relocated together to
      Pakistan  but  it  was  nevertheless  relevant   to   the   issue   of
      proportionality under Article 8.

   j) In relation to the medical evidence  he  relied  on  page  12  of  the
      Appellant's bundle. The lengthy concluding  paragraph  was  sufficient
      evidence of the complexity of her regime and  her  condition.  To  the
      suggestion that simply taking a number of medications did not make the
      regime a complex one  he  suggested  that  it  demonstrated  that  the
      process of moving from one country to another less developed  on  than
      the UK was a factor that I could take into account. He  accepted  that
      there was no evidence to suggest that her medical problems  could  not
      be addressed in Pakistan.

   k) The test was an aggregate one and that I should have regard to all  of
      the factors cumulatively in determining whether EX.1 was met.

   l)  In relation to Article 8 he  suggested  that  the  test  was  one  of
      reasonableness. If MW decided she wanted to stay in the United Kingdom
      that was not unreasonable.

   m) The care that the Appellant provided to  MW  became  significant.  She
      faced not only losing her partner but the loss of personal care  by  a
      person with whom she was intimate rather than  from  a  stranger.  The
      assessment turned on the credibility of the care provided

   n) In relation to the possibility of the  Appellant  leaving  the  United
      Kingdom and making an entry clearance  application  from  Pakistan  he
      suggested that Chikwamba (FC) v SSHD 2008 UKHL 40 was still  good  law
      and there should be a careful assessment of the factual circumstances.
      In this case it was not appropriate to require return in that  MW  was
      71 years old and not in good health. Even a  delay  for  a  couple  of
      years would impact significantly on the totality of  the  period  they
      would spend together.

Legal Framework

9. The provisions of EX.1 at the time of the decision were as follows:
EX.1. This paragraph applies if
(a)........
(b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the UK or in the UK
with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and there are insurmountable
obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.
EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable obstacles"
means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together outside
the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very serious
hardship for the applicant or their partner.
Findings

10. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round  before  reaching
   any findings.  I  have  done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
   compartmentalised my findings in some respects below,  I  must  emphasise
   the findings have only been made having taken account of the evidence  as
   a whole.

11. The Appellant is a 48 year old national of Pakistan who arrived  in  the
   United Kingdom in 2002 and while he claims that he fled in  fear  of  his
   life he did not claim asylum and lived in the United  Kingdom  thereafter
   unlawfully.

12. He met MW in 2006 and in January 2008 the  Appellant  and  MW  began  to
   live together and this was accepted by the Respondent. Again  I  note  he
   did nothing to regularise his status on the  basis  of  his  relationship
   with  her  until  he  made  an  application  dated  8  March  2010.  That
   application was refused on 23 April 2010 by the Respondent and on 11 June
   2010 he requested reconsideration of that decision and  further  evidence
   was submitted.

13. On 8 December 2014 the application was refused and it  is  that  refusal
   that is the subject of this appeal. The  application  was  considered  by
   reference to Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.
   It is not in dispute that the Appellant could only succeed under Appendix
   FM if he met the requirements of EX.1 and 2.

14.  I accept  as  did  the  Respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  that  the
   Appellant and MW are for the  purpose  of  EX.1  (b)  in  a  genuine  and
   subsisting  relationship.  The  issue  is  therefore  whether  there  are
   insurmountable obstacles to family life with MW  continuing  outside  the
   United Kingdom and the definition of 'insurmountable obstacles'  is  that
   set out in EX.2. I have also considered R(on the application of  Agyarko)
   [2015] EWCA Civ 440 where it was held  that  the  phrase  "insurmountable
   obstacles" as used in this paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a  high
   hurdle to be overcome by an applicant  for  leave  to  remain  under  the
   Rules. The test is significantly more  demanding  than  a  mere  test  of
   whether it would be reasonable to  expect  a  couple  to  continue  their
   family life outside the United Kingdom. ...The  phrase  as  used  in  the
   Rules is  intended  to  have  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  Strasbourg
   jurisprudence. It is clear that the ECtHR regards  it  as  a  formulation
   imposing a stringent test in respect of that factor.

15.  I  accept  Mr  Roystons  argument  that  at  this  stage  the  solution
   proffered by the Respondent  through  Mr  Harrison,  that  the  Appellant
   returns to Pakistan to make an  entry  clearance  application,  does  not
   address the requirement of EX.1 which is in essence  whether  they  could
   continue their family life together in Pakistan.

16. The two factors advanced  both  in  the  skeleton  argument  and  orally
   before me by the Appellant in support of his  assertion  that  they  face
   insurmountable obstacles are that they are unmarried  partners  and  MW's
   health and those are the two  factors  I  have  assessed.  The  Appellant
   argues that he  and  MW  would  face  very  significant  difficulties  in
   Pakistan if they were living together as unmarried partners  as  this  is
   illegal and socially unacceptable in  Pakistan  (WS  paragraph  10).  The
   Respondent argues that this obstacle could be  overcome  by  the  parties
   marrying.

17. I have considered Mr Royston's argument that it is not for the state  to
   dictate how parties enjoy their family life and he drew  the  analogy  in
   paragraph 16 of his skeleton argument and in oral submissions  before  me
   with HJ. I am not persuaded by this argument: I note of  course  that  HJ
   was concerned with an 'immutable characteristic', sexuality, and  whether
   an applicant should be  required  to  conceal  this  in  order  to  avoid
   persecution. I note that neither the Appellant  nor  MW  have  given  any
   social, moral, religious or philosophical reasons to suggest they  oppose
   the principal of marriage and therefore I do not consider that for either
   of them it could be described as an immutable characteristic  but  rather
   it is a choice that they have made for the present time that they do  not
   wish to marry. I do not accept the argument that I can  draw  from  their
   present intention not to marry  that  they  will  never  marry  as  I  am
   satisfied that it is not what they say in their witness statements,  they
   simply say they do not intend to marry "in the near future"  (Appellant's
   witness statement paragraph 17 ; MW's WS paragraph 8). I  therefore  find
   that given this is apparently an issue of timing  rather  than  principal
   the problems that would face them as unmarried partners could be overcome
   by them marrying.

18. I have considered the evidence placed  before  me  in  respect  of  MW's
   health  and  whether  this  is  a  factor  that  could   amount   to   an
   insurmountable  obstacle  to  them  enjoying  family  life  together   in
   Pakistan. I accept that  MW  has  ischaemic  heart  disease  (She  had  a
   successful triple by pass in 2009), type II diabetes, high blood pressure
   and high cholesterol. She is on a number of medications  to  control  her
   conditions. Her diabetes has worsened and  affected  her  eyes.  While  I
   accept that MW takes a  number  of  medications  their  number  does  not
   necessarily mean that her conditions or regime are  complex  or  unusual,
   nor are they described as such, and there was no evidence  before  me  to
   suggest that her medications were unavailable in  Pakistan  or  that  she
   could not be monitored there as  she  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
   although clearly the medical services may not be as good as in the UK. Mr
   Royston conceded for the purpose of  EX.1  that  the  personal  care  and
   support provided to MW by the Appellant could be provided in Pakistan  as
   it has been in the United Kingdom.

19. While I accept that for a 71 year old woman uprooting  from  the  United
   Kingdom  and  relocating  to  Pakistan  would  involve   disruption   and
   inconvenience I do not accept that given  my  finding  that  the  parties
   could marry sooner rather than  later  to  avoid  religious  or  societal
   problems that there is sufficient evidence for me to conclude  that  MW's
   health issues alone meet the test in EX.1.

20. In relation to Article 8 I remind myself that the Court of Appeal in  SS
   Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387 stated in paragraph 33:

   "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not apply  in
   every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate to say
   that the general position outside the sorts of special contexts  referred
   to above is that compelling circumstances would need to be identified  to
   support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new Rules in Appendix FM. In
   our view, that is a formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of
   exceptionality or a requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred
   to in MF (Nigeria) in the context of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
   criminals),  but  which  gives  appropriate   weight   to   the   focused
   consideration of public interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
   Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM. It also
   reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has  been  tested
   and has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g., Haleemudeen at  [44],
   per Beatson LJ. (my bold)


21. Mr Royston argued that there were issues in this  case  which  were  not
   properly addressed by the Rules that amounted to  compelling  reasons  to
   allow the appeal outside the Rules and he set those out for  me  on  oral
   arguments and in his skeleton argument both of which I  have  taken  into
   account. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions  posed
   by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


22. I am satisfied that the Appellant and MW  have  a  family  life  in  the
   United Kingdom because I have accepted that they have lived  together  as
   unmarried partners since January  2008.  The  Appellant  claims  to  have
   arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 and while there is no  evidence  of
   his engagement with the community  beyond  his  relationship  with  MW  I
   accept that inevitably he has created a private  aswell  as  family  life
   with her.


If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


23. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such  gravity  as
   potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


24. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for  the
   decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights  which  is
   precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate  his  conduct
   by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


25. The interference does have legitimate aims since it  is  in  pursuit  of
   one of the legitimate aims set out in Article 8 (2) necessary in  pursuit
   of the economic well being of the country through the maintenance of  the
   requirements of a policy of immigration control. The state has the  right
   to control the entry of non nationals into its territory  and  Article  8
   does not mean that an individual can choose where he wishes to enjoy  his
   private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


26. In carrying out the proportionality assessment I  am  required  to  give
   weight to the public interest factors as set out in section 117B  of  the
   Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. I must therefore  take  into
   account and give weight to the fact that  the  maintenance  of  effective
   immigration controls is in the public interest and effective  immigration
   controls are underpinned by the consistent and fair  application  of  the
   Immigration Rules to all applicants. This  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
   requirements of the Rules in part because  he  had  been  in  the  United
   Kingdom unlawfully since 2002. While he claimed that he was  at  risk  in
   Pakistan he did not claim asylum and that must undermine the  credibility
   of that aspect of his history.


27. I accept that the Appellant  speaks  English  as  there  is  documentary
   evidence to that effect.


28. There is no  evidence  before  me  to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  is
   personally financially independent because he has  been  unable  to  work
   because of his lack of status. However I accept that MW has been able  to
   financially support the Appellant.


29. I remind myself however s 117(4) (b) that little weight should be  given
   to a private life, or a relationship formed with  a  qualifying  partner,
   that is established by a person at a time  when  the  person  is  in  the
   United Kingdom unlawfully. The Appellant in this case has  at  all  times
   been in the United Kingdom unlawfully and I attach considerable weight to
   this factor in the balancing exercise.


30. I have reminded myself that Lord Bingham in  Razgar  stated  that  in  a
   judgement on proportionality that the ultimate question is, "whether  the
   refusal of leave to enter or remain in circumstances where  the  life  of
   the family cannot reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere,  taking
   full account of all considerations weighing in  favour  of  the  refusal,
   prejudices the family life of the  applicant  in  a  manner  sufficiently
   serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental  right  protected  by
   Article 8. If the answer to this question is affirmative, the refusal  is
   unlawful and the authority must so decide."


31. I have therefore assessed firstly whether it  would  be  reasonable  for
   the Appellant and sponsor to continue their family life in Pakistan  -  a
   very different test to that set out in EX.1 I accept. MW asserts  in  her
   witness statement that she would not wish to live in Pakistan: given  her
   age and the inevitable disruption that relocation to a country  that  was
   socially and culturally very different to the UK  and  the  benefits  she
   derives in terms of the access to the NHS I accept that her stance, while
   not an insurmountable obstacle as required by EX.1 is not an unreasonable
   one.


32. I am satisfied however that this is not the  only  choice  open  to  the
   couple as I am satisfied that the Appellant could return to  Pakistan  to
   re apply for entry clearance on the basis of his relationship with MW.  I
   have  to  consider  whether  such  a  period  of  separation   would   be
   disproportionate. I have considered R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD
   (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation  -  proportionality)  IJR
   [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC). I am satisfied that the ratio was that there may
   be cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
   being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where temporary separation  to  enable
   an individual to make an application  for  entry  clearance  may  not  be
   disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for the  individual  to  place
   before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such  temporary  separation
   will interfere disproportionately with protected rights. It will  not  be
   enough to rely solely upon  the  case-law  concerning  Chikwamba  v  SSHD
   [2008] UKHL 40.

33.  It  is  argued  by  Mr  Royston  that  'the  likely  delay   would   be
   considerable' (paragraph 23 of the skeleton argument) although  there  is
   no evidential basis for this argument contained within the papers. It  is
   suggested that any delay could be an appreciable portion of her remaining
   life but again the medical evidence  that  I  have  considered  does  not
   suggest that MW's demise is imminent as her  surgery  was  successful  in
   2009 and while has a number of ailments consistent with old age  non  are
   described as life threatening or chronic and all appear to require simply
   monitoring. It is suggested that MW will be  deprived  of  the  care  and
   emotional support of the Appellant during any period  of  separation  but
   while I accept that they have  lived  together  since  2008  and  have  a
   supportive relationship the exact nature  of  the  care  he  provides  in
   relation to  her  health  is  unclear  and  unspecified  in  the  witness
   statements and not referred to at all  in  the  medical  evidence.  I  am
   therefore unable to attach in the balancing exercise much weight to  this
   argument in the absence of clear evidence of  both  the  nature  of  that
   assistance and  the  claimed  length  of  the  delay  in  processing  the
   application.

34. Taking all of the matters into account as set out above I  am  satisfied
   that the Appellant failed to comply with the  Immigration  Rules  and  no
   compelling circumstances were identified why those Rules  should  not  be
   applied in his case in the usual way, there was nothing  disproportionate
   in applying the Rules in accordance with their terms.


35. In determining  whether  the  removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
   legitimate aim of immigration control I  find  that  none  of  the  facts
   underpinning the Appellants life  in  the  United  Kingdom  taken  either
   singularly  or  cumulatively  outweigh  the  legitimate  purpose  of  the
   Appellants removal.

DECISION

36. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

37. The appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

38. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.


   Signed


   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
   Date 28.11.2015




