

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/00149/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 November 2019                    |On 19 November 2019            |
|                                      |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                 ABID IQBAL
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, of Counsel, instructed by Connaught Law


For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan on 3 October 2019  against
          the  determination   of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Wilding,
          promulgated on 2 July 2019 following a hearing at Taylor House  on
          4 June 2019.


       2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 15 December 1985. He
          entered the UK on 1 May 2011 as a Tier 4 student with leave  until
          30 April 2013. During this time, he studied for a level 7 extended
          diploma  in   strategic   management   and   leadership   at   the
          International  School  of  Business  in  Harrow.   There   is   no
          information as to whether he successfully completed this course.


       3. An application for further leave to study for a year  for  another
          extended Diploma in Information Technology at the14 Stars European
          College for Higher Education was made on 30  April  2013  but  was
          refused on 5 August  2013  because  there  were  issues  with  the
          sponsor's licence and his CAS was withdrawn. He appealed,  arguing
          that he should have been made  aware  of  the  problems  with  his
          sponsor before a decision was taken to refuse his application. The
          appeal was allowed to a  limited  extent  by  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Wiseman on 22 August 2014 on the basis that the decision was
          not in accordance with the law and a fresh decision  was  required
          "either to allow the sixty day period in question  for  a  further
          CAS to be obtained or if the application is to be refused again to
          justify in detail why that should be  the  appropriate  course  of
          action". The application was re-refused on 21  August  2015  under
          paragraph 322(1A) on the basis that the appellant had relied on  a
          fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate from ETS.


       4. A further appeal was lodged and was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Wylie on 23 June 2016. The judge found  that  the  appellant
          had taken the test himself and had not used a  proxy  test  taker.
          The appeal was allowed on 21 July 2016 again on  a  limited  basis
          and remitted to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.


       5. On 14 June 2017, the respondent provided the appellant with a  60-
          day letter. A second letter was provided on 25 May  2018  after  a
          judicial review challenge. On 23 July 2018 a  further  three-month
          period was given to the appellant. No CAS was,  however,  obtained
          and on 25 October 2018 the application was eventually refused. The
          respondent noted that the 14 stars  European  College  for  Higher
          Education was not on the list of sponsors and that  the  appellant
          had already been given two 60-day letters to enable him to  obtain
          a CAS.


       6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilding then heard  the  appeal  against
          the October 2018 decision.  The  appellant's  case  was  that  the
          respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  law  on  the
          basis that  it  breached  the  respondent's  duty  of  common  law
          fairness.  In  his  witness  statement  the  appellant  asked  for
          discretionary leave so that he did not have to satisfy  the  usual
          student requirements but that  was  not  an  argument  pursued  by
          Counsel at the  hearing  before  Judge  Wilding.  The  judge  took
          account  of  the  appellant's  evidence,   noting   that   various
          educational institutions had refused his application  for  reasons
          varying  from  a  lack  of  academic  progression  to  his   risky
          immigration situation but also noting that none had stated that he
          would have been accepted were it not for his lack  of  status.  He
          also noted the unexplained and regrettable delays on the  part  of
          the respondent and accepted those were not the appellant's  fault.
          However, he found that the respondent's decision was not  unlawful
          because the appellant had been given time to find  a  sponsor  and
          had not been able to do so. He  considered  he  had  no  power  to
          direct the respondent to grant a period of leave  long  enough  to
          enable the appellant to undertake a course of study and  that  the
          appellant could not expect to be granted a period of leave outside
          what he had sought. Given that the appellant had  been  given  two
          chances to remedy the problem over the lack of a  CAS,  the  judge
          concluded that  there  was  no  breach  of  common  law  fairness.
          Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.


       7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable
          that the lack of a CAS was the result of an act or an omission  of
          the respondent (Kaur [2019] EWCA Civ 1101).


       8. In her Rule 24 reply, the respondent sought  to  distinguish  Kaur
          and relied on EK (Ivory  Coast)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1517  instead,
          maintaining that the  respondent  could  not  be  blamed  for  the
          actions of institutions outside her control.


          The Hearing


       9. Mr Pipe relied on and expanded the grounds in his  submissions  at
          the hearing on 8 November 2019. He submitted that the decision was
          not in accordance with the law because of the problems  which  led
          to the absence of a CAS and the delays in the issue of the  60-day
          letters.  He then took  me  through  the  appellant's  immigration
          history and background and  submitted  that  all  the  appellant's
          immigration difficulties lay  with  the  Secretary  of  State.  He
          pointed to two successful appeals and to the long  delays  in  the
          issue of the two 60-day letters.


      10. Mr Pipe submitted that the  judge  made  irrational  findings  and
          those vitiated his determination. He submitted that the  appellant
          had no adverse immigration history when he made  his  application.
          All his problems emanated from the respondent. He  submitted  that
          the respondent could have  issued  the  appellant  with  a  letter
          stating that his immigration history was not his  fault  or  could
          have granted him a period of leave.


      11. For the respondent, Mr Melvin relied upon the Rule 24 response. He
          submitted that there  was  nothing  irrational  with  the  judge's
          decision.  Many  students  faced  similar  problems  and   lengthy
          litigation was not an exceptional circumstance. The respondent did
          not instruct institutions to issue a CAS and so reliance could  be
          placed on EK. Two 60-day letters had been issued.   The  appellant
          had  therefore  had  the  opportunity  to   apply   to   colleges.
          Alternatively, he could apply from overseas where his  immigration
          history would not be an issue. It was irrational to  suggest  that
          he should be granted discretionary leave. The judge's decision was
          not vitiated by material error.


      12. In response, Mr Pipe  submitted  that  the  appellant's  situation
          could not be fairly compared to that of other students. There  had
          been long unexplained delays. The conduct of  the  respondent  had
          not been engaged with. It was unfair  to  describe  this  just  as
          protracted litigation. The respondent  had  the  option  to  grant
          discretionary leave or to  issue  a  letter  confirming  that  the
          delays were not the appellant's fault. EK did not  apply  as  that
          concerned a mistake by a university where a CAS was withdrawn. The
          appellant sought a decision from the Tribunal that the decision of
          the respondent was not in accordance with the law. It  would  then
          be up to the parties to decide on the remedy.


      13. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      14. I have considered all the evidence and the submissions made.


      15. The grounds maintain that the appellant seeks a  letter  from  the
          respondent to Tier 4 sponsors to whom he  applies  which  confirms
          that his immigration history should not be taken into account.  Mr
          Pipe,  in  his  submissions,  maintained  that  or  a  period   of
          discretionary leave was sought but that the nature of  the  remedy
          was a matter for the parties to agree. What the  appellant  sought
          from the Tribunal was a decision that the respondent had not acted
          in accordance with the law.


      16. The appellant argues that  he  could  not  obtain  a  CAS  because
          sponsors were unwilling to take him on due to his poor immigration
          history.  He  has  adduced  evidence  of  refusals  from   several
          educational institutions. The University of Bedfordshire letter of
          5 July 2017 gives no reason for the rejection of  his  application
          but the appellant claims in his  witness  statement  that  it  was
          because his last college was not in  the  list  of  sponsors.  The
          University of Roehampton turned down his application  on  13  July
          2017 because he had no guarantee of a student visa. An email  from
          the University of West London dated 4 August 2017 (after the first
          60-day letter was issued) states that "Our  admissions  policy  is
          that we are unable to consider any applicants who have  had  their
          leave curtailed in their UK immigration history".  A  letter  from
          London Metropolitan University dated 11 August  2017  states  that
          the appellant was  not  offered  a  place  because  "there  is  no
          academic progress from your  previous  study".  That  was  also  a
          reason given by the University of Hertfordshire in 2017 along with
          the fact that the appellant's last sponsor had  lost  its  Tier  4
          licence. On 7 June 2018, the University of the  West  of  Scotland
          refused his application because he had been in the UK for over ten
          years. On 20 July 2018 Ulster University turned down the appellant
          because there was no time for them to carry out checks  given  the
          imminent expiry of his visa.


      17. The judge had full regard to all the matters Mr Pipe raised in his
          submissions. He acknowledged the delays in the issuing of the  two
          60-day letters but noted that they had been issued and  that  they
          did give the appellant the opportunity to find a new  sponsor.  He
          also considered the request for discretionary leave but noted that
          the appellant could not be granted something he  had  not  applied
          for. That was a valid conclusion.


      18. The appellant complains that he was not given a letter that  shows
          that the delays in resolving his leave application  were  not  his
          fault. The two letters issued by the  respondent,  dated  14  June
          2017 and 25 May 2018,  make  it  very  clear,  however,  that  the
          appellant put in his application in 2013 and  that  it  has  since
          been under consideration  by  the  respondent.  Any  sponsor  can,
          therefore, see from these letters that the appellant's  leave  was
          not curtailed and that he did not  delay  in  the  making  of  his
          applications.  Indeed,  he  has  two  determinations  which  would
          further support  that.  In  those  circumstances,  the  respondent
          cannot  be  held  accountable  for  the  policies  of   individual
          educational institutions or how they interpreted his position.  As
          observed in Alam [2012] EWCA Civ 960 (at 35 and 45) and  cited  in
          EK (Ivory Coast) (at 29), it is an inherent feature of the points-
          based system  that  it  "puts  a  premium  on  predictability  and
          certainty at the expense of discretion" and this "may well  result
          in hard decisions". However, as the court held in EK, "application
          of the duty of fairness should not result in the  public  benefits
          associated  with  having  such  a  clear  and  predictable  scheme
          operating according to objective criteria being placed in  serious
          jeopardy" (at 31).


      19. I have also considered Kaur [2019] EWCA Civ 1101 where  the  court
          held that if an applicant's failure to produce a required document
          on application was "the result of an act or omission on  the  part
          of the Secretary of State for the Home Department, then refusal of
          leave to remain on the basis of that failure would prima facie  be
          unlawful" (at 16) but that it was necessary for  such  a  case  to
          succeed to show "a causal connection"  between  the  Secretary  of
          State's act or omission and the applicant's failure  to  meet  the
          rules (at 17 and 19).  In the case of Kaur it was the Secretary of
          State's retention  of  the  applicant's  passport  which,  it  was
          argued, led to her inability to obtain a CAS. In fact,  the  court
          found no causal connection had been shown. In  the  present  case,
          the judgment was not relied on by Mr Pipe in his oral  submissions
          and indeed it would not be clear what act  or  omission  could  be
          attributed to the respondent in circumstances where she  acted  in
          accordance with her policy and accepted procedure and  issued  the
          appellant not one but two 60-day letters. If the argument is  that
          it was the delay in issuing the letters that led to his difficulty
          in obtaining a CAS, then I find that a causal connection  has  not
          been shown. This  is  because  although  some  of  the  university
          rejections cite  a  poor  immigration  history  as  a  reason  for
          rejection, two refer to the lack of academic progress demonstrated
          by the proposed course and not a single institution confirmed that
          it would accept him were it not for his immigration history.


      20. The appellant's problems in fact commenced in 2013 with his choice
          of college. Had he perhaps shown more care  in  his  selection  at
          that stage he may not have ended up in the  predicament  he  later
          found himself. In any event, the respondent gave the appellant two
          letters in line with her practice  and  policy  and  then  further
          delayed consideration of the application for a further two  months
          until it was eventually refused in October 2018 for want of a CAS.
           The appellant appears,  therefore,  to  have  been  treated  more
          favourably than other students in getting further  time,  possibly
          because of the delays that had been previously incurred.  However,
          as he was still unable to obtain a CAS after the  additional  time
          allotted to  him,  the  respondent  was  entitled  to  refuse  his
          application and the judge was entitled to dismiss the appeal.


          Decision


      21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  any
          material errors of law. The appeal is dismissed.


          Anonymity


      22. No request for an anonymity order was made.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 14 November 2019
