
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00778/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17th February 2015                         |On 3rd March 2015              |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                     D S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion I shall continue to  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The first hearing of this appeal in the Upper Tribunal on 11th December
    2014 (when the appellant was not represented) I  heard  submissions  in
    relation to the claimed error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I made the following decision setting out the background  to
    the appeal:

         "2.   On  24th  October  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             Wellesley-Cole gave permission to  the  respondent  to  appeal
             against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Juss
             in which he allowed the appeal against  the  decision  of  the
             respondent to refuse to vary the appellant's  leave  to  enter
             applying the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
             Rules and under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

          3.  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  noted  that,   in   the   grounds   of
             application, it was claimed  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had
             failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  material
             matters  having  erred  in  his  approach  to  Article  8   in
             particular.  The grounds made reference to MF (Nigeria) [2013]
             EWCA Civ 1192 which, it was contended, had confirmed that  the
             Immigration Rules were a complete code.   Reference  was  also
             made to Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  providing  that  an
             Article 8 assessment should only be carried  out  where  there
             were compelling circumstances not recognised by the Rules  and
             that the appeal  should  only  be  allowed  where  there  were
             exceptional circumstances on  the  basis  explained  in  Nagre
             [2013] EWHC 720p (Admin).  The judge had also failed  to  take
             into consideration that the  appellant  had  gained  entry  be
             deceit claiming that she was a tourist when in truth  she  had
             come to the United Kingdom to get married.

          4. Although Judge Wellesley-Cole note that the  judge  had  found
             there4 were exceptional  circumstances,  citing  Huang  [2007]
             UKHL 11, she thought the judge had not elaborated the  reasons
             for finding that to be the case.

          5. At the hearing  before  me  the  appellant  was  unrepresented
             (although correspondence from Paragon Law dated 18th  December
             2014 indicates that they are now representing her).  In  these
             circumstances I took steps to explain  to  the  appellant  the
             nature of the proceedings and, in particular, my initial  task
             to investigate and decide whether or not the First-tier  Judge
             had, actually, made an error on a point of law such  that  the
             determination  should  be  re-made.   It  appeared  that   the
             appellant had  received  some  legal  assistance  because  she
             handed in a Rule  24  reply  completed  by  Mr  R  O'Ryan,  of
             Counsel, on 12th November 29014.  I summarise this, below.

          6. The appellant argues that the decision of Judge Juss contained
             no material misdirection of law.  It  is  submitted  that  the
             judge had given adequate reasons to support  his  conclusions.
             It is argued that, in MF (Nigeria), the Court  of  Appeal  had
             decided that the Rules were a complete code only  in  relation
             to  deportation  cases  and  the  reference  to   'exceptional
             circumstances' required a  balancing  exercise  involving  the
             application of a proportionality test.  This view is supported
             by Nagre where the Court of Appeal noted that  the  respondent
             did not contend that the new Rules  completely  covered  every
             conceivable case.  The response also contends that  the  judge
             had properly  considered  Article  8  only  after  considering
             whether  or  not  the  appellant  could  succeed   under   the
             Immigration Rules.  The judge considered  compelling  features
             in the appeal including the fact that the appellant's  husband
             was a refugee from Iran and had no  connections  with  Tunisia
             and that the appellant was herself vulnerable as she was about
             to give birth.

          7. Ms Johnstone submitted that the respondent continued  to  rely
             upon the grounds.  She expressed the view that, from paragraph
             12 onwards, the determination showed errors in failing to give
             reasons for the inability of the appellant's husband to go  to
             Tunisia or to explain what made  the  case  exceptional.   The
             only reason given was that that the husband had indicated that
             he was not prepared to go to Tunisia.

          8. The appellant did not make any oral  submissions  although  it
             was clear that she relied upon those set out in the response.

          9. After considering the matter for a  few  moments  I  indicated
             that I was satisfied that the determination showed a  material
             error on a point  of  law  in  the  judge's  consideration  of
             Article 8 issues such that it should be re-made.  The  reasons
             for that conclusion follow.

         10. Although the judge recounts the  circumstances  in  which  the
             appellant came to the United Kingdom as a visitor, he does not
             deal  with  the  respondent's  contention  that  she  came  by
             deception intending to marry which might have a bearing on the
             Article 8 decision.  Further, the judge gives only one  reason
             for the conclusion that the family life enjoyed by the parties
             cannot reasonably be expected to be  enjoyed  elsewhere  which
             was simply the  husband's  unwillingness  to  go  to  Tunisia.
             Although the judge notes that the appellant was pregnant  (she
             has now given birth to a daughter, S) the judge does  not,  in
             the Article 8 balancing exercise,  give  reasons  for  it  not
             being reasonable to expect the  young  child,  when  born,  to
             accompany her parents to  Tunisia.   Whilst  the  decision  is
             otherwise comprehensive and cogently argued, the omissions  to
             which I have referred give rise to material errors  on  points
             of law.

         11.  Having  decided  that  the  determination  showed  errors   I
             indicated my attention to proceed  to  re-make  the  decision.
             However, the appellant indicated to me that she would like  to
             see representations  and  I  also  reminded  myself  that  the
             Tribunal would need to consider  the  best  interests  of  her
             child who, it was claimed, is  a  British  citizen.   On  this
             basis I agreed that it would be in the  interests  of  justice
             for the appellant to  be  represented  at  a  resumed  hearing
             before the Upper Tribunal before me.

         12. At the resumed hearing human rights issues  incorporating  the
             best interests of the appellant's  child  will  be  considered
             which may  require  a  re-evaluation  of  the  application  of
             paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM the Immigration  Rules  on  that
             account."

 3. At the first hearing I also made directions relating to  the  re-making
    of the First-tier decision which was  then  heard  before  me  on  17th
    February 2015.



Re-making the Decision

 4. The appellant gave brief oral evidence in which she adopted the content
    of her statement which commences on page 3 of the bundle  of  documents
    submitted by her representatives on 9th February  2015.   In  this  she
    confirms  that  she  lives  with  her  husband  and  baby  daughter  in
    Nottingham.  Her husband has indefinite leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom and so it was possible to obtain a  British  passport  for  her
    daughter.  She states that, as her husband is a Christian,  this  would
    cause problems for her if she returned to Tunisia where her family  are
    traditional and conservative Muslims.  At present  her  family  do  not
    know that her husband is a Christian.  During  brief  cross-examination
    she said that her parents would be angry and never forgive her for this
    and it would not be possible for them to become part of her  family  if
    returned to Tunisia.

 5. The appellant's husband, Mr M H  then  gave  evidence.   His  statement
    commences on page 1 of the bundle.  He states that he  works  full-time
    as a taxi driver whilst his wife  stays  at  home  to  care  for  their
    daughter.  He said he would be unable to care for his daughter  on  his
    own if his wife were  forced  to  return  to  Tunisia.   During  cross-
    examination he confirmed that he had never been to that country.

Submissions

 6. Mr McVeety helpfully agreed that the only issue was whether,  in  terms
    of proportionality having regard to the provisions of  Section  117B(6)
    was whether or not the appellant had a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with her British child and it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   He  made  no  further
    submissions on the point.

 7. Mr O'Ryan relied upon the terms of his comprehensive skeleton  argument
    which emphasises that the appellant's family life with her daughter and
    husband cannot reasonably be enjoyed in  Tunisia.   His  argument  also
    points out that there is no requirement, under Article 8 ECHR, for  the
    existence of insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  abroad
    and  there  is  no  threshold  test  of  "good  arguable  grounds"  for
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The skeleton
    also  concedes  that,  although  the  appellant's   application   might
    otherwise succeed under section EX.1 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules, that could not be applied in  the  circumstances  of  this  case
    because, having arrived  in  UK  as  a  visitor  she  cannot  meet  the
    immigration status requirements under section LTRP of Appendix FM.   He
    asserted that it would not reasonable to expect the  British  child  to
    leave.  He also reminded me that the appellant was still  breastfeeding
    her baby who could not be left in the care of the father.   The  latter
    also speaks no Arabic and is a Christian in a mixed marriage which,  if
    discovered in Tunisia, would make it unreasonable for him to go  there.
    At this point Mr McVeety confirmed that the husband's faith was not  an
    issue.

 8. As to the situation in Tunisia Mr O'Ryan referred to  an  extract  from
    the United States Department of State of 2013 in which  he  had  marked
    passages concerning the difficulties  experienced  in  the  country  by
    religious minorities and the inadequate steps  taken  by  the  Tunisian
    government to protect such communities from harassment,  vandalism  and
    intimidation.  Societal abuses based on religious affiliation had  also
    been reported on and there was significant  societal  pressure  against
    the conversion of Muslims to other religions.  Particularly threats  of
    violence from members of their families or others.

Conclusions

 9. Where human rights issues arise it is for the appellant  to  show  that
    the particular right will be infringed and for the respondent  to  show
    that the infringement of the right will not be proportionate.   I  take
    into consideration the evidence as at the date of hearing applying  the
    standard of a balance of probabilities to any evidential issues.

10. Mr McVeety helpfully identified the issues in this appeal as those  set
    out in Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended).  I have little hesitation  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  her
    English national child. That is not a matter which has  been  contested
    by the respondent and I am satisfied, from the evidence I  have  heard,
    that the appellant is the  main  carer  for  her  child  who  is  being
    breastfed by her.  In relation to the issue of whether or not it  would
    be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom I have to
    take into consideration the wider picture upon which I comment below.

11. I accept that the appellant is  in  a  genuine  relationship  with  her
    husband who has indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    following  the  successful  asylum  claim  based  upon  his   fear   of
    persecution as a Christian convert in Iran.  That  situation  was  made
    quite clear to me from the evidence given by both husband and  wife  at
    the hearing, with  their  child  present.   As  matters  stand  I  also
    conclude that it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom with the appellant to go to live  in  Tunisia.   Not
    only would this cause severe difficulties for the  appellant  with  her
    family who would, I conclude, find out about the  appellant's  marriage
    to a Christian and thus give rise to some considerable friction  within
    the  family.   Most  importantly,  however,  family  life   could   not
    reasonably be expected to continue by the appellant's husband going  to
    Tunisia.  That is because he is a  Farsi  speaker  and  not  an  Arabic
    speaker which will create difficulties for him in obtaining employment.
     I also conclude that  the  husband's  faith,  as  a  Christian,  would
    inevitably give rise to other difficulties both with employment, family
    relationships and societal harassment which would make it  unreasonable
    for him to go there.  The background information provided to me  by  Mr
    O'Ryan has assisted  me  to  make  that  conclusion  as  it  shows  the
    existence  of  religious  discrimination  with  an  absence  of   state
    protection. Such difficulties would be present throughout  the  country
    if the parties were forced to re-locate to avoid family friction.

12. Thus considering Article 8 issues outside the Immigration Rules,  which
    cannot avail the appellant, I am satisfied that it has been shown  that
    the respondent's decision  would  be  a  disproportionate  exercise  of
    legitimate immigration control. I have reached that conclusion applying
    the 5 stage approach recommended in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The  public
    interest does not require the removal of a person who cannot reasonably
    be expected to leave the United Kingdom in the circumstances as I  have
    found them to be.

Notice of Decision

I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

As this appeal now involves the interests  of  a  young  child  I  make  the
following direction:


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I  do  not  make  a  fees  order  in  this  appeal.   That  is  because  the
circumstances which now enable me  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds were not all  present  at  the  time  of  the  appellant's  original
application.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

