
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00071/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2018                   |On 26 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr inayeth hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Rendle instructed by Novells Legal Practice,
London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Hussain is a citizen of Bangladesh whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 11 February 1972.  On 13 December 2015 his application made  to  the
    Secretary of State on human rights grounds for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom was refused.  He appealed that decision.  His appeal was
    heard on 24 April 2017 by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ripley
    sitting at Hatton Cross.  She allowed his appeal. She gave  significant
    weight to delay on the part of the Secretary of  State  in  considering
    the application made by him as long ago as May 2008.   He  had  made  a
    further submission in response to a request from the Secretary of State
    in November 2009.  In 2011 he received a letter telling  him  that  his
    case was in a backlog of older asylum applications being considered  by
    the Case Resolution  Directorate.   In  the  same  month  he  submitted
    further evidence.  In May 2015 the  Secretary  of  State  wrote  to  Mr
    Hussain  requesting  that  he  complete  an  SET(O)  form  and  provide
    supporting evidence.  Mr Hussain did as  he  was  told.   He  responded
    within a month.

 2. Not content with the decision of Judge Ripley to allow the appeal,  the
    Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on various grounds,  all
    of which were refused save for one.  Judge  Brunnen  in  the  grant  of
    permission, dated 24 November 2017, limited the Secretary of  State  to
    arguing that the judge arguably had applied the wrong  test  in  making
    reference to "strong countervailing factors"  against  the  refusal  of
    leave to remain.

 3. Mr Clarke submitted that in giving considerable weight, as she did,  to
    the delay, and making reference,  as  she  did,  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's guidance in particular at paragraphs 41 and 42  the  judge  had
    erred.  The guidance in Chapter  23  of  Enforcement  Instructions  and
    Guidance relates to the policy of the Secretary of  State  in  removing
    illegal immigrants from the United Kingdom unless it would be a  breach
    of the Refugee Convention or the European Convention of Human Rights or
    that there are  exceptional  circumstances  for  not  doing  so  in  an
    individual   case.    The   guidance   concerns   further   exceptional
    circumstances where it is claimed that removal would be  inappropriate.
    The relevant factors are:-

      i) Character, conduct and associations including any previous criminal
         record and the nature of any offence of  which  the  applicant  has
         been convicted.

     ii) Compliance with any conditions attached to any  previous  grant  of
         leave to enter or remain and  compliance  with  any  conditions  of
         temporary admission or immigration bail where applicable.

    iii) Length of time in the United Kingdom accrued for reasons beyond the
         migrant's control after their human rights or asylum claim has been
         submitted.

    The focus in this case was upon (ii) and (iii).  Under (ii) caseworkers
    are told that they should assess whether there was  evidence  that  the
    individual  had  sought  to  delay  or  frustrate  the  decision-making
    process, frustrate removal or otherwise not comply with any requirement
    imposed upon them and account was to be take of:

    .    Evidence of deception practised at any stage  in  the  immigration
         process, including submitting a false identity to the Home Office.

    .    Any other type of fraud or deception, such as benefit fraud or NHS
         debt.

    .    Failure to attend interviews as requested.

    .    Failure to supply information as requested e.g. for documentation.

    .     Whether  they  have  lodged  spurious  application   or   further
         submissions to frustrate removal.

    .    Failure to comply with the reporting conditions.

    .     Failure  to  demonstrate  genuine  efforts  to   leave   the   UK
         voluntarily.

    .    When they have worked illegally.

    .    Any individual's lawful  employment  history  and  how  they  have
         supported themselves and/or their family, and

    .    A sustained history of compliance with every requirement the  Home
         Office has made of them, including providing  full  information  in
         their  application,  attending  interviews,  compliance  with   the
         reporting requirements.

    Caseworkers must assess all evidence of compliance  and  non-compliance
    in the round, but repeated non-compliance  and/or  lengthy  periods  of
    absconding will generally mean that an individual cannot  benefit  from
    the grant of leave on  account  of  exceptional  circumstances,  unless
    there are strong countervailing reasons in their favour.

    The third consideration being length of time in the United Kingdom  due
    to  reasons  beyond  the  migrant's  control  ...  goes  on  to  invite
    caseworkers to have regard to the length of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom which is a factor to be considered  where  residence  has  been
    accrued by an unreasonable delay not attributable to the migrant.   But
    the second paragraph under that heading reads as follows: -

         "Provided that the factors outlined in "character" or  "compliance"
         do not mean that the claimant cannot benefit from  the  exceptional
         circumstances guidance, then caseworkers must also consider whether
         there  has  been  significant  delay  by  the  Home   Office,   not
         attributable to the migrant, in deciding a  valid  application  for
         leave to remain on asylum or human rights grounds or whether  there
         are reasons beyond the individual's  control  why  they  could  not
         leave the UK voluntarily after their application was refused ... ."

 4. One of the issues addressed by the judge was whether Mr Hussain in  the
    First-tier could benefit from the exceptional  circumstances  guidance.
    Mr Clarke invited me to find that it was not appropriate for the  judge
    to go on to consider delay.

 5. With all due respect to Mr Clarke I  have  some  difficulty  with  that
    submission.  There are instances in  which  there  may  not  have  been
    compliance with conditions attached to any previous grant of leave  and
    the like but if strong countervailing reasons  are  found  then  in  my
    judgement the delay is a factor to be taken  into  account.   In  other
    words, the condition precedent which Mr Clarke said did not exist  will
    exist if there are strong countervailing  factors  found.   This  judge
    found strong countervailing reasons.  I refer to paragraphs 47  and  48
    and the approach taken by the judge at paragraphs 40 and  41  in  which
    she explains her reasoning in what I find to be an impeccable  decision
    in that there is a clear logic with adequate reasons given  leading  to
    the conclusion open to the judge in my judgement.

 6. In any event, even if  Mr  Clarke  were  right,  the  judge  was  still
    entitled  when  applying  the  guidance  in  Huang  to  make  her   own
    proportionality assessment which she did and she was entitled  to  give
    weight, having regard  to  other  factors  to  the  delay.   The  judge
    recognised that there had been non-compliance  by  Mr  Hussain  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal; she noted that it was lengthy;  that  it  preceded
    the making of the 2008 application; and as she  said  at  paragraph  42
    that did not extend or otherwise affect the Secretary of State's  delay
    in considering the application.  As to the eventual test which  appears
    to have been applied by the judge of strong countervailing factors,  as
    Mr Rendle rightly submitted, that was not a test any stronger than  the
    test which was properly to have been applied given the guidance in  the
    case Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 at paragraph 60.  That reads:-

         "It remains the position that the ultimate question is how  a  fair
         balance  should  be  struck  between  the  competing   public   and
         individual interests involved,  applying  a  proportionality  test.
         The rules and instructions in issue in  the  present  case  do  not
         depart from that position.  The Secretary of State has not  imposed
         a test of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord  Bingham  had  in
         mind: that is to say a requirement that  the  case  should  exhibit
         some highly unusual feature, over and above the application of  the
         test of proportionality.  On the contrary, she has defined the word
         "exceptional", as already explained, as meaning  "circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
         the individual such that refusal of the application  would  not  be
         proportionate."

    So understood, the provision in the  instructions  that  leave  can  be
    granted  outside  the  Rules  where  exceptional  circumstances   apply
    involves  the  application  of  the  test  of  proportionality  to  the
    circumstances of  the  individual  case,  and  cannot  be  regarded  as
    incompatible with Article 8.   That  conclusion  is  fortified  by  the
    express statement in the instructions that "exceptional" does not  mean
    "unusual" or "unique".

 7. It follows in my view that even if  there  was  an  error  it  was  not
    material because the judge was required to carry out a  proportionality
    assessment.  It was not necessary to  look  for  strong  countervailing
    factors but on the facts of this case the judge found them.

 8. Inevitably therefore on  the  findings  of  fact  which  she  made  and
    ultimately this case was fact-sensitive and the reasoning being open to
    her being entirely rational the appeal of the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.



Addendum

 9. The grounds were as I have already said severely restricted.  It may be
    had Mr Clarke been given the opportunity to develop his  argument  more
    widely, I would have come to a different view.  I simply do  not  know.
    Mr Clarke  did  not  seek  to  expand  on  the  grounds  or  renew  any
    application before me to argue the case more widely. It should  not  be
    inferred from the observation that I make that I was of the  view  that
    had they been argued there would have been a different  result,  but  I
    raise this for completeness.



Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 21 February 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
