
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00154/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2016                   |On 24 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS ANA MILENKOVIC
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Sowerby (Counsel instructed by Douglass Simon
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before  me  following  an  application  made  by  the
    Secretary of State that the First-tier Tribunal made a  material  error
    of law.  In this decision the appellant is the "Secretary of State" and
    the respondent  is  Ana  Milenkovic  whom  I  shall  refer  to  as  the
    "claimant".

2.   The Secretary of State appeals against a decision made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Samimi) ("FtT") who allowed the claimant's  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.

Background

3.   The claimant is a citizen of Serbia and her date of birth  is  23  June
    1988.  The Secretary of State refused  her  application  for  leave  to
    remain as the partner of a British citizen settled in  the  UK  because
    the parties had not been living together for two  years  prior  to  the
    date of the application and did not meet the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM under E-LTR.1.2 and with reference to R-LTRP.1.(c).   The  Secretary
    of State also considered  paragraph  EX1(a)(i)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules but concluded that the claimant's removal  would  not  amount  to
    insurmountable obstacles to continuing family life outside of  the  UK.
    It was accepted that the parties  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  The requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  were  not
    met.

4.   The FtT found that the claimant was a talented  artist,  who  had  been
    awarded a distinction in her masters degree in fine  art  at  Wimbledon
    College, London, and won the Clifford  Chance  award  for  her  artwork
    leading to an exhibition.  She was working as a studio  manager  for  a
    well-established British artist.  Her partner Mr Pomichal was  also  an
    artist with an impressive portfolio of nominations  and  awards.   They
    had established friends and connections within  the  art  community  in
    London.  The FtT heard the appeal with  reference  to  Article  8  ECHR
    only. It found that as at the date of  hearing  the  claimant  and  her
    British partner lived together for two and a half years  and  financial
    support was available. There were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    claimant's family life continuing outside of the UK.  The claimant  and
    her partner were exceptionally talented artists who had integrated into
    the  art  community  in  London,  established  a  network  of  valuable
    connections and friends and had made notable contributions  to  the  UK
    through their artwork [12].

5.   The FtT followed the approach in Gulshan  (Article  3  -  new  Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC), Iftikhar Ahmed [2014] EWHC 300
    (Admin) and Hayat (Nature of Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011]  UKUT
    444 (IAC).  The Ft found at the date of hearing that the  claimant  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 concluded
    that interference to private life was disproportionate. In the event of
    relocation to Serbia or Slovakia the ability for the claimant's partner
    to continue to work as an artist would suffer a major detriment due  to
    the extensive network of support and contacts they have built in the UK
    [15].  The FtT relied on the Chikwamba principle in concluding that  it
    was unreasonable to expect the claimant's partner to relocate to Serbia
    where he had no family, social or cultural connections  and  where  his
    work as an artist would  suffer  [17].  In  deciding  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances justifying an exercise of  discretion  outside
    of the Rules and in considering the public  interest,  the  FtT  placed
    weight on the established connections made in the art  world,  cultural
    and social  isolation  from  the  art  community  in  the  UK  for  the
    claimant's partner, and the contributions by  both  to  the  art  world
    within the UK.

6.   At [19] the FtT considered Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).



Grounds of Application for Permission to Appeal

7.   The Secretary of State argued that the FtT made a  material  errors  of
    law by firstly giving weight to immaterial matters and secondly failing
    to give adequate reasons on material matters.

8.    Ground  1  -  It  was  contended  that  its   assessment   was   based
    determinatively on the fact that the couple could not return to  Serbia
    because of the impact on the partner's work in the UK.  The FtT  failed
    to engage in a holistic assessment of  the  rights  of  the  individual
    against the wider rights of society, R (On the application of  Chen)  v
    SSHD (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)
    IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) at paragraph 35:

         "Thus it is misconceived to suggest, in  reliance  upon  Chikwamba,
         that it is only rarely that it will be proportionate  to  expect  a
         claimant to make an application for  entry  clearance  from  abroad
         irrespective of his or her individual circumstances."

9.   The Secretary of State contended that  the  FtT  erred  in  failing  to
    identify and explain reasons why  the  claimant  could  not  return  to
    Serbia in order to make a fresh application and further that it  was  a
    matter of choice as to whether the claimant's partner  accompanied  her
    or not.

10.   Ground  2  -  The  FtT's  assessment  of  the  public   interest   was
    superficial.  The FtT failed to make lawful  findings  to  support  the
    conclusion that  the  claimant's  family  life  outweighed  the  public
    interest and to explain reasons why comparable family  life  could  not
    reasonably continue from Serbia.

11.  Ground 3 - The FtT erred in  considering  the  appeal  outside  of  the
    Rules in the light of the fact that the claimant's  circumstances  fell
    within the ambit of the relevant immigration Rules. The FtT  failed  to
    articulate reasons why the circumstances warranted consideration beyond
    this, Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 at paragraph 64:

         "There is no need to conduct a full separate examination of Article
         8 outside the Rules where, in the  circumstances  of  a  particular
         case, all the issues have been addressed in the consideration under
         the Rules."

Permission to Appeal

12.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McDade.
    In granting permission Judge McDade found that the FtT lacked focus  on
    these  particular   matters   before   finding   that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to remove the claimant from the UK, which amounted  to
    an arguable error of law.

Error of Law Hearing

Submissions

13.  Mr Sowerby for the claimant produced a skeleton argument which  I  read
    at the start of the hearing.

14.  Ms Isherwood relied on  the  grounds  of  the  application.   She  drew
    attention to the fact that the  Claimant's  bundle  produced  for  this
    hearing contained evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal.



15.  As to the substance of the application Ms Isherwood  argued  that  this
    was a case where the claimant simply had failed to meet the Immigration
    Rules. The fact that she was a good artist did not render the  decision
    disproportionate.  She failed to meet the Rules and did not  meet  EX1.
    The fact the claimant was working for an artist was not  sufficient  to
    establish private life and/or outweigh the public interest, as in  Chen
    at paragraph 39.  The essence of the application  was  founded  on  the
    claimant's private life. There were no insurmountable obstacles to  the
    claimant's family life continuing outside of the UK.  The FtT failed to
    consider why any temporary separation or exit from the UK would  amount
    to a disproportionate interference with private  or  family  life.   Ms
    Isherwood  also  highlighted  the  Immigration  Rules  applicable   for
    exceptionally talented persons.  There had been no consideration of the
    length of time  it  would  take  for  a  fresh  application  for  entry
    clearance to be made from Serbia and too great a weight was  placed  on
    the claimant's employment in establishing  private  life.   SS  (Congo)
    confirmed  the  need   to   identify   compelling   circumstances   for
    consideration outwith the  rules,  and  Forman  decided  that  economic
    factors and employment did not dilute public interest considerations.

16.  Mr Sowerby submitted that the FtT was perfectly entitled to  go  on  to
    consider Article 8.  The FtT had  effectively  allowed  the  appeal  on
    private and family  life.   The  FtT  considered  the  issue  of  entry
    clearance outside of the UK at [16] referring to Chikwamba  and  Hayat.
    Ms Isherwood was mistaken in her submission that  family  life  of  the
    claimant had been established whilst in  a  precarious  position.   The
    claimant was in the UK lawfully and this was  not  covered  by  Section
    117B.  The claimant could satisfy the Rules at  present.  None  of  the
    findings made by the FtT were challenged.  The fact that it was a "near
    miss" was a relevant issue following SS (Congo) at paragraph 56.

17.  The FtT found exceptional circumstances. It was not simply  a  question
    of employment but contribution to the art culture in the UK.  This  was
    a factor that the FtT considered in assessing the public  interest  and
    identified as compelling factors consistent with  the  guidance  in  SS
    (Congo) at [33].   No  public  interest  factors  weighed  against  the
    claimant and there was nothing to be served by her removal from the UK.
     The parties were in an established relationship of over  three  and  a
    half years lawful residence in the UK.

18.  Mr Sowerby submitted that Chen  allowed  for  a  decision  to  be  made
    having regard to the individual facts  of  a  case  and  any  temporary
    separation would be unreasonable  given  the  current  engagement  with
    exhibitions within the art world.

19.  Ms Isherwood submitted that the main error was  the  FtT's  failure  to
    consider the issue of temporary separation.

20.  At the  end  of  the  hearing  I  reserved  my  decision.   Mr  Sowerby
    submitted that in the event of finding an error of law he would wish to
    have a further opportunity to be able to call additional oral  evidence
    as the claimant's  circumstances  had  changed  and  were  relevant  to
    Article 8 considerations.

Discussion and Decision

21.  The substance of this appeal focuses on Article 8 private life  outside
    of the rules. The FtT found that private life consisted of the life and
    work of the claimant and her partner  as artists and their contribution
    individually and collectively to the art world in the UK.  Family  life
    was relevant to the extent that  the  parties  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship. However, it is  accepted  that  there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to the parties continuing family life  outside
    of the UK, whether that be in Serbia or Slovakia. There was no evidence
    before the FtT to show that there would be any  immediate  hardship  in
    terms of their relationship in the event of a temporary separation  for
    the claimant to return to Serbia  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance.

22.  In assessing  proportionality  the  FtT  took  into  account  that  the
    claimant was lawfully resident in the UK at the  time  she  established
    her relationship with her partner. However, contrary  to  the  position
    taken by Mr Sowerby her immigration status was precarious to the extent
    that she had leave to remain until 20 October 2014 as  a  student  when
    she built up her private life and this would come under  the  scope  of
    section 117B(5) in carrying little weight, (AM  (S117B)  Malawi  [2015]
    UKUT 260 (IAC)).

23.  The main consideration  in  this  error  of  law  appeal  is  temporary
    separation, which the FtT failed  to  deal  with.   Since  Appendix  FM
    generally requires  an  applicant  to  have  applied  in  a  particular
    capacity in order to  be  entitled  to  entry  in  that  capacity,  the
    practical effect of enforcing the Rules, when a person seeks to  remain
    in one capacity having applied in another, may in some  cases  be  that
    the person may need to return home simply to reapply.  As held in Chen:

    (1)  Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question whether
         it would be disproportionate to expect an individual to  return  to
         his home country to make an  application  for  entry  clearance  to
         rejoin family members in the UK.  There may be cases in which there
         are no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being  enjoyed
         outside  the  UK  but  where  temporary  separation  to  enable  an
         individual to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
         disproportionate.  In all cases it will be for  the  individual  to
         place before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such  temporary
         separation will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.
          It will not be enough to rely solely on the  case  law  concerning
         Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

    (2)  Lord Brown was not laying down a legal test when he  suggested  in
         Chikwamba that requiring a claimant  to  make  an  application  for
         entry  clearance  would  only   be   "comparatively   rarely",   be
         proportionate in a case involving children.

24.  The question that the FtT ought to have considered was whether  or  not
    there was evidence to show that  temporary separation  would  interfere
    disproportionately  with  protected  rights  under  Article  8.   I  am
    satisfied that there  was  no  consideration  by  the  FtT  as  to  the
    possibility of the claimant returning to Serbia on  a  temporary  basis
    and/or how long it would take in order  for  her  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance.  Given that the FtT was satisfied that  the  claimant  would
    indeed meet the relevant Rules, any interference with her private  life
    would be temporary.  On the findings as set out above in  paragraph  4,
    there was no evidence before the FtT to conclude that  there  would  be
    any lengthy disruption to the claimant's private life which essentially
    was her work as an artistic manager  in  the  studio  of  a  well-known
    British artist.  There was therefore no evidence to  show  why  in  the
    short term the claimant could not be expected to return  to  Serbia  to
    make an application under the Rules.

25.  The  public  interest  is  in  the  maintenance  of  a  fair  and  firm
    immigration policy and to deter those who do not have  entry  clearance
    from coming and jumping the queue.  However, that does  not  mean  that
    the policy remains to be utterly inflexible, rigid and pays  no  regard
    to individual circumstances.  The courts  have  more  recently  altered
    their view as regards private life as incorporated in statutory form in
    Section 117B.  Section 117B(5)  specifically states that little  weight
    should be given to private life established by a person at a time  when
    their immigration status is precarious.  In Nasim and  Others  (Article
    8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) it was held that the judgments of  the  Supreme
    Court in Patel and Others v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  72  served  to  refocus
    attention on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  ECHR  and,  in
    particular, to recognise that Article's limited utility in private life
    cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's moral
    and physical integrity.  It is suggested that public value  can  be  of
    relevance but only in a relatively few  instances  where  the  positive
    contribution to this country is  very  significant.   On  the  evidence
    before the FtT it cannot be said that the  contribution  made  by  this
    claimant falls into that category. I conclude that the  FtT  materially
    erred in law by placing too much  weight  on  the  claimant's  in  fact
    limited private life, insufficient weight on the claimant's failure  to
    meet the Rules, the short term nature of separation in order  to  apply
    for entry clearance  and  the  establishment  of  private  life  during
    precarious circumstances.  The Secretary of State's appeal  is  allowed
    following the approach in SS (Congo) and Chen (cited above).

Notice of Decision

26.  There is a material error of law in  the  decision  and  reasons  which
    shall be set aside. I decided that there was  no  need  for  a  further
    hearing. I remake the decision having regard to the  findings  made  by
    the FtT and by substituting a decision to dismiss the appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 16.2.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 16.2.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

