
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/00580/2016
                                                               HU/13181/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 November 2017                           |On 02 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MORRIS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           [m m] (First Appellant)
                          [l y] (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Kaihiva, Counsel instructed by PHIL Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal, brought with permission, by the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department ("the Secretary of State") against the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert promulgated on  24  February  2017
    ("the FtT decision").   By the  FtT  decision  the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal of [MM] (the first appellant) and her daughter [LY] (the  second
    appellant) against two  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated
    respectively, 16  January  2016  revoking  the  first  appellant's  EEA
    residence  card,  and  dated  24  November  2015  refusing  the  second
    appellant leave to remain.  The FtT Judge refused the first appellant's
    case under the EEA  Regulations  but  allowed  the  second  appellant's
    appeal (and, as a result, the first appellant's appeal  as  her  carer)
    under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  a  dependent  child  of  the  first
    appellant, and in any event outside the Rules, under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals on two  grounds:  first,  that  the  FtT
    Judge erred in his refusal to entertain the EEA appeal in  relation  to
    the first appellant, and secondly because the second appellant's appeal
    was dealt with without proper consideration, and  further  it  was  not
    open to the judge to consider the first appellant's appeal on the basis
    of the second appellant's position.

The Factual Background

 3. The first appellant is a Ghanaian national and is aged 31.  The  second
    appellant is her daughter who is now aged 8 and has lived here all  her
    life.   The  first  appellant  had  previously  been  issued  with  EEA
    residence cards, and further on 27 October 2011 she was issued with  an
    EEA residence card.  On its face that  card  stated  that  she  was  "a
    family member of  an  EEA  national".   On  24  July  2015  the  second
    appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain.  On 24 November  2015
    the second appellant's application for leave to remain was refused.

 4. The Secretary of State  in  the  "reasons  for  decision"  refused  the
    application on the following grounds.

 5. First, the first appellant, the mother, although previously issued with
    a residence permit as a family member was no longer  residing  with  or
    financially dependent upon her own mother and as  a  result  no  longer
    qualified for a right of  residence  under  the  EEA  Regulations.   It
    followed that, as the second appellant's mother did not have  leave  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom, or was British or had a right of
    abode in the United Kingdom, the second  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 305(i) of the Immigration Rules  because  she
    was not the child of a parent given leave to enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 6. Secondly, as regards the second  appellant's  family  life,  under  the
    relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules, as the  second  appellant
    was at that time aged only 6 she did not qualify on the basis of family
    life.  Thirdly, in relation to the second appellant's private life, the
    second  appellant  did  not  qualify  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules,  most  particularly  because  at  the  time  of  the
    application, although the second appellant was  under  the  age  of  18
    years, she had only lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  six
    years (not the requisite seven years), and  further  it  was  concluded
    that it would be reasonable to expect her and her  mother  to  continue
    her family life in Ghana.  Fourthly,  having  considered  the  position
    under Section 55 of the Immigration Citizenship and Borders  Act  2009,
    in the particular circumstances of her case:-

         "It had been concluded that the need to maintain the  integrity  of
         the immigration laws outweighs the  possible  effect  on  you  that
         might result from you and your mother having to  re-establish  your
         family life outside the UK".

 7. On 8 December 2015 the second appellant gave notice of  appeal  against
    that refusal of leave to remain.  Whilst referring to the fact that the
    first appellant's EEA residence right was still in  place,  the  appeal
    was firmly based on Article 8 family life.   On  16  January  2016  the
    Secretary of State issued her decision revoking the  first  appellant's
    residence card purportedly under Regulation 8(2) and  Regulation  20(2)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (the  EEA
    Regulations).  In the Reasons for the  Revocation  Letter  accompanying
    that decision the Secretary of State set out  Regulation  8(2)  of  the
    Regulations and concluded as follows:-

         "You provided evidence to show that you  now  reside  in  your  own
         rented accommodation and are in receipt of public funding,  notably
         housing, council and tax benefits.  As such  this  department  does
         not consider you to be dependent on  your  EEA  sponsor  and  as  a
         result  you  cease  to  be  entitled  to  a  residence  card  under
         Regulation 8(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006".

 8. On 27 January 2016 the first appellant appealed against the decision of
    16 January contending, inter alia, that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    applied too restrictive an interpretation of the meaning to  be  placed
    on the concept of dependency for the purposes  of  Regulation  8.   The
    first appellant further contended that the Secretary of  State  wrongly
    failed to have any adequate regard to Article 8 ECHR and wrongly failed
    to have regard to the exceptional circumstances surrounding  her  case,
    as well as the disproportionate effect that  the  decision  would  have
    upon her private and family life.

 9. The relevant legislation in the EEA Regulations are those to  be  found
    at Regulation 7(1)(b) which provides that:-

         "... the following persons shall be treated as the  family  members
         of another person-

         ...

         (b)      direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner
             who are-

            (i)   under 21; or

            (ii)  dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner".

10. Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations provides, as far as relevant:-

         "(1)     In these Regulations  'extended  family  member'  means  a
         person who is  not  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under
         regulation 7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions  in
         paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5)".

      In this case we are concerned with paragraph 2 which provides:-

         "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his  civil  partner
         and-

         (a)      the person is residing in an EEA State in  which  the  EEA
             national also resides and is dependent upon the  EEA  national
             or is a member of his household".

11. As regards private and family  life  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules are set out  at  paragraphs  A27-C  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  the  further  paragraphs
    there referred to.  We refer in particular to provisions set out in the
    Secretary of State's decision of 24 November 2015.

The FtT Judgment

12. First, whilst it appears that in  fact  that  it  was  only  the  first
    appellant's appeal which had been notified for hearing, the  FtT  Judge
    decided to hear both appeals at the  same  hearing,  despite  objection
    being taken by the first appellant.  It is not clear that the Secretary
    of State actually objected at that hearing to the hearing of the second
    appellant's appeal.

13. The FtT Judge recorded the Secretary of State's case  as  follows.   As
    regards the  first  appellant  she  was  considered  no  longer  to  be
    dependent on her EEA sponsor and as a result ceased to be entitled to a
    residence card under  the  EEA  Regulations.   As  regards  the  second
    appellant, she did not qualify because her  mother  no  longer  had  an
    entitlement to an EEA residence card, and further, at the time  of  the
    letter of decision the second appellant did not meet  the  requirements
    under the Immigration Rules.

14. The FtT Judge found, at paragraph 7, that although the first  appellant
    had lived separately from her father and stepmother, she  continued  to
    rely upon them both financially and in terms of emotional and  physical
    support for herself and her daughter.  The judge went on also  to  find
    that the second appellant was by then over 7 years of age and had built
    a significant private and family life in the UK.  He then cited a case,
    apparently under Regulation 7 of the EEA  Regulations,  supporting  the
    proposition that  dependency  is  not  the  same  as  mere  receipt  of
    financial assistance, and that whether there was dependency involved  a
    holistic examination  of  a  number  of  factors  including  financial,
    physical and social conditions.  Importantly, at paragraph 8 of the FtT
    judgment the judge concluded that there was ample evidence  that  there
    was a significant level of dependency, notwithstanding  the  fact  that
    the  first  appellant  and  her  daughter  live  separately  from   her
    stepmother who was an EEA national and her father, and that there is  a
    significant emotional, financial and physical  matrix  supporting  both
    the first and second appellants.

15. The judge then appeared to consider the "parent" route in relation to a
    claim based on family life under R-LTRP.1.1. and then seemed to  go  on
    to consider separate provisions relating to family life.  At  paragraph
    11 of his judgment the FtT Judge recognised that, at the  date  of  her
    application for leave to remain, the second appellant had not reached 7
    years of age and therefore did not benefit from the provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Nevertheless, he considered that given that by  the
    time of his decision she was 7 years old, and "the evidence  before  me
    that the removal of her mother and her to Ghana would  be  unreasonable
    and would cause her significant hardship if she was forced to leave the
    United Kingdom".  In our judgment this is an important finding.

16. At paragraph 13, dealing first with the first  appellant's  case  under
    the EEA Regulations, the judge concluded that,  given  his  finding  of
    dependency on her EEA national father and stepmother, he  "would  have"
    allowed the appeal save for the decision of Sala which held that  there
    is no right of appeal against a decision to refuse a residence card  to
    a person claiming to be an extended family member.  (Of course  we  now
    know that as a result of the recent decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    Khan (which we believe was on 9 November 2017) the decision of Sala has
    been over-ruled and there is indeed such a right of appeal.)

17. Finally, at paragraph 14 the judge continued  that  in  any  event  the
    first appellant was allowed to remain  as  the  primary  carer  of  the
    second appellant.  He continued:-

         "This is a case that following SS (Congo) would be allowed  outside
         of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR in any event.   There
         is a presumption in favour of not removing children who  have  been
         in the UK for more than seven years and developed.   I  have  found
         that it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the UK after
         the significant integration she has developed here.   This  is  the
         only country she knows.  I apply the rational in ZH (Tanzania), the
         ruling by Lady Justice Hale, s 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration Act 2009, the provisions of the Children Act  1989  and
         rule 117 in so far as it is relevant  to  this  child."   (emphasis
         added)

18. The final decision in the Notice of Decision in the FtT judgment was as
    follows:-

         "I refuse this the First  Appellant's  application  under  the  EEA
         (Regulations).

         I  allow  second  appellant's  appeal  (and  therefore  the   first
         appellant as her carer), under the immigration rules as a dependent
         child of the first appellant, and  in  any  event  outside  of  the
         Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR".

19. Whilst not entirely easy to decipher, it appears that in substance  the
    decision of the FtT Judge was as follows:-

      i) The first appellant's appeal in relation to the revocation  of  the
         residence card was refused because there was  no  right  of  appeal
         under the principle stated in Sala.

     ii) However, the second appellant's appeal was allowed first under  the
         Immigration Rules because she was a dependent child  of  the  first
         appellant and secondly, in any event, outside the Immigration Rules
         under Article 8.

    iii)  The  first  appellant's  appeal  against  the  revocation  of  the
         residence card appears to have been allowed  on  the  grounds  that
         she, the first appellant, was the carer of the second appellant who
         was entitled to leave to remain.

The Grounds of Appeal

20. The Secretary of State appeals against the  FtT  decision.   Her  first
    ground of appeal was that the second appellant's appeal should not have
    been heard together with the first appellant's appeal without  adequate
    notice.  However, permission to appeal on that ground was refused.  The
    second two grounds, grounds 2 and 3, for which permission was  granted,
    were as follows.  By ground 2 the Secretary of State contends that  the
    FtT Judge was wrong in law to refuse to entertain the EEA appeal.  This
    was because in substance this was not a case covered by the decision of
    Sala,  Sala  only  covered  cases  of  residence  cards  granted  under
    Regulation 8(2) of the EEA Regulations, namely on the basis of being an
    extended family member of an EEA national.  However, the  Secretary  of
    State now accepts and contends that the first  appellant's  entitlement
    to an EEA residence card was, and always  had  been,  that  she  was  a
    dependent descending relative aged over 21 of an EEA  qualified  person
    and thus covered by Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) of the EEA Regulations.  The
    slight oddity about this ground is that  previously  the  Secretary  of
    State's own case, both in the decision of 16 January  2016  and  before
    the FtT Judge was that the first appellant's residence card had in fact
    been issued under Regulation 8.  Nevertheless, the Secretary  of  State
    says that as a matter of  jurisdiction  the  FtT  Judge  was  wrong  to
    decline to hear the appeal because there was a right of appeal from the
    substance of the decision.

21. By ground 3 the Secretary of State  submits  that  the  FtT  Judge  had
    concluded that because the second appellant was born in 2009  it  could
    not be considered reasonable to expect her to leave the  UK  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules.   However,
    the FtT Judge had no regard to  the  relevant  case  law  or  statutory
    framework.  The second appellant's appeal was considered without proper
    notice and without proper consideration.

22. Further, in relation to the first appellant's appeal and  the  decision
    that it succeeded on the basis that  she  was  the  second  appellant's
    "primary carer", this was erroneous because, first, the first appellant
    could  not  pursue  her  own  appeal  by   reference   to   Article   8
    considerations because  that  appeal  was  an  appeal  against  an  EEA
    decision.  Secondly, in any event, even if the FtT Judge  was  able  to
    consider the first appellant's appeal by reference to Article  8  there
    was no proper consideration given to her position against the  relevant
    statutory framework.

23. In argument today as regards the first appellant,  Mr  Tarlow  for  the
    Secretary of State accepts that based on the findings by the FtT  Judge
    at paragraph 8 of the FtT judgment, the first appellant was entitled to
    an EEA residence card as a family member under Regulation  7(1)(b)(ii).
    He says to that extent the FtT judgment should be set  aside  and  then
    should be remitted to the FtT.  As regards the second  appellant,  when
    pressed, the Secretary of State's submission on the appeal was that the
    FtT Judge had set out no valid reasoning as to why the second appellant
    could not reasonably be expected to leave  the  country.   Further,  as
    regards the  first  appellant  in  her  capacity  as  carer  Mr  Tarlow
    maintained his submission that given that her appeal was in respect  of
    an EEA residence card, that ground was not available.

The Appellants' Contentions

24. Mr Kaihiva for the appellants contended that as regards  the  residence
    card the matter should not be remitted but the FtT decision  should  be
    remade by us, and as regards  the  second  appellant  the  FtT  Judge's
    findings outside  the  Immigration  Rules  were  correct  and  the  FtT
    decision should be maintained.

Conclusions

The First Appellant and the EEA Residence

25. In our judgment, on the basis of the clear finding of fact in paragraph
    8 of the FtT judgment which is not contested by the Secretary of State,
    the first appellant had a right to an EEA residence card  as  a  direct
    dependent descendant of an EEA national under Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii) of
    the EEA Regulations.  The decision of Sala  (which  in  any  event  has
    since  been  over-ruled  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Khan)  had  no
    application to a claim to  a  residence  card  under  Regulation  7  as
    opposed to Regulation 8.  It therefore follows  that  the  FtT  Judge's
    decision at paragraph 13 that there was no right of appeal against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 16 January 2016 was wrong in law.  The
    FtT Judge did have jurisdiction  to  entertain  the  first  appellant's
    appeal against the revocation of her residence card.  To that extent we
    therefore  set  aside  the  FtT  decision  in  relation  to  the  first
    appellant, namely the first sentence of the Notice of Decision.

26. Further, we have decided to remake the decision ourselves under Section
    12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007.   In
    doing so we preserve the finding of fact made in paragraph 8 of the FtT
    judgment.  On the basis of that finding of fact we  conclude  that  the
    first appellant was a direct descendant of, and dependent  on,  an  EEA
    national under Regulation 7(1)(b)(ii).  It  therefore  further  follows
    that the Secretary of State's decision dated 16 January 2016 to  revoke
    the first appellant's residence card on grounds based on  Regulation  8
    was wrong as a matter of law since the first appellant had a  right  of
    residence under Regulation 7.

27.  Accordingly,  we  allow  the  first  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision and that decision revoking the  residence
    card issued on 27 October 2011 is set aside.

28. In the light of  this  conclusion  we  say  no  more  about  the  first
    appellant's position as carer of the second appellant and do not  enter
    upon issues as discussed in  the case of Amirteymour v SSHD [2017] EWCA
    Civ 353

The Second Appellant

29. As regards the second appellant we  do  not  accept  the  Secretary  of
    State's ultimate argument that the FtT Judge set out no valid reasoning
    as to why she could not reasonably be expected to  leave  the  country.
    In our judgment, at paragraph 14 of the FtT judgment the FtT Judge made
    a clear finding that the second appellant  was  entitled  to  leave  to
    remain under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  What is more, he
    set out clear reasons why he concluded that it would not be  reasonable
    to expect a 7 year old girl who had lived all her life in  the  UK  and
    had been schooled in the UK to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   We  have
    already set out paragraph 14 in full. When faced with this reasoning Mr
    Tarlow fairly accepted that he had no answer.

30. It follows that in our judgement the FtT Judge was correct to  conclude
    that the second appellant is entitled to leave to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and to that extent, and on that specific  basis,  the
    Secretary of State's appeal fails.

31. However, we make clear that the  second  paragraph  of  the  Notice  of
    Decision in the FtT decision does not  wholly  accurately  reflect  the
    correct position in law.  Contrary to what is there stated, the  second
    appellant does not have a right to remain under the Immigration  Rules,
    as indeed the FtT Judge found in the first part of paragraph 11 of  his
    substantive decision (and  there  is  no  right  of  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules); and secondly, in  the  events  which  happened  the
    first appellant's right to remain does not arise  in  her  capacity  as
    carer for the second appellant.

32. We conclude that although in relation to the second appellant  the  FtT
    Judge to this extent had erred in law, those errors were  not  material
    and so we do not set aside the substance of that part of the  decision.
    However, for the record we would suggest that the second  paragraph  be
    amended to reflect the substance of his findings to read "I  allow  the
    second appellant's  appeal  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Article 8 ECHR".  Those are our reasons for our decision.

33. No anonymity direction was made nor is one required.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the First Appellant is allowed under the EEA Regulations

The second paragraph of the Notice of Decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge be amended to reflect the substance of the findings of the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge and should  read  "I  allow  the  second  appellant's  appeal
outside of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR".


|                |[pic]                     |
|Signed          |Mr Justice Morris         |
|Dated           |23 January 2018           |

