
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/00190/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination  Promulgated    |
|On 7th November 2014                         |On 14th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                                  dora Amoh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Darko of BWF Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Cockrill (the judge) promulgated on 9th July 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female citizen of Ghana born 27th August 1967 who  in
    October 2013 applied for a residence card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national, that being her husband King Douglas Antwi (the Sponsor).

 4. The application was made on the basis that the Claimant and Sponsor had
    undergone a proxy marriage on 17th November 2012.  This had taken place
    in Ghana.  The Sponsor  although  a  citizen  of  the  Netherlands,  is
    originally from Ghana.  Both the Sponsor and Claimant remained  in  the
    United Kingdom but were represented at  the  proxy  marriage  by  their
    family members.

 5. The application was refused on 11th December 2013.   The  Secretary  of
    State did not accept that the proxy marriage was  valid  and  therefore
    did not accept that the Claimant was the spouse of an  EEA  citizen  as
    required by regulation 7 of The Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations).

 6. The Secretary of State went on to consider  whether  the  Claimant  and
    Sponsor were in a durable relationship, and whether  the  Claimant  was
    therefore an extended family member pursuant to regulation 8(5) of  the
    2006 regulations.  It was noted that no evidence had been submitted  to
    prove that the Claimant and Sponsor resided together as a couple at the
    same address prior to the date of their customary marriage certificate,
    and had provided no evidence that they knew each other or had met prior
    to the date of that certificate being issued.  The Secretary  of  State
    decided that insufficient evidence had been submitted to prove that the
    couple were in a durable relationship and therefore the application was
    also refused with reference to regulation 8(5) of the 2006 regulations.

 7. In relation to Article 8, and the right to a family and  private  life,
    the Secretary of  State  noted  that  the  Claimant  had  not  made  an
    application under  either  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and contended that if the Claimant wished  Article  8
    to be considered, then an application would have to be made, and as  no
    application had been made Article 8 was not considered.

 8. The Claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  decision
    that the proxy marriage was not a valid marriage.  The Claimant did not
    appeal on any other ground.

 9. The appeal was heard by the judge on 1st July 2014.   The  judge  found
    that the proxy marriage was valid, and therefore the Claimant  was  the
    spouse of an EEA citizen and the appeal was allowed on that basis.

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the  judge  had  misapplied
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law)  [2014]  UKUT  0024  (IAC).   It  was
    contended that the judge should  have  examined  the  validity  of  the
    marriage in accordance with the laws of the member state from which the
    union citizen obtains nationality.  In  this  appeal  that  would  have
    meant considering Dutch law.  It was contended that the judge  did  not
    follow this approach, and had therefore erred in law.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    White and I  set  out  below  paragraphs  2  and  3  of  the  grant  of
    permission;

         "2.  Having had regard to the grounds for permission to appeal  and
             the  determination,  I  am  satisfied  that  in  reaching  his
             decision the judge arguably made an error of law (at paragraph
             12) by  failing  to  engage  with  whether  the  marriage  was
             recognised  under  the  law  of  the  Sponsor's  own   country
             (Netherlands) - see Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  [2014]
             UKUT 0024, and TA and Others (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]
             UKUT 00316 (IAC).
         3.   Accordingly I am satisfied that the grounds and  determination
             disclose an arguable error of law."

12. Following the grant  of  permission  the  Claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  contending  that  the  judge  had  correctly  applied  Kareem  in
    paragraph 12 of the determination, and in paragraph 14 had  found  that
    the appellant had "done  all  she  reasonably  and  properly  could  to
    produce material to show that her marriage would be properly recognised
    as a valid one in Holland."

13. The rule 24 response  also  made  reference  to  the  Claimant  seeking
    permission  to  cross  appeal  "as  the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    discharged the burden of proof on the issue of durable relationship  in
    her decision."

14. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

15. Mr Melvin relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal and submitted that the judge had  not  taken  into
    account the principles in Kareem and TA and Others  (Kareem  explained)
    Ghana [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC).  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  because  the
    judge had not properly considered whether a  proxy  marriage  would  be
    recognised in the Netherlands, the judge  had  erred  in  law  and  the
    decision must be set aside.

16. I then heard submissions from Miss Darko who relied upon  the  rule  24
    response, and pointed out that in paragraph 14  the  judge  had  stated
    that the Appellant had done  all  that  she  could  to  show  that  the
    marriage would be properly recognised as valid under Dutch law.

17. I was asked to note that in the supplementary bundle before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, there was at L1 a  letter  from  the  Dutch  Embassy  in
    London dated 13th March 2014, and at L2 a letter from  a  Dutch  lawyer
    dated 28th February 2014 which Miss Darko  submitted  showed  that  the
    marriage would recognised under Dutch law.

18. Miss Darko explained that the reference in  the  rule  24  response  to
    durable relationship, was because it was contended that the  judge  had
    erred in law in not making a finding  regarding  durable  relationship.
    Miss Darko accepted that this point had not been raised as a Ground  of
    Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, and was not referred to  in  the
    skeleton argument produced to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  accepted
    that the Claimant in paragraph 10 of  her  witness  statement  and  the
    Sponsor in paragraph 12 of his witness statement had both  stated  that
    they are not in a durable relationship.

19. I did not agree that the judge  had  erred  in  not  making  a  finding
    regarding durable relationship, as in my view it was  clear  that  this
    had never been raised as a Ground  of  Appeal.   The  issue  before  me
    related to the contention by the Secretary of State that the judge  had
    erred in not considering whether the proxy  marriage  was  valid  under
    Dutch law.

20. I decided that the judge had materially  erred  in  law  and  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.  My reasons  for
    this conclusion are that legal guidance on this issue has been given by
    the Upper Tribunal in both Kareem and TA.  Although TA was  promulgated
    on 18th June 2014, I do not believe that it was  published  until  14th
    July 2014, and therefore was not before the First-tier Tribunal.   This
    would explain why there was no reference in the determination to TA.

21. TA clarifies what the Upper Tribunal decided  in  Kareem.   I  set  out
    below, the headnote in TA, and also paragraph 20;

    Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT
    24, the determination of whether there is a  marital  relationship  for
    the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must  always  be
    examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State from which the
    Union citizen obtains nationality.
    20.      Given that which I set out above, it is difficult to see  how
         the Upper Tribunal in Kareem could have been  any  clearer  in  its
         conclusion that when consideration is being  given  to  whether  an
         applicant has undertaken a valid marriage for the purposes  of  the
         2006  Regulations,  such  consideration  has  to  be  assessed   by
         reference to the laws of the legal system of the nationality of the
         relevant Union citizen.  Mr Akohene's submissions to  the  contrary
         are entirely misconceived and are born out of a failure to read the
         determination in Kareem as a whole.

22. It was submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State, to the First-tier
    Tribunal, that the issue of whether the proxy marriage was  valid,  had
    to be assessed with reference to Dutch law.  The  judge  rejected  this
    proposition stating, inter alia, in paragraph 12;

         "Quite properly and  helpfully,  my  attention  was  drawn  to  the
         decision in Kareem and the stance of  the  Respondent  was  that  I
         should really identity whether or not, under Dutch law, which is of
         course the relevant EEA national's qualifying person's law in  this
         case, would say that the marriage was contracted according to Dutch
         law.  I do not in fact accept that that is the  right  argument  in
         the circumstances of this case."

23. In rejecting that submission the judge erred in law.  I do  not  accept
    Miss Darko's argument that the error is not material because the  judge
    in paragraph 14 made a reference to the Claimant  doing  all  that  she
    could to produce material to show that her marriage would  be  properly
    recognised as valid in the Netherlands.

24. I accept that the Claimant had supplied a letter from the Dutch Embassy
    in London dated 13th March 2014, and a letter from a Dutch lawyer dated
    28th February 2014, but the judge did not specifically  refer  to  that
    evidence.  There was no analysis of  that  evidence,  and  no  adequate
    reason given as to why that evidence proved that the Appellant's  proxy
    marriage would be recognised as valid in the Netherlands.

25. For the above reasons I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with no findings preserved.

Re-Making the Decision

26. I indicated that I did not, having considered  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement 7.2, consider it appropriate to remit this appeal to
    the   First-tier   Tribunal   to   be   determined   afresh.    Neither
    representative sought to persuade me otherwise.

27. Mr Melvin submitted that it would be appropriate for the decision to be
    remade by the Upper Tribunal without a further adjournment, taking into
    account the directions that had been made to  the  parties,  that  they
    should prepare for the Upper Tribunal hearing, on the basis that if the
    First-tier Tribunal determination was set  aside,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    could remake the decision at the hearing.

28. Miss Darko requested that  the  hearing  be  adjourned  to  enable  the
    Claimant to submit further evidence in order to prove that her marriage
    would be recognised in the  Netherlands.   Miss  Darko  was  unable  to
    explain why no  further  evidence  had  been  submitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in accordance with the directions that had been issued before
    this hearing.

29. I decided that  the  directions  were  clear,  and  that  it  would  be
    appropriate, fair, and in the  interests  of  justice  to  proceed  and
    dispose of this appeal  without  a  further  adjournment,  taking  into
    account that the application for a residence  card  had  been  made  in
    excess of twelve months previously.  There was no indication  given  of
    what further evidence might be submitted in order to prove the validity
    of the marriage, and in the circumstances,  I  found  that  the  appeal
    should proceed without a further adjournment.

30. No further oral  evidence  was  called.   I  had  before  me,  all  the
    documentary evidence that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This
    included the Secretary of State's bundle, the Claimant's initial bundle
    with Annexes A - D, and a supplementary bundle with Annexes E - L.

31. The issue before me, was the same issue that had been before the First-
    tier Tribunal, which was whether sufficient evidence had been submitted
    to prove that the proxy marriage would be recognised under Dutch law.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

32. Mr Melvin submitted that there was insufficient evidence to  show  that
    the marriage would be accepted under Dutch law.  The letters  from  the
    Dutch Embassy, and the Dutch lawyer did not  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.

The Claimant's Submissions

33. Miss Darko submitted that there was sufficient evidence  to  show  that
    the marriage would be recognised in the Netherlands.  I  was  asked  to
    note that the Upper Tribunal in Kareem indicated in paragraph  25  that
    they were unsure whether they were considering the correct  version  of
    the Dutch Civil Code, but the letter from the  Dutch  Embassy  at   L1,
    confirmed that the correct Articles of the Dutch Civil Code were  10.31
    to 10.34 which were in  fact  the  Articles  considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Kareem.  Miss Darko placed reliance upon  Article  10.31(4)
    which states that a marriage is presumed to  be  valid  if  a  marriage
    certificate has  been issued by a competent  authority,  and  submitted
    that in this appeal, evidence had been presented to show  the  marriage
    certificate had been issued by a competent authority, and therefore the
    marriage would be recognised.

34. I was referred to the letter dated 28th February 2014  from  the  Dutch
    lawyer, and in particular  paragraph  3  in  which  it  was  stated  in
    summary;

         "A valid foreign proxy  marriage  is  (probably)  not  against  our
         public order, so the proxy part will not be a stay in the  way  for
         recognition.  Almost all valid foreign marriages are recognised  in
         the Netherlands as long as they are not bigamists."

35. Miss Darko therefore submitted that the appeal should be allowed on the
    basis that the proxy marriage would be recognised as valid under  Dutch
    law, and therefore the appellant has proved that she is the  spouse  of
    an EEA citizen and entitled to a residence card under regulation  7  of
    the 2006 regulations.

My Conclusions and Reasons

36. I remind myself that the burden of proof is on the  Claimant,  and  the
    standard of proof is a balance of probability.  I have  considered  all
    the documentary evidence placed before me even if I do not refer  to  a
    particular  piece of evidence,  and  I  have  taken  into  account  the
    submissions of both representatives.

37. I have followed the guidance given in the  decisions  Kareem,  and  TA.
    The letter from the  Dutch  Embassy  makes  it  clear  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal were considering the correct version of the Dutch  Civil  Code
    in Kareem and I set out below paragraphs 27 - 30 of Kareem;

         "27. Article 10.31 is headed, Recognition of foreign marriages.  It
             provides:
             Article 10:31
             (1)  A marriage that is contracted outside the Netherlands and
                  that is valid under the law of the State  where  it  took
                  place or that has become valid  afterwards  according  to
                  the law of that State is recognised in the Netherlands as
                  a valid marriage.
             ...
             (3)  For the purposes of paragraph 1 and  2,  the  word  'law'
                  includes rules of private international law.
             (4)  A  marriage  is  presumed  to  be  valid  if  a  marriage
                  certificate has been issued by a competent authority.
         28.  The following article contains a restriction on  this  general
             rule:
             Article 10:32
             Irrespective of what is  provided  for  in  Article  10.31,  a
             marriage that is contracted outside the Netherlands shall  not
             be  recognised  in  the  Netherlands  where  such   recogition
             obviously would be incompatible with Dutch public order.
         29.  The passages  we  cite  are  silent  on  whether  a  proxy  or
             customary marriage would be recognised in the  Netherlands  or
             whether such a  marriage  would  be  incompatible  with  Dutch
             public order.  We do recognise,  however,  that  article  1:66
             permits marriage by representation in  certain  circumstances,
             which would suggest that marriage in the absence of one of the
             parties would not be contrary to Dutch public order.  However,
             as we have indicated, we have not received evidence  on  these
             complex issues and have been given no help on  how  Dutch  law
             might apply."

38. The evidence submitted in this appeal is firstly the  letter  from  the
    Dutch Embassy in London, which Miss Darko confirmed was a reply to  BWF
    Solicitors in relation to a general question about the  recognition  of
    Ghanaian customary marriages by proxy under  Dutch  law,  and  was  not
    specific to this appeal.  The conclusion in the letter is as follows;

         "The Dutch Embassy will only draw conclusions on the recognition of
         a marriage in the  context  of  an  application  such  as  a  Dutch
         passport application.  It is therefore not possible to  comment  on
         the documentary evidence required."

39. I do not find that this letter supports the appellant's contention that
    her marriage would be recognised under Dutch law.

40. Turning then to the letter from the Dutch lawyer  dated  28th  February
    2014, if this was intended to be put forward as expert  evidence,  then
    it does not comply with Practice Direction 10.9.  This sets outs (a) to
    (j) what an expert's report must contain.    An  expert's  report  must
    also be verified by a statement of truth which is not present  in  this
    case.

41. Again, Miss Darko confirmed that this letter was written in response to
    a general question about proxy Ghanaian marriages being  recognised  in
    the Netherlands, and therefore the  letter  is  not  specific  to  this
    appeal.  It is stated in the third paragraph of the letter, inter alia;



         "A valid foreign proxy  marriage  is  (probably)  not  against  our
         public order, so the proxy part will not be a stay in the  way  for
         recognition.  Almost all foreign marriages are  recognised  in  the
         Netherlands as long as they are not bigamist."

42. I set out below in full, the fourth paragraph of the letter;

         "However, I expect that the  municipality  will  not  consider  for
         granted proved the existence of the marriage.  Therefore  I  assume
         that recognition in the Netherlands should start with  proving  the
         marriage.  If this marriage can be proven and if  it  is  a  formal
         marriage as you informed me,  I  don't  expect  problems  with  the
         recognition of this marriage in the Netherlands.  Of course I can't
         give you guarantees.  If you want to be sure, you  should  ask  the
         municipality where the registration of  the  marriage  should  take
         place."

43. I had some difficulty in understanding the terms of that paragraph,  in
    particular the first sentence.  However I find that the author  of  the
    letter is answering a general question about Ghanaian proxy  marriages,
    and is clearly making an assumption  in  the  second  sentence  of  the
    paragraph, and goes on to indicate that no guarantees could  be  given.
    It is not clear what documents were  provided  to  the  lawyer,  it  is
    relevant that in addition to the caveat, that the author of the  letter
    cannot give any guarantees, the statement is made that a valid  foreign
    proxy marriage is probably not against Dutch public order.  In my view,
    this letter does not specifically address the issues  in  this  appeal,
    and does not give a specific opinion on the validity of this Claimant's
    marriage under Dutch law.  I do not find that cumulatively, the letters
    from the Dutch Embassy and the Dutch lawyer, prove  that  the  marriage
    would be recognised under Dutch law and therefore the Claimant has  not
    discharged the burden of proof.

44. As the only issue before me is whether the Claimant is the spouse of an
    EEA citizen, the appeal must be dismissed with reference to  regulation
    7 of the 2006 regulations.

45. As previously mentioned, the Claimant did not raise either Article 8 or
    the issue of a durable relationship as Grounds  of  Appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

46. Although this decision means that the Claimant's appeal is dismissed as
    the burden of proof has not been discharged, it does  not  prevent  the
    Claimant from making a further application for  a  residence  card,  if
    further evidence is available

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  was
set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  was  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             10th November 2014



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             10th November 2014


