
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00112/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31 July 2013                                 |On 20 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                           mr precious nosa okoro
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bello
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 22 July 1980.  He
    appeals the decision  made  by  the  respondent  on  10  December  2012
    refusing him a residence card as a family member of an EEA national.

 2. The appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Batiste  but
    permission to appeal was granted and the matter came  before  me  at  a
    hearing on 13 May 2013.  I found that the First-tier Tribunal  made  an
    error of law such that its decision fell to be set aside.  I  had  this
    to say:

          1. "The appellant applied for a residence card as confirmation of
             his right to reside in the United Kingdom.   That  application
             was refused and he appealed  the  decision.   The  appeal  was
             heard on the papers by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  S  Batiste.
             In a determination promulgated on 15 March 2013 the appeal was
             dismissed under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  on  human  rights
             grounds.

          2. The appellant applied for permission to appeal  that  decision
             and permission was granted.   It  was  noted  that  the  judge
             accepted  that  the  marriage  was  valid  but  not  that  the
             relationship between the couple was  genuine  and  subsisting.
             The judge was also not satisfied that the EEA national  spouse
             was exercising treaty rights as a worker.

          3. In the application for permission to appeal  it  is  contended
             that the judge did not have proper regard to the evidence.  In
             particular, the judge  did  not  take  into  account  that  an
             address check  carried  out  by  the  respondent  on  the  EEA
             spouse's former employer was for the ground floor and not  for
             the first floor,  where  the  employer  was  located.   It  is
             alleged that the judge misdirected himself in respect  of  the
             EEA spouse's current employment by stating that  the  evidence
             did not show that the employment  was  permanent.   The  judge
             accepted  that  an  assertion  by  the  respondent  that   the
             appellant and his spouse failed to  attend  an  interview  was
             incorrect but did not take into account  documentary  evidence
             as to the appellant and sponsor's relationship.  It was  found
             arguable that the judge did not give adequate reasons for  his
             findings, particularly those  made  in  relation  to  the  EEA
             spouse's employment.

          4. As a result of the  submissions  made  to  me  orally  at  the
             hearing I have decided that the decision is not a safe one and
             that the appeal should be reheard.   Although  the  judge  was
             satisfied that the marriage entered into in Nigeria  is  valid
             and that in the absence of  evidence  of  the  invitation  for
             interview being made  he  could  not  be  satisfied  that  the
             appellant received any such invitation and did not  find  that
             issue relevant to his findings, there were other  areas  where
             he found against the appellant which findings  are  not  safe.
             It was clearly important to establish the position with regard
             to the appellant's spouse's employment.  The respondent stated
             that a search had been made of the address as  given  for  the
             company at which the spouse was allegedly working. That search
             showed that the address housed a  supermarket  rather  than  a
             company that the spouse said she worked for, called  Feligrace
             Ltd.  This led the respondent to conclude that the spouse  was
             not working for a company at that address.

          5. This  point  is  dealt  with  at  length  in  the  appellant's
             statement and there was supporting evidence that  the  company
             existed and  still  exists.   The  judge  talks  of  an  email
             confirming  the  sponsor's  employment  being  littered   with
             grammatical errors and appearing to be of little value.  There
             are errors in the email but it is difficult  to  describe  the
             document as being  littered  with  them.   The  judge  perhaps
             unsurprisingly appears to have given weight to the  fact  that
             there is  an  allegation  in  the  refusal  letter  that  UKBA
             attempted to contact Feligrace Ltd on a  particular  telephone
             number but "each call that was made was disconnected".  It  is
             asserted that the telephone of the previous  employer  of  the
             spouse was working at all times and the respondent should have
             exhibited in their bundle the log  in  respect  of  the  calls
             made.  The judge has not engaged with  the  points  that  were
             raised in the witness statements that were before him.   There
             was a considerable amount of evidence before  him.  The  judge
             finds that the  net  amount  shown  in  the  payslips  is  not
             supported by any bank statements showing  the  payments  going
             into an  account.  This  is  not  surprising  given  that  the
             payslips themselves refer to the payment method being in cash.
              The same may be said in relation  to  the  payslips  for  the
             current employer where payment is in cash also.

          6. These matters and others not referred to above that appear  in
             the grounds seeking permission to appeal  warrant  a  decision
             from me that this appeal should be reheard.   I  indicated  to
             the representatives that I am unable to conclude that  any  of
             the findings in the  determination  are  safe  and  that  this
             appeal is to be a  complete  rehearing  before  me  with  both
             parties ready to argue all matters including the  validity  of
             the marriage.

          7. For the above reasons this appeal is adjourned for  a  resumed
             hearing.  Either party has liberty to file and serve  updating
             statements and evidence.  It is assumed that no interpreter is
             required but if otherwise the appellant's representatives must
             inform the Tribunal straightaway."

 3. At the resumed hearing on 31 July there was  put  before  me  a  bundle
    filed on behalf of the respondent, a copy of which had been  served  on
    the appellant's solicitors, as well as a further bundle filed on behalf
    of the appellant sent under cover of a letter dated 30 July  2013.   Mr
    Tufan, on behalf of the respondent, did not object to the  late  filing
    of the appellant's bundle as he was able  to  find  time  to  read  the
    documentation prior to the hearing.

Reasons for Refusal of the Application

 4. The Reasons for Refusal Letter shows that the  respondent  refused  the
    application for a number of reasons.  Firstly, it is said that  because
    the appellant and his EEA sponsor were not resident in Nigeria  at  the
    time of the marriage the respondent could not  be  satisfied  that  the
    marriage was conducted in accordance with the  relevant  Nigerian  laws
    and  customs.   Therefore  it  was  not  accepted  that  the   marriage
    certificate  submitted  was  lawfully  issued  and  evidence   of   the
    relationship.  This is based upon paragraph 24.23 of  the  COIS  Report
    for  Nigeria  which  states  "The  United   States   State   Department
    Reciprocity Schedule", in an undated section on  marriage  certificates
    in the country accessed on 17 October 2011, recorded  that,  "...  both
    parties to the marriage technically must be physically present  at  the
    same location with witnesses to sign certain marriage documents,  proxy
    marriages have ceased to be valid but still occur."  That  is  said  to
    apply to all marriages undertaken by Nigerian customary law as well  as
    marriages undertaken  by  Nigerian  law.   Paragraph  11(1)(a)  of  the
    Nigerian Marriage Act  states  "before  the  registrar  can  issue  the
    certificate he must be satisfied that  one  of  the  parties  has  been
    resident within the district in which the marriage is  intended  to  be
    celebrated  at  least  fifteen  days  preceding  the  granting  of  the
    certificate".  Parties to the marriage must sign the certificate in the
    presence of the officiating minister  or  registrar  as  stipulated  in
    paragraphs 26 and 28 of  the  Nigerian  Marriage  Act  "Celebration  of
    Marriage".  Passports for the EEA sponsor and appellant  did  not  show
    any entry stamps which would indicate that either of them  was  present
    at the marriage ceremony and present in Nigeria before the wedding.

 5. Another reason for refusing the application was  that  on  13  November
    2012 the appellant and his sponsor were invited to  attend  a  marriage
    interview at UKBA in Liverpool.  They failed to  attend  the  interview
    and have not provided any valid reason as to why they did  not  attend.
    This led the respondent to doubt that the appellant is  in  a  genuine,
    subsisting relationship with his sponsor.

 6. Yet a further reason given for refusing the application is that the EEA
    sponsor failed to provide sufficient evidence that  she  is  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  She was said to be working for an
    organisation called Feligrace Ltd.  UKBA had emailed  the  organisation
    to confirm her employment status but no response had been received  and
    attempts by telephone to  contact  that  organisation  had  failed.   A
    search made of the address given for the company stated  that  a  Halal
    supermarket operated from that address.

The appellant's written statement

 7. The appellant  filed  a  written  statement  dated  29  July  2013.   I
    summarise the relevant parts of that statement.

 8. The appellant states that the respondent  appears  to  be  confused  in
    relation to the formalities of the Nigerian Marriage Act  which  guides
    civil marriages.  She has mixed this up with the procedure that  guides
    customary/traditional marriages.  The only part  of  the  Marriage  Act
    relevant to the type of marriage celebrated between the  appellant  and
    his wife is Section 35 of the said Act.  Neither the  EEA  sponsor  nor
    the appellant needed to be present at the marriage.   Neither  of  them
    was but all  rites  were  performed  as  required.   The  marriage  was
    conducted by proxy in line with the procedure for the type of  marriage
    that took place between them.  That type of marriage is  recognised  in
    Nigeria.  The issue of residence within the district  of  the  marriage
    applies to civil/registry marriages only and not the type  of  marriage
    that took place between the appellant  and  the  sponsor.   It  is  not
    compulsory for marriages under native law and custom to  be  registered
    with the local government or  customary  court  but  it  is  just  done
    nowadays as a matter of choice.  The most  important  elements  of  the
    marriage are that the families and parties consent to the marriage  and
    other formalities like bride price/dowry are carried out.

 9. As to the purported interview request neither the appellant nor sponsor
    were ever invited for an interview and no evidence  has  been  provided
    that such an invitation was received.  It is particularly worrying that
    the respondent is using the allegation as a basis for finding that  the
    relationship between the  appellant  and  sponsor  is  not  genuine  or
    subsisting.  It is.  They met in London in October 2011.  It  was  love
    at first sight.  They began living together in December 2011  and  have
    been living together  ever  since.   Both  families  consented  to  the
    marriage and gave their blessing.  A dowry was paid and  the  sponsor's
    family accepted the same.  The sponsor was represented by her uncle and
    he has sworn an affidavit to that effect.

10. With regard to the sponsor's employment she is now employed by  another
    employer. At the time of the application Feligrace Ltd clearly  existed
    (and still exists).   There  was  more  than  enough  evidence  of  the
    existence of the business.  As to whether an email was responded to  or
    not should not have been used as a basis for finding that  the  sponsor
    was not working or exercising treaty rights.  The employer did  respond
    to the email after the sponsor brought the issue  to  their  attention.
    The employer's phone was working at all times.  If any phone calls were
    made the respondent should have exhibited logs for the  same  in  their
    bundle.  Properly issued payslips  and  documents  in  support  of  the
    employment were submitted and the respondent should  not  have  ignored
    that evidence.  There was also  evidence  from  HMRC.   There  is  also
    nothing unusual about two businesses sharing the  same  premises.   The
    sponsor's ex-employers are on the top floor and the  Halal  supermarket
    is on the ground floor.

The appellant's oral evidence

11. The appellant confirmed as true the contents of his  written  statement
    date 29 July 2013. In oral evidence he stated that the  dowry  paid  at
    the time of the marriage was a sum of money.   His  wife's  family  was
    represented by Mr Collins who swore an affidavit to that  effect.   The
    appellant was represented by his  brother  at  the  marriage  ceremony.
    Afterwards  the  marriage  was  registered  at  the  local   government
    registry.  He and his wife are therefore married according to customary
    law and are recognised as husband and wife.  They are still  living  in
    the same house here in the United Kingdom.

12. Mr Tufan representing  the  respondent  asked  why  the  appellant  and
    sponsor  did  not  marry  here,  considering  they  did  not  need  the
    permission of the Secretary of State to enable  them  to  do  so.   The
    appellant replied that the families would not be  able  to  give  their
    blessing to the marriage because they would not be able to be  here  to
    be aware of it.  He then gave evidence that his wife was  not  here  to
    give evidence because her mother had had a car accident in France.   He
    did not know if she had broken bones.  He had talked to Ms  Navarro  on
    the telephone but it was not a question that he asked her.   Why  then,
    asked Mr Tufan, did the sponsor put in her statement  that  her  mother
    was ill if she had had an accident?  The appellant  responded  that  Ms
    Navarro's mother was ill as a result of the  accident.   He  then  said
    that there is no evidence other than the affidavit  from  Ms  Navarro's
    uncle to prove that he is Nigerian but both the appellant's father  and
    brother are Nigerian.  The sponsor went to France on 27 July during the
    day.  She had been to see the lawyer on Friday  26  July  to  make  the
    statement.  The appellant accepted that he had tried  twice  before  to
    obtain a residence card.  He denied that anyone had arranged for him to
    enter the UK illegally.  He was asked where his wife was  born  and  he
    responded that she was born in Paris and, when  asked,  gave  the  same
    date of birth as that given by the sponsor herself.  There  were  other
    members of each side's family at the ceremony and not just  Mr  Collins
    and the appellant's brother.  The appellant then said in  answer  to  a
    question from me that he came on a visit visa to the United Kingdom  in
    2008 and overstayed.  His passport was completely empty of  any  stamps
    because his original one had been stolen  and  he  was  issued  with  a
    replacement in London.  He did not report the theft of his passport  to
    the police because he was new here and did not know what to do.

The written evidence of Ms Navarro

13. The evidence of Morgan E Navarro is contained in a statement  dated  26
    July 2013.  Ms Navarro did not give evidence  before  me  and  was  not
    present in court. Ms Navarro is a French citizen born  on  29  December
    1990.  She fully agrees with what the appellant said in  his  statement
    and repeats in hers what he said in his.  She is still in employment in
    the UK but states that she is not able to attend the hearing due to the
    fact that she has to travel back to France  to  attend  to  a  personal
    emergency - her mother being very ill - but she wholeheartedly supports
    her husband's appeal.  She does not want her spouse to be expelled from
    the UK as this would have an adverse effect on her.  She sees the UK as
    her home and they have set up their life in the UK.

Submissions

14. I then heard submissions from both representatives.  Mr  Tufan  pointed
    to the fact that there was evidence in the bundle that the sponsor  was
    born in Tours and not Paris.  The signatures on the identity  card  for
    Ms Navarro and her statement differed.  The  appellant  said  that  his
    mother-in-law had had a car accident whereas the sponsor  herself  said
    that she was only ill.  There is no explanation as to how the sponsor's
    father and uncle are Nigerian but she is French.  There is  a  previous
    finding by a judge  that  the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally and the background evidence shows that this is  not  a  valid
    marriage.

15. Mr Bello on behalf of the appellant referred to his up-to-date skeleton
    argument.   Other  matters  raised  by  Mr  Tufan  were  not  of   real
    importance.  The point about the signatures on the two documents is not
    of any weight since Mr Tufan is  not  an  expert  on  signatures.   The
    appellant may think that Tours is part  of  Paris  and  the  difference
    between being ill or sick is pure semantics.  The appellant  had  given
    an explanation that he  did  not  enter  the  country  illegally.   The
    correct procedure in relation to proxy marriages has been followed  and
    because the marriage is recognised in the country of origin  it  should
    be recognised in the United Kingdom:  see  CB  (validity  of  marriage:
    proxy  marriage)  Brazil  [2008]  UKAIT  00080.  This  is   a   durable
    relationship of longstanding.  There  are  clear  human  rights  issues
    also.

The Burden and Standard of Proof

16. The burden of proof in this appeal unless otherwise stated is upon  the
    appellant and the standard of proof is the civil one of the balance  of
    probabilities.

My Deliberations

17. Although Mr Tufan did not concede  that  the  sponsor  is  a  qualified
    person under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  of
    2006 he did accept that he was not  in  a  position  to  challenge  the
    documentation, albeit copy documentation, that  had  been  produced  to
    support the sponsor's case that she is an EEA national and is a  worker
    as defined in the said Regulations.

18. I find that I am satisfied to the relevant standard that  the  sponsor,
    Ms Navarro, is a qualified person for the purpose of  the  Regulations.
    There is a considerable amount of evidence that  she  was  employed  by
    Feligrace Ltd between at least April and August 2012 and by Mhug's & Co
    Ltd from January 2013.  There are payslips and two letters from  Mhug's
    Ltd, the latter one being dated 9 July 2013, confirming her  employment
    there as an administration assistant.  The fax from UKBA  to  Feligrace
    Ltd and the reply is further confirmation that Ms Navarro was  employed
    there although I note that there are spelling and grammatical errors in
    the email and it is not written in good English. I do not find that the
    errors are such as to render the document a  fabrication,  particularly
    given that there is other evidence from that employer that is seemingly
    not challenged.  National Insurance information  given  shows  that  Ms
    Navarro entered the scheme in February 2012 and her postal  address  is
    recorded as that now given which is the same as  the  address  for  the
    appellant also.  There are in addition letters from Lloyds TSB  and  TV
    Licensing to the sponsor at the same  address,  as  well  as  a  postal
    polling card for 3 May 2012.  Overall and on balance I am satisfied for
    these reasons that the sponsor is a qualified person for the purpose of
    the Regulations.

19. I leave aside the validity of the marriage into which the appellant and
    sponsor entered.  I do so because if I make a finding that this  is  in
    any event a marriage of convenience then under the 2006 Regulations  at
    2(1) a spouse does not include a party to a marriage of convenience.

20. That this marriage is supposedly a marriage of convenience appears only
    to have been hinted at rather than brought into issue  initially.   The
    letter, whether received or not dated 9 October 2012 to the appellant's
    solicitors inviting the appellant and Ms Navarro to an interview on  13
    November 2012 was  with  a  view  to  them  providing  evidence  of  Ms
    Navarro's employment, bank statements, council bills, photographs taken
    during their relationship, wedding photographs etc.  It must be  fairly
    obvious that one of the purposes of the interview was to establish  the
    genuineness of the marriage.  One may suppose that  depending  on  what
    happened at the interview the issue of marriage  of  convenience  would
    then have been raised and would have formed part  of  the  reasons  for
    refusal.   As  is  known  no-one  attended  the  interview.   In  their
    statements both the appellant and Ms Navarro  have  denied  ever  being
    informed that they were expected to attend for interview.

21. The Reasons for Refusal Letter however raises the matter of the failure
    to attend the interview and states thereafter:-

         "The fact that you failed to attend this interview,  together  with
         the points raised previously in this letter,  raises  doubts  about
         your claim to be in a genuine, subsisting  relationship  with  your
         EEA national sponsor.  On that  basis  your  application  has  been
         refused under Regulation 7 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
         2006."

22. No definition is given of marriage of convenience but that  phrase  has
    been construed in the context of the Immigration Rules  as  a  marriage
    entered into without the intention of matrimonial cohabitation and  for
    the primary reason of securing admission to the  United  Kingdom.   See
    paragraph 14 of Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).

         "... not every applicant needs to prove that his  marriage  is  not
         one of convenience.  The need to do so only arises where there  are
         factors which support suspicions for believing the marriage is  one
         of convenience.  Translated into  the  technical  language  of  the
         English law of procedure and evidence, that means that there is  an
         evidential burden on the respondent.  If there is no evidence  that
         could support a conclusion that the marriage is one of convenience,
         the appellant does not have to deal with the issue.  But  once  the
         issue is raised, by evidence capable of pointing  to  a  conclusion
         that the marriage is one of convenience, it is for the appellant to
         show that his marriage is not one of convenience."

23. The appellant has been represented by solicitors.  I am satisfied  that
    they and the appellant have been aware throughout that the evidence  in
    possession of the respondent was such that supported  the  respondent's
    conclusion that this is not a genuine marriage and therefore in essence
    the marriage  between  the  appellant  and  Ms  Navarro  constituted  a
    marriage of convenience.  The appellant therefore needs to show that on
    the balance of probabilities the marriage is genuine  and  not  one  of
    convenience.

My Findings of Fact Relevant to the Issue

24. In a determination promulgated on 6 August 2010 the First-tier Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent
    refusing to issue him with a permanent residence card.  The judge  that
    heard the appeal made a finding that the appellant probably entered the
    United Kingdom illegally.  At the time the appellant was living at  the
    same address where he now lives and gave evidence that also  living  in
    the property were his sponsor (his nephew), his (then)  sponsor's  wife
    and their three children.  By a  decision  dated  11  March  2011  upon
    appeal from the First-tier Tribunal there was found to be no  error  of
    law in the determination.

25. According to the appellant he met Ms Navarro in October 2011  and  they
    began living together approximately two months later.  They married, or
    purported to marry, on 27 January 2012 by  proxy  "according  to  Benin
    Native Law and Custom" as per Ms Navarro's uncle who made  a  statutory
    declaration to that effect dated 28 May 2012.  The  application  for  a
    residence card was made on the appellant's behalf by his solicitors  on
    8 June 2012.

26. I have accepted on the evidence that Ms Navarro is working and that she
    lives at the same address as that given for the appellant.   There  are
    sufficient bills and other information before me that lead me  to  that
    conclusion.  That does not mean, however, that I  find  that  they  are
    living together as man and wife or that the marriage  is  or  ever  has
    been a genuine one.

27. I do not find that the appellant's testimony is credible. The appellant
    has never shown that he entered the country legally.   In  his  witness
    statement prepared for the  earlier  hearing  before  the  Tribunal  he
    stated at paragraph 9 that in January 2008 "my  friend  I  was  staying
    with in Lagos assisted in organising my departure from  Nigeria".   The
    appellant then arrived in the UK in March 2008.   The  evidence  before
    the judge at the 2010 hearing from the UK sponsor was that he  believed
    the appellant had come to the United Kingdom  on  an  "official"  visa.
    The appellant's representative informed the judge that he did not  know
    the basis on which his  client  entered  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    appellant's written evidence on the point was "ambiguous".  No evidence
    of the appellant having entered the country legally was provided  which
    led to the judge finding it probable that  he  entered  illegally.   In
    answer to a question from me the appellant said that he came on a visit
    visa and then overstayed.  His passport was stolen and that is why  the
    passport currently in the possession of the Secretary of State does not
    have any entries in it.  He did not report the theft of the passport to
    the police because he did not know what to do.

28. I do not believe the appellant in relation to  those  matters.   If  he
    obtained a visit visa in 2008 and then had his passport stolen he would
    have said as much in his statement prepared for  the  earlier  hearing.
    Almost certainly his comment in that earlier statement that his  friend
    assisted in organising his departure from  Nigeria  is  code  for  that
    friend having arranged for his illegal entry into the  United  Kingdom.
    Had he entered on a visit visa I find that he would have  said  so  and
    would have proved it. If his passport was stolen he would have reported
    its theft. He was purportedly living with his  nephew  and  family  who
    would have been able to advise him or point him  to  someone  else  who
    could if they were unable to do so.

29. The real difficulty for the appellant I find is the paucity of evidence
    supporting that this is a genuine marriage.  I made  it  clear  in  the
    error of law decision that this appeal was to be a  complete  rehearing
    before me with both parties ready to argue all  matters  including  the
    validity of the marriage.  The appeal hearing earlier this year was "on
    the papers".  The appellant did give evidence before me but Ms  Navarro
    has never given oral evidence and did not do so before me.

30. In a situation where the genuineness of the marriage is  in  issue  the
    evidence of Ms Navarro I find is of great  importance.   The  appellant
    gave a reason as to why  she  did  not  appear.   The  appellant  spoke
    English  well  enough  and  made  himself   easily   understood.    His
    explanation for the non-appearance of his wife at the hearing  is  that
    her mother had an accident, which turned out to be a  car  accident  on
    further questioning, and because Ms Navarro is the  only  daughter  she
    had to travel to France to be with her  mother.   That  explanation  is
    perfectly satisfactory and provides a good reason for Ms Navarro not to
    be at the hearing.  However, what is not satisfactory and leads  me  to
    believe that I have not been told the truth by the  appellant  is  that
    although he had, he said, talked to his wife on the telephone about the
    injury he did not know if her mother had broken bones because that  was
    not a question he asked.  If Ms Navarro's mother had indeed been  in  a
    car accident prior to Ms Navarro's departure from the  UK  there  would
    have been a conversation about what  happened  to  her  mother  in  the
    accident and he would have  asked  after  her  and  her  injuries  when
    speaking to Ms Navarro by telephone subsequently.  I do not  accept  as
    true either his reply when it was pointed out to him that there was  no
    mention of a car accident by Ms Navarro in her statement,  rather  that
    her mother was "very ill", his response being that she  was  ill  as  a
    result of the accident.  That could be true but is  not  the  way  that
    would obviously describe what is said to have happened to Ms  Navarro's
    mother. There were no language difficulties that I could discern.

31. Even if I am wrong about that and Ms Navarro indeed intended  to  refer
    to her mother being very ill as a result of a car accident I would have
    expected there to have been an application for an adjournment to enable
    Ms Navarro to attend the hearing to give evidence.  No such application
    was made. Whether to make such an application is of course  entirely  a
    matter for the appellant and those  advising  him,    but  there  is  a
    distinct lack of credible evidence in relation to the marriage  in  any
    event that Ms Navarro may well have been able to provide.

32. It seems that a conscious decision was  taken  to  go  ahead  with  the
    hearing in any event because the accident is said by the  appellant  to
    have taken  place  on  25  July,  the  appellant  then  telephoned  his
    solicitors and his wife made her statement on 26 July prior to going to
    France the next day.  That  statement  refers  to  the  illness  of  Ms
    Navarro's mother  so  that  the  solicitors  were  well  aware  of  the
    position.

33. Another matter is that the appellant does not know that  his  wife  was
    born in Tours, according to her passport, and Tours, I  note,  is  some
    150 miles away from where he says she was born, namely  Paris.   It  is
    not a big point but it does not help me arrive at a credibility finding
    in favour of this being a genuine marriage.

34. The lack  of  evidence  extends  also  to  there  being  no  supporting
    witnesses to give evidence about the family life of the  appellant  and
    Ms Navarro, the history leading to their marriage and the current state
    of it.  Such evidence, if given, would have been invaluable  in  giving
    support to the claim that this is a genuine marriage, if such  evidence
    was believed.  In 2010 Mr Iyamu and his family provided a home for  the
    appellant and the address given is that for Ms  Navarro  also.   It  is
    quite possible that Mr Iyamu and his  family  no  longer  live  at  the
    address.  Mr Iyamu gave  evidence  at  the  hearing  in  2010  but  for
    whatever reason did not do so before me.   There was  also  no  witness
    statement  from  him  or  anyone  else   that   might   have   provided
    corroboration.

35. Photographs have been provided which  appear  to  show  the  appellant,
    presumably Ms Navarro, and others. No direct evidence  has  been  given
    about those photographs and their significance such as would enable  me
    to make any favourable findings as a result.

36. The appellant appeared to accept that he did not need permission of the
    Secretary of State to  get  married  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  his
    explanation for not doing so was that if he and Ms Navarro married here
    the family would not be able to give their blessing to the marriage and
    could not be here to be  aware  of  and  part  of  it.   The  appellant
    appeared to accept thereafter Mr Tufan's point  that  this  meant  that
    although the appellant and Ms Navarro would not be part of any marriage
    ceremony the families would be.  I find that if that is the view of the
    appellant and Ms Navarro then that  is  their  choice  but  again  does
    nothing to lend substance  to  their  claim  that  this  is  a  genuine
    marriage.

Conclusions

37. Taking these matters altogether  and  applying  the  evidential  burden
    which is upon the appellant, namely that it is for him to show  on  the
    balance of probabilities that his marriage is not one  of  convenience,
    my conclusion is that he has failed to do so for  the  reasons  that  I
    have given above. The result therefore is that even assuming that  this
    is a valid marriage in all other ways (I make no such finding),  it  is
    nevertheless a marriage of convenience.  The appellant has  simply  not
    provided enough credible testimony and supporting evidence to enable me
    to make any other finding.

38. For the sake of completeness and although provided late in  the  day  I
    find it probable that the letter of 9 October 2012 was sent by UKBA  to
    Apex Solicitors as the representatives of the appellant and Ms Navarro.
    I make no finding about its receipt. If the solicitors had received  it
    then as the appellant's representatives they would  have  forwarded  on
    that letter, in the normal course of business to him. They  would  have
    been negligent to  have  done  otherwise.  Unfortunately  there  is  no
    witness statement  from  any  representative  from  the  solicitors  to
    indicate that the letter was not received, which I might have  expected
    to have before me.

39. There was a request in the letter for a reply slip to be sent by  email
    to the UKBA interview team. I note that in the notice of appeal  it  is
    alleged that the appellant was not at any time invited for an interview
    but there is reference made by the solicitors in  that  notice  to  the
    fact that someone from UKBA telephoned those solicitors on 12  November
    2012 asking if the appellant would be attending  for  interview  on  13
    November 2012 "as per an earlier emailed invite". It is said  that  the
    person from UKBA was informed that no invitation had been received and,
    according to the grounds of appeal, UKBA promised to  write  to  invite
    the appellant but did not do so.

40. If that is what occurred it is clear that UKBA certainly believed  that
    the invitation had been sent and I anticipate that the solicitors would
    normally have requested a copy of the invitation allegedly already sent
    as it would have had  great  significance  for  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Navarro. There is no evidence that the solicitors ever followed up that
    conversation.   Nevertheless,  and  although  unfortunate  because   an
    interview may well have clarified the position at a much earlier  date,
    I view what I refer to as the interview episode as entirely neutral  in
    considering the credibility of the appellant and  the  evidence  either
    for or against him in relation to  the  circumstances  surrounding  the
    application.

The Article 8 Position

41. The paucity of information and evidence in this appeal extends  to  the
    appellant's private and family life.  Although he appears  to  live  at
    the same address as Ms Navarro I have  not  found  to  the  appropriate
    standard that they are living together as man and wife and therefore  I
    am not persuaded that he has family life with her or anyone  else.   He
    does, of course, have a private life but there has been no  significant
    development of his case in relation to that life.  I cannot assume that
    Mr Iyamu and his family still live at the address, the same address  as
    the appellant, and I know nothing of the appellant's life otherwise and
    how he spends his time and days.

42. As is well known there shall be no interference by a  public  authority
    with the exercise of the right to private and  family  life.   This  is
    subject to the exception that there can be such interference if  it  is
    in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society  in
    the interests of national  security,  public  safety  or  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,  for
    the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of rights and
    freedoms of others.

43. In the current appeal it is proposed that the appellant will be removed
    from the United Kingdom and this will undoubtedly  be  an  interference
    with his right to respect for his private life.  I  do  not  find  that
    there is family life currently.  The consequence of removal potentially
    engages the operation of Article 8.  I find that the interference is in
    accordance with the law and is necessary in the interests of  effective
    immigration control which, although not a legitimate aim in itself,  is
    a well-established means of protecting the economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country.

44. I have little hesitation in finding that the proposed  interference  in
    the appellant's private life is proportionate to the legitimate  public
    end sought to be achieved.  The appellant more likely than not  entered
    the United Kingdom illegally but even if he did, as he says,  obtain  a
    visit visa there is no doubt he overstayed and from that point  on  was
    not here legally.  I have found that his marriage to Ms Navarro is  not
    a genuine marriage; there are  scant  details  of  his  private  and/or
    family life and there is no good  reason  for  him  not  to  return  to
    Nigeria where he has spent all his life other than the last five  years
    approximately.  Therefore his Article 8 claim does not succeed.

45. Having found that the marriage is not a genuine one  renders  redundant
    any need for me to make a  finding  in  relation  to  the  validity  or
    otherwise of the by proxy marriage ceremony that took place in  Nigeria
    on 27 January 2012.

46.  For  the  sake  of  completeness  for  the  reasons  given   in   this
    determination I do not find that the appellant is  an  extended  family
    member of Ms Navarro or anybody else.

Decision

47. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred for the reasons set out above.  For
    different  reasons  the  appeal  is  dismissed  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area)  Regulations  of  2006  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

48. No anonymity direction is made.  None has been made  previously,  there
    was no application for one to be made now, and I see no need for it  in
    the particular circumstances of this appeal.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
