
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00158/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons promulgated |
|On 8 December 2017                         |On 18 December 2017            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                      RAVIKUMAR RAKESHKUMAR BRAHMBHATT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Swain instructed by Eagles solicitors
For the Respondent: Miss Vijiwala Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Herlihy, promulgated  on  12  January  2017,  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appeal.



Background


     2. The appellant, a national of  India  born  on  22  September  1986,
        appealed against a decision to refuse an application dated 28  July
        2014 for a variation of his leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
        Student Migrant under paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules.
     3. The respondent refused the application on the basis  the  appellant
        had failed to submit a valid CAS leading to a refusal  pursuant  to
        paragraph 117 of Appendix A of the Rules and  under  paragraph  245
        ZX(c), and unlike mandatory grounds by reference to  paragraph  322
        (1A).
     4. Having considered the matter with the required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny the Judge sets out findings of fact in [7] of the decision
        under challenge which can be summarised in the following terms:


                i. That a Document Verification Report relied  upon  by  the
                   respondent in support of  additional  ground  of  refusal
                   pursuant to paragraph 322(1A) is incomplete and  did  not
                   provide to a high degree of proof that a certificate from
                   LEBC relied upon by the appellant is false [7.6].
               ii. At [7.7] and [7.8]:


                   7.7     Paragraph 322(1A) is mandatory ground of refusal.
                      In considering the totality of  the  evidence  before
                      me, I find that the Respondent  has  not  established
                      that the Appellant did submit  a  false  document.  I
                      therefore  find   that   the   Respondent   has   not
                      established that the  documents  submitted  with  the
                      application was false and I am not satisfied that the
                      Respondent has established that  the  assertion  that
                      the Appellant submitted a false document is supported
                      by the evidence.


                   7.8     The Respondent has also refused  the  Appellant's
                      application for further leave to remain as a  Tier  4
                      student because the  Appellant  failed  to  submit  a
                      valid CAS. It is not disputed by the Appellant or his
                      Representative that he failed to submit a valid  CAS;
                      and there has been no challenge to the finding by the
                      Respondent that a valid CAS was not submitted by  the
                      Appellant. The requirement to provide a valid CAS  is
                      clearly set out in  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
                      Appellant cannot comply and thus the appeal falls  to
                      be dismissed.


     5. The Judge finds  that  the  appellant  is  unable  to  satisfy  the
        requirements of paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Rules.
     6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 20  September  2017  on
        the basis:


             "It is arguable that the Judge has  set  out  an  insufficient
             analysis set  against  the  matrix  of  findings  of  fact  in
             relation to the issue of the application of the  principle  of
             fairness, given the extent of the information provided to  the
             Respondent by or on behalf of  the  Appellant  and  given  the
             response of the Respondent. It is arguable that the Judge  has
             not dealt  sufficiently  with  the  relationship  between  the
             nature and extent of the duty to act fairly  set  against  the
             facts of the case.



Error of law


     7. The changes introduced by the Points-based System  in  relation  to
        student applications are to be  found  at  Tier  4.  A  fundamental
        change  introduced  by  the  new  system  was  a  transfer  of  the
        responsibility for  administering  the  system  to  the  individual
        colleges  providing  sponsorship  to  prospective   students.   The
        respondent  produces   comprehensive   guidance   both   with   the
        application  process  and  information  produced  on  the  Internet
        relating to Tier 4 applications, setting out  the  responsibilities
        and obligations of both a Tier 4 sponsor and an applicant for leave
        in this capacity.
     8. In relation to the nature of  the  documentation  an  applicant  is
        required to file the Tier 4 guidance provides the following:


             Documents you will need to send with your application

             11.  To claim points, you must send the documents  required  by
                  the Immigration Rules that are applicable to you. We  will
                  only accept the documents  specified  in  the  Immigration
                  Rules as evidence.

             12.  If you qualify for our differentiation  arrangements  you
                  will normally be  required  to  provide  fewer  evidential
                  documents. If you are exempted from having  to  provide  a
                  document  -  or  a  group  of  documents   -   under   our
                  differentiation arrangements, this  will  be  specifically
                  stated in this guidance. We may  request  these  or  other
                  documents from you.

             13.  The Home Office  will  refuse  any  application  where  a
                  request  is  made  for  the  supporting  documents  to  be
                  submitted, if the specified documents are not provided  to
                  us within the period specified in that request.

             14.  You qualify for our differentiation arrangements if:

                o you are sponsored by a sponsor with Tier 4 Sponsor status;
                  and
                o you are applying for entry clearance in  your  country  of
                  nationality or for leave to remain in the UK; and
                o you are a national of one of one of the  countries  listed
                  at Appendix H of the Immigration Rules. You can check this
                  at: www.gov.uk/government/collections/immigration-rules

                  We will confirm your nationality using your passport.

             15.  Documents must be issued by an authorised official of the
                  issuing organisation and be:

                o original (unless we say otherwise); and
                o on the official letter-headed paper or stationery  of  the
                  organisation.

             16.   If you are in the UK, where a document is not in English
                  or Welsh, the original must  be  accompanied  by  a  fully
                  certified     translation      by      a      professional
                  translator/translation  company.  This  translation   must
                  include:

                o   details   of   the   translator/translation    company's
                  credentials; and
                o confirmation that it is an  accurate  translation  of  the
                  original   document;   and   the    translator/translation
                  company's contact details.

                  It must also be dated and include the  original  signature
                  of  the  translator  or  an  authorised  official  of  the
                  translation company.

             17.  If you are outside the UK, where a  document  is  not  in
                  English or Welsh, the original must be  accompanied  by  a
                  full translation that can be independently verified by the
                  Home  Office.  The  original  translation   must   contain
                  confirmation from the translator/translation company  that
                  it is an accurate translation of  the  original  document,
                  the date of the translation, the translator/an  authorised
                  official  of  the  translation  company's  full  name  and
                  signature,  and   the   translator/translation   company's
                  contact details.

             18.  Where a translation of an overseas qualification or award
                  certificate is submitted, we will not take it as a  direct
                  translation of the academic level of that award.  We  will
                  always use UK NARIC to assess the equivalency of  overseas
                  qualifications.

             19.  If you have submitted specified documents in which:

                o some of the documents within a sequence have been  omitted
                  (for example,  if  one  page  from  a  bank  statement  is
                  missing) and the documents marking the beginning  and  end
                  of that sequence have been provided; or
                o a document is in the  wrong  format  (for  example,  if  a
                  letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or
                o a document is a copy and not an original document; or
                o  a  document  does  not  contain  all  of  the   specified
                  information.

                  we may contact you and/or your representative in  writing,
                  and request the correct documents. We will only make  this
                  request once.

             20.  We will not ask for additional documents where:

                o you have not provided a specified document at all; or
                o requesting the missing or correct document will  not  lead
                  to your application  being  granted  because  it  will  be
                  refused for other reasons

             21.  The requested documents must be received at  the  address
                  specified in the request within 10  working  days  of  the
                  date of the request. Working day means any day other  than
                  Saturday or Sunday, a bank holiday, Christmas Day or  Good
                  Friday.

             22.  If you have submitted a specified document that:

                o in the wrong format, or
                o is a copy and not an original document, or
                o does not contain all of the specified information, but the
                  missing information is verifiable from:
                    . other documents submitted with the application,
                    . the website of  the  organisation  which  issued  the
                      document, or
                    . the website of the appropriate regulatory body;

                  we may approve your application exceptionally  if  we  are
                  satisfied that the specified  documents  are  genuine  and
                  that you meet all the other requirements. We  reserve  the
                  right to request the original  documents  in  the  correct
                  format  and  to  refuse  applications  if  the   specified
                  documents are not provided.

     9. The appellant asserts unfairness in that he claims to have informed
        the respondent prior to the refusal that  he  had  been  unable  to
        obtain a valid CAS and requested details  from  the  respondent  of
        alternative colleges which might have been able to issue him with a
        CAS.
    10. As stated above, the obligation to establish an  entitlement  to  a
        grant of leave as a Tier 4 migrant falls upon  the  applicant.  The
        Secretary of State does not purport to be able to offer  advice  in
        relation to colleges able to offer courses at  any  specific  time.
        The list of Tier 4 sponsors is a public document available to  all,
        including the appellant. Not only is it not made  out  there  is  a
        legal obligation upon the respondent to provide a list of  colleges
        who may be able to assist an  individual  student,  depending  upon
        their personal circumstances and chosen course, it is not made  out
        that failing  to  provide  such  information  makes  any  resultant
        decision arguably unfair.
    11. The fact the appellant might have been able to secure admission  at
        a particular college but that that college refused to offer  a  CAS
        as they had no vacant or unassigned CAS to assign to him, is not  a
        matter for which the respondent is arguably responsible. A  Tier  4
        sponsor will decide how many places on an  individual  course  they
        are willing to offer to prospective students and  then,  no  doubt,
        offer those to applicants who they feel able to benefit from  their
        course  and  who  have  established  that  they  can  satisfy   any
        applicable entry criteria. A statement by the  prospective  college
        to the appellant that they have no unassigned CAS  is  a  statement
        that they have no vacancies  on  the  course  which  the  appellant
        wishes to study. There is no obligation upon a Tier  4  sponsor  to
        produce an infinite number of courses solely to meet demand, as  to
        do so may have serious consequences on the ability of  the  sponsor
        to satisfy their Tier 4 obligations.
    12. The decision of other prospective  colleges  the  appellant  claims
        told him they would not accept him as he did not have a valid visa,
        is only a reflection of the accepted legal position. A  person  who
        is not a British national is  not  entitled  to  study  within  the
        United Kingdom unless they have been given permission. A person who
        provides a course of study to an  individual  without  ascertaining
        that that person has legal status to remain in the  United  Kingdom
        as a student may open themselves up to action being  taken  by  the
        Home Office by way of a revocation of their sponsors licence  or  a
        financial penalty. A  decision  by  a  college  not  to  issue  the
        applicant with a CAS until he was able to  show  he  had  a  lawful
        right to study in the United Kingdom  appears  to  be  a  perfectly
        logical and lawful decision.
    13.  The  applicant  asserts  the  respondent  failed  to  respond   to
        correspondence giving rise to arguable unfairness. In relation to a
        letter dated 11 September 2016, referred to at some  length  by  Mr
        Swain in his submissions, Miss Vijiwala advised the Upper  Tribunal
        that a search of the respondent's case management system during the
        course of preparing for this hearing did  not  disclose  any  entry
        indicating the respondent had in fact received such correspondence.
        If a letter had not been received it cannot be arguably unfair  for
        the alleged recipient not to have responded to it.
    14. When this matter was put to Mr Swain in his reply he confirmed that
        the appellant was unable to provide any evidence by way of recorded
        delivery slips to establish that the letter had  been  posted  and,
        although a copy of the alleged letter was handed up  by  Mr  Swain,
        that  document  is  undated.  The  appellant  therefore  fails   to
        establish that the letter of 11 September was in fact sent  to  the
        respondent as alleged.
    15. Even if the letter was posted and the respondent failed to  respond
        to it prior to the refusal, the  applicant  fails  to  make  out  a
        breach of the common law duty of fairness sufficient  to  establish
        arguable legal error in the decision of the Judge.
    16. The appellant asserts at [13] of the application for permission  to
        appeal that the decision to refuse the Tier 4  application  on  the
        basis that a CAS had not been provided  was  unfair  and  therefore
        unlawful as the respondent was duty-bound to at least  provide  the
        appellant with further  opportunity  to  find  a  CAS  having  been
        notified of UK  Business  College's  inability  to  provide  a  CAS
        despite  the  earlier  conditional  offer.  As  stated  above,  the
        appellant has failed to establish any  legal  obligation  upon  the
        respondent. The appellant fails to establish what is meant  by  the
        term  "duty-bound"  which  seems  to  infer   a   legally   binding
        obligation. The respondent in the above guidance indicates that she
        will only ask once for additional documentation and may not ask  at
        all if the document has not been provided. The appellant was  fully
        aware in this case of the fact there was no CAS and it is not  made
        out the has been  a  breach  of  published  policy  or  any  lawful
        obligation  if  the  respondent  does  not  give  more   than   one
        opportunity  to  an  applicant  to  remedy  a   defect   in   their
        application, or no further obligation if that is in accordance with
        her published  policy.  Such  policy  has  not  been  found  to  be
        unlawful.
    17. There is no arguable merit in an 'evidential flexibility'  argument
        for two reasons; firstly, that this is a case involving  a  missing
        document which the appellant failed to provide and secondly because
        this is a case in which,  in  light  of  the  refusal  pursuant  to
        paragraph 322(1A), the decision-maker was entitled to find it was a
        matter that would be refused in any event. The fact the Judge found
        that the mandatory ground of refusal had not been made out  has  no
        retrospective effect when considering the lawfulness or fairness of
        the decision at the date it was made, which is  the  relevant  date
        when one considers the merits  of  a  challenge  to  a  refusal  in
        relation to an application of this nature.
    18. The submission on the respondent's behalf that the  credibility  of
        the Points-based System requires a  strict  interpretation  of  the
        requirements set out in the Rules that an individual must show they
        can satisfy to entitle them to a grant of leave is not  technically
        correct, as the common law duty of fairness cannot be ignored  even
        in a points-based case.
    19. In relation to the application of the common law duty of  fairness,
        in Marghia (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT  00366  (IAC)  it  was
        held that the common law duty  of  fairness  is  essentially  about
        procedural fairness. There is no absolute duty  at  common  law  to
        make decisions which are substantively "fair". The Court  will  not
        interfere  with  decisions  which  are   objected   to   as   being
        substantively unfair, except the decision in question falls foul of
        the Wednesbury test  i.e.  that  no  reasonable  decision-maker  or
        public body could have arrived at such a decision. It is  a  matter
        for the Secretary of  State  whether  she  exercises  her  residual
        discretion. The exercise of such residual  discretion,  which  does
        not appear in the Immigration Rules, is absolutely a matter for the
        Secretary of State and nobody else, including the Tribunal  -  Abdi
        [1996] Imm AR 148.
    20. The appellant's argument appears to be predicated on the basis that
        because he believes he should have been given  the  opportunity  to
        find another college the decision is unfair, because he  thinks  it
        is. This is not the requisite legal test. It is not  made  out  the
        respondent acted in conflict with her published policy or that  she
        was legally obliged to do more than she did.
    21. In relation to the reliance by both parties upon the decision in EK
        (Ivory Coast) v Secretary State the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ
        1517; in that case it was held that the Secretary of State for  the
        Home Department was not responsible for a college's  administrative
        error in withdrawing a letter of  confirmation  of  acceptance  for
        studies  before  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  had  been
        determined under the points-based system.  When  the  Secretary  of
        State saw that the letter had been withdrawn,  the  general  public
        law duty of fairness had not obliged her to adjourn any decision to
        give the Claimant notice of  the  problem  and  an  opportunity  to
        rectify it.
    22. In addition, Miss Vijiwala relied on the further  decision  of  the
        Court of Appeal of Kaur v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 13 in which  it  was
        held the respondent had no obligation to give notice either  to  an
        applicant for leave to remain,  or  to  their  sponsoring  academic
        institution, that she considered there to be a  deficiency  in  the
        "confirmation of acceptance for studies" document before making  an
        adverse decision on that basis.
    23. Whilst it is accepted that the common law duty of fairness  may  be
        relevant in a  case,  even  if  problems  are  not  caused  by  the
        Secretary's States conduct, it has not been established  the  Judge
        erred in law in finding that the respondent's  refusal  is  lawful.
        The finding by the Judge that the appellant had failed  to  satisfy
        the mandatory requirements of the Rules is  a  finding  within  the
        range of those available to the Judge on the evidence. It is  clear
        the Judge did not find the appellant was assisted by the Common Law
        duty of fairness even though the facts relied upon were brought  to
        the Judge's attention who was clearly aware of the  same.  For  the
        appellant to succeed on this point it was  necessary  to  establish
        that the respondent's public law duty meant she was required to act
        in a manner different from that in which she did as a result  of  a
        binding  obligation.  In  this  appeal,  no  such  obligation   was
        established. The finding of the Judge that  the  appeal  should  be
        dismissed is therefore one not arguably  affected  by  legal  error
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.  It is not made out
        that no reasonable decision-maker or public body could have arrived
        at such a decision.




Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 14th of December 2017












