
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00348/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2018                   |On 26 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                       mr Suraj Omogbolahan Gbadamosi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr West of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 14 January 1974.  He is a citizen of Nigeria.



 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 7 January  2016  to
    refuse leave to remain.

 3. Judge R G Walters (the  judge)  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated  on  3  April  2017.   He  found  that  the  appellant  had
    established family life here with his wife and that removal would be an
    interference with such family and private life but that  given  private
    life had been established at a time when  the  appellant's  immigration
    status was precarious and that there  would  not  be  very  significant
    obstacles facing the appellant and his wife re-establishing family life
    in Nigeria, that the respondent's decision was proportionate.

 4. The grounds claim that the judge erred with regard  to  proportionality
    and in particular his finding that there  would  be  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to re-establishing family life in Nigeria bearing in mind the
    sponsor is "certified deaf".  Further, no account was  taken  that  the
    sponsor was born here, she is aged  around  40  and  has  only  visited
    Nigeria twice.  She is dependent upon  the  appellant  to  communicate.
    Such facts were before the judge but he did not take them into account.



 5. Judge Birrell granted leave to appeal on 13 December 2017:

         "The findings in this case in relation to the wife's  deafness  are
         extremely brief at paragraph 40 and there is no  reference  to  the
         background material relied on by the appellant."

 6. There was no Rule 40 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Mr West relied upon the grounds.  Mr Avery accepted the  findings  with
    regard to the wife's deafness at [40]  were  brief  and  further,  that
    there was no reference to the background material relied  upon  by  the
    appellant.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8.  I  find  the  judge's  analysis  inadequate.  The   appellant   raised
    exceptional circumstances and insurmountable obstacles with  which  the
    judge was obliged to engage and failed to adequately do so.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

