
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00769/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 June 2013                            |On 18 June 2013            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                             MR AHMAD UMAIR AWAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr Miah of counsel
           instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon solicitors
          For the Respondent: Ms J Isherwood a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 19  June  1987.
      He has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Oliver  who  dismissed   his   appeal   against   the
      respondent's decision of 1 November  2012  to  refuse  him  indefinite
      leave to remain in the UK as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
      settled here under the provisions of paragraph 287 of the  Immigration
      Rules.


   2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 16 September 2006 on a student visa
      valid  until  31  January  2010.  On  6  July  2009  he  submitted  an
      application for leave to remain as a spouse. On 14 October 2009  leave
      was granted for a period expiring  on  14  October  2011.  After  this
      expired, on 16 November 2011, the appellant made the application under
      appeal.


   3. The respondent refused the application for indefinite leave to  remain
      as a spouse having received a letter  from  the  appellant's  wife  in
      which she said that the marriage was  no  longer  subsisting,  she  no
      longer lived with the appellant and did not intend to live with him in
      the future.


   4. The appellant appealed and the judge heard the appeal on 2 April 2013.
      The appellant was represented but the respondent  was  not.  Both  the
      appellant  and  his  wife  attended  and  gave  evidence.  The   judge
      summarised their evidence in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the  determination.
      In paragraph 6 he reminded himself that it was for  the  appellant  to
      prove his case to the standard of the  balance  of  probabilities.  He
      assessed the evidence in paragraphs 7  and  8  before  coming  to  the
      conclusion that the marriage was  not  subsisting.  He  dismissed  the
      appeal under the Immigration Rules, including the Article 8 grounds.


   5. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal arguing
      that the judge erred in law by failing to give  adequate  reasons  for
      rejecting the  wife's  evidence  that  the  marriage  was  subsisting.
      Demeanour was not a good reason for the  adverse  credibility  finding
      and demonstrated that the correct  standard  of  proof  had  not  been
      applied. Case law on the correct approach to  assessing  a  subsisting
      marriage had not been applied.


   6. The appellant attended the hearing before me. Mr Miah  relied  on  the
      grounds and submitted that the behaviour of the parties at the hearing
      was not a indication on which the judge should have relied.  She  gave
      evidence that they were reconciled. The judge should  have  considered
      the  quality  of  her  evidence  not  her  demeanour.  There  were  no
      inconsistencies in her evidence and his evaluation of her evidence was
      flawed. I was asked to find that the judge erred in  law  and  to  set
      aside the decision.


   7. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was no  error  of  law.  The  wife's
      position at the hearing had to be compared  and  contrasted  with  the
      position she took when she wrote  the  letter  to  the  respondent  in
      November 2012. It was clear that the judge was  entitled  to  and  did
      take this into account. The history of  the  marriage  was  vital  and
      there was a lack of explanation for the allegedly  changed  situation.
      There was also a lack of explanation as to the  current  circumstances
      of the marriage. She submitted that whilst demeanour on its own  might
      not be sufficient the totality of the judge's reasoning supported  his
      conclusion and there was no error of law.


   8. In his reply Mr Miah argued that the evidence of the appellant and his
      wife was entirely consistent with the position that they  were  trying
      to reconcile and mend their marriage. I reserved my determination.


   9. I find that the judge did not rely on demeanour alone in reaching  his
      conclusion that the appellant had not established  that  the  marriage
      was subsisting. Paragraph 7 of the determination has to be read  as  a
      whole. This experienced First-Tier Tribunal Judge was not assessing  a
      relationship about which there were no more than suspicions or doubts.
      The appellant's wife could not have put  the  position  more  strongly
      than she did at the end of 2012. The respondent records her as  saying
      that the marriage was no longer subsisting, she no longer  lived  with
      the appellant and did not intend to live with him in the  future.  The
      appellant has not questioned this summary of what  she  said  or  that
      this was the position at that time. In the circumstances the judge was
      clearly well aware of  the  need  to  approach  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant and his wife with caution, to look for clear and  persuasive
      evidence that the  position  had  changed  and  to  be  aware  of  the
      possibility that the wife's  evidence  might  not  be  given  entirely
      willingly or accurately.


  10. Against this background and the judge's summary of the evidence  given
      by the appellant and his wife I find that it was open to him to  start
      his assessment of the position in paragraph 7 with the words;  "For  a
      couple in a subsisting relationship the actions of the  appellant  and
      his wife are distinctly odd".  The  reasoning  in  that  paragraph  is
      sufficient  to  justify  the  judge's  conclusions  even  without  any
      reliance on demeanour. Whilst I accept that a lack of  "outward  signs
      of warmth" between the husband-and-wife is susceptible of a number  of
      possible interpretations I read  this  is  only  one  example  of  the
      judge's assessment of the interaction between them at the hearing.


  11. I have looked at Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan  [2012]
      UKUT 00041 (IAC) but do not consider that this provides any assistance
      on the facts of this appeal. The judge reached conclusions open to him
      on all the evidence.


  12. I  find  that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
      determination.










      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 14 June
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

