


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/00549/2015

                                                      IA/00555/2015

                                                      IA/49161/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 5 February 2016                       |        On 22 February 2016         |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                                SHADAAB JAMIL
                              NISHAT MOHAMMADI
                       MOHAMMAD MAHFUZUR RAHMAN TUTUL
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Muquit  (Londinium Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of Shadaab Jamil, and his wife  Nishat  Mohammadi,
       citizens of India, and his business partner Mohammad Mahfuzur  Rahman
       Tutul,  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh,  against  the  decision  of   the
       Respondent of 18 November 2014 to refuse their applications for leave
       to remain under the Entrepreneur route and to set removal  directions
       against  them  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration  Asylum   and
       Nationality Act 2006. They now appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
       permission. The application was to run  their  company  Future  Shine
       Marketing Private Limited.


    2. The application  was  refused  because  requirements  of  Appendix  A
       regarding contracts and level of business  activity  were  considered
       not to have been established, in particular:


      a) The contract put forward as evidence of business activity was
         thought to be between the two members of the Entrepreneur Team
         rather than between their company and a third party;


      b) The level of activities evidenced in the documents did not appear
         to be compatible with the claim to be providing services at the
         level of an information technology manager exceeding NVQ level 6
         in expertise.


    3. The decision has previously been the subject of an  appeal  in  which
       the First-tier Tribunal found the immigration decision not to  be  in
       accordance with the law because of a failure to understand the nature
       of the business that underlaid the Entrepreneur application: this had
       led Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt to find that a material error of fact had
       been made regarding the contract which was not, on its face,  between
       the team members, but rather between two independent  companies,  one
       based in this country and one in India, by  which  the  former  would
       collect payments for IT services rendered  by  the  latter  to  third
       parties. This had been compounded by the fact that the decision maker
       appeared to have looked at the wrong website details for the UK based
       company. Accordingly the Secretary of State was required to  redecide
       the application.


    4. However, the subsequent refusal letters for the various Appellants do
       not acknowledge this disposition of the appeal following the  hearing
       before Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt and are  identical  in  the  terms  of
       their reasoning to those that he had found wanting.


    5. The Appellants duly appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  in  a
       decision promulgated on 15 June 2015, it found that the  Respondent's
       refusal reasons were justified, because  the  contract  supplied  was
       with Futureshine Marketing Pvt Ltd, based in Kolkata,  India,  signed
       by one Mohammad Taha, involving currency conversion services,  rather
       than information  technology  ones:  this  appeared  to  represent  a
       contract  between  the  team  members  rather  than  being  with   an
       independent entity. Mr Tutul was  identified  as  being  able  to  be
       contacted at the sales office of the  latter  company  and  in  these
       circumstances the two entities appeared to be so  closely  affiliated
       that any contracting between them could not realistically be seen  as
       independent activity of trading.


    6. Grounds of appeal took issue with this finding. Permission to  appeal
       was granted by Judge Rintoul for the Upper  Tribunal  on  13  October
       2015 because of apparent confusion as to the business framework.


    7. Before me Mr Muquit explained the history of the appeal and contended
       that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law in  all  the
       circumstances. In the light of her appreciation that  the  Respondent
       had substantially contributed to the confusion before the  First-tier
       Tribunal by failing to reconsider its decision in line with a binding
       judicial decision to which it was  party,  and  given  the  extensive
       reliance below on a document that was not in truth the  contract  and
       indeed was not admissible evidence, Ms Everett  did  not  resist  the
       thrust of the appeal.


Findings and reasons

    8. The relevant Immigration Rules are these, within Appendix A:


       "41-SD. The specified documents in Table  4  and  paragraph  41,  and
       associated definitions, are as follows:
       (e) If the applicant is applying for leave to remain, and has, or was
       lasted granted, leave as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant or a Tier 1 (Post-
       Study Work) Migrant, he must also provide the following evidence that
       he meets the additional requirements set out in Table 4:
       (ii) the Standard  Occupational  Classification  (SOC)  code  of  the
       occupation that the applicant has been working  in  since  before  11
       July 2014 or 6 April 2015 (as applicable), up  to  the  date  of  his
       application, which must appear on the list of occupations skilled  to
       National Qualifications Framework level 4 or above, as stated in  the
       Codes of Practice in Appendix J ...
       (iv) one or more of the following specified  documents  showing  that
       the business was trading before 11 July 2014  or  6  April  2015  (as
       applicable) and traded continuously throughout the period leading  up
       to the date of his application:
       (1) one or more contracts for  service.  If  a  contract  is  not  an
       original the applicant must sign each page. Each contract must show:
       (a) the name of the business,
       (b) the service provided by the applicant's business;
       (c) the name of the other party or parties involved in  the  contract
       and their contact details, including their full address, postal code,
       telephone contact number and any email address; and
       (d) the duration of the contract or, if it is a rolling contract with
       no defined end date, confirmation of when this arrangement began  and
       a letter from the customer or their  representative  confirming  that
       the contract has not been terminated, dated  no  earlier  than  three
       months before the date of application;"


    9. Accordingly there were two issues upon which the First-tier  Tribunal
       should have concentrated. The first was whether the contract met  the
       requirements of the Rules,  the  second  was  whether  the  level  of
       business activities tallied with that claimed for  the  firm  in  the
       application. The second issue was left undetermined below. That might
       be an error of law, but would not be material if the finding  on  the
       first issue was a lawful one. I do not consider that  it  can  be  so
       treated.
   10. The two critical items of evidence that received attention  from  the
       First-tier Tribunal were a letter of 27 April 2015 (that in fact post-
       dated the application and was thus inadmissible  on  appeal  applying
       section 85A of the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002)
       provided as part of the Appellant's bundle, and  the  contract  which
       had caused the Home Office concern. The April 2015 letter is  written
       "To whom it may concern" and sets out that  Mr  Taha  of  the  Indian
       based company and Mr Jamil of the  entrepreneur  team's  company  had
       agreed that the former would act for the  latter  in  managing  their
       affairs and in dealing with their clients abroad. The  contract  that
       worried the decision maker is between Shadaab Jamil for Future  Shine
       Marketing Providing Ltd (United Kingdom) and Mohammad Taha for Future
       Shine Marketing Pvt Ltd  (India)  and  provides  for  the  former  to
       receive money on behalf of the latter as its London agent  in  return
       for taking 15% of its professional fees.


   11. The First-tier Tribunal accordingly relied heavily on  findings  that
       were based not on the contract with which the Home Office  had  taken
       issue but which referenced the contents of a further  document  which
       appears to have been relied on as explanatory of the application.  In
       fact it was patently not admissible (post-dating the  application  as
       it did) and appears to  be  another  example  of  the  overly  common
       tendency  in  these  appeals  for  those  representing   Entrepreneur
       Appellants to bombard the Tribunal with a mixture of  material,  some
       of which was part of the application  and  some  of  which  was  not,
       regardless  of  its  admissibility.  Nevertheless,   the   First-tier
       Tribunal fell into a significant error of fact.


   12. An error of fact is not necessarily an  error  of  law,  particularly
       when the disadvantaged party contributed towards the  error,  but  in
       this case the Respondent was equally guilty of failing to  adequately
       assist the Tribunal, by putting  forward  refusal  reasons  that  had
       previously been found unlawful on appeal. It  seems  to  me  that  in
       these circumstances Ms Everett was correct  to  accept  the  decision
       below is fundamentally flawed.


   13. Following the remittal of this appeal for re-hearing below the First-
       tier Tribunal will need to engage  with  the  two  issues  identified
       above. On the face of it, and as already found on the earlier appeal,
       the contract does not appear to be between  the  two  Appellants  who
       form the relevant Entrepreneur  Team:  subsequent  judicial  findings
       will need to take the decision of Judge Vaudin  d'Imecourt  as  their
       starting point. Whether or not it and other materials relied on truly
       exhibit activities at the relevant SOC code level  will  have  to  be
       judicially determined.


          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and the appeal is remitted for hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.


 Signed:
      [pic]
Deputy           Upper            Tribunal            Judge            Symes
      Date: 5 February 2016

