
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00062/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17th January 2018                     |On 07th February 2018               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                       mR EMMERSON JALVIN KACHIBEKETE
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everrett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Malawi.  He was given entry clearance  as
    a working holidaymaker on 19th January 2008 with a valid visa until 7th
    January 2010. Further leave was  granted.   He  applied  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules  and  when  that  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of  State  his  subsequent  appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet who in a decision  promulgated
    on 26th April 2017 dismissed the appeal in respect of  the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant did not appear for his hearing.  The judge noted that and
    proceeded to deal  with  the  case  in  his  absence.   The  judge  had
    considered the overriding objective of the  Rules  and  were  satisfied
    that the case could be heard fairly and justly in the  absence  of  the
    Appellant.

 3. The Appellant then sought permission to appeal against the decision  of
    Judge Turquet and stated in the grounds that having received a document
    bundle printed  "false"  dated  6th  April  2017  neither  he  nor  his
    representatives were aware that the actual date was 5th April 2017.

 4. In short the  Appellant's  case  is  that  he  has  been  a  victim  of
    procedural unfairness. Permission to appeal was granted on this basis.

 5. Before me the Appellant explained that he  had  gone  to  his  Tribunal
    hearing on 6th April (the date following the date when he  should  have
    been to the hearing) because that was the date the solicitors told  him
    to attend. I observed that the  Notice  of  Hearing  was  sent  to  the
    Appellant on 9th March 2017 at a different address - the Appellant said
    he had not been living at that address  for  some  time  and  had  been
    residing at his present address  since  2016.   Helpfully  Ms  Everrett
    produced a bundle relating to the Appellant's documents which gives the
    date of the hearing as 5th April 2017 but as she pointed out  it  seems
    that the 5th has been written on top of the 6th April  indicating  that
    the Appellant may well be correct when he said that he  did  attend  on
    6th April because that was the date he thought was  applicable.   In  a
    letter on file dated 13th April 2017 and received at  Hatton  Cross  on
    21st April 2017 the Appellant refers to "an error from solicitors".

 6. In all the circumstances (and while the matter may  not  be  free  from
    doubt) I am prepared to accept that  the  Appellant  did  his  best  to
    attend the hearing but because of his understanding that  the  date  of
    the hearing was 6th April he duly attended on that date consistent with
    the fact that he did not attend the hearing before Judge Turquet.

 7. Plainly no fault attaches to  Judge  Turquet  in  the  absence  of  any
    explanation from the Appellant or his representatives on the  due  date
    but it seems on balance that the  Appellant  attempted  to  attend  the
    hearing and can properly say that he has been a  victim  of  procedural
    unfairness.

 8. It therefore seems to me that the decision is not safe and must be  set
    aside.  I have concluded that because further fact-finding is necessary
    the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. To avoid further difficulty I would  only  add
    that the Appellant's address appears to be [ ] Craven Street, St  Marys
    in Southampton and not St Marks - the latter  word  having  been  being
    used to advise him of the date of the hearing before me.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is required.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Dated 5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




