
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00196/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 December 2018                        |On 14 February 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr [S]
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born on 5 March 1989.



 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision dated 30  June
    2017 to refuse him leave to remain.

 3. Judge Traynor (the judge) dismissed the appeal for reasons he  set  out
    in a decision promulgated on 4 September 2018.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred because of a procedural  irregularity
    leading to unfairness.  That was  because  the  appellant's  solicitors
    Thamina Solicitors faxed a letter to the Tribunal at 14:18 on  11  June
    2018 enclosing a letter from them  and  a  "statement  of  fitness  for
    work".  Their letter said inter alia:

         "We have been acting as a representative  of  the  appellant.   Our
         client has an outstanding appeal, which is listed for hearing on 12
         June 2018 at IAC Taylor House.  The appellant Mr [S] has instructed
         us that he is suffering from  diarrhoea  and  vomiting  and  he  is
         currently very unwell.  As a result, he is now unable to attend the
         hearing on 12 June 2018 at IAC  Taylor  House.   We  have  attached
         herewith a 'statement of fitness for work'  letter  for  your  kind
         consideration.

         In all fairness it should  be  recognised  that  this  is  not  the
         appellant fault as he have tried  his  level  best  to  attend  the
         hearing.  In the interest of fairness therefore, we  would  impress
         upon the Tribunal to accede to his  requests  so  as  to  grant  an
         adjournment, as this appeal is very important for him.

         We thank you in advance for your cooperation and  look  forward  to
         hearing from you in due course".

 5. It appeared the facts had not been placed before the judge  as  it  was
    not mentioned in his decision.

 6. In a decision dated 17 October 2018 Judge Lambert  granted  permission.
    She said inter alia as follows:

         "3.  The grounds take issue with the judge's  decision  to  proceed
             with the hearing in the absence of  the  appellant,  which  is
             fully reasoned at paragraph 12.  The contention  is  that  the
             judge failed to take into account the fact  the  Tribunal  had
             the day before the  hearing  been  provided  by  fax  with  an
             adjournment application accompanied by a medical FIT note  for
             the appellant.  While there is  no  record  on  file  of  this
             having been received and the medical evidence does not in  any
             event specifically address the appellant's ability  to  attend
             the hearing, there may be a procedural error amounting  to  an
             error of law in that the judge was not able  to  consider  the
             adjournment request".

 7. The Rule 24 response was dated 27 November 2018.  The  respondent  said
    that the judge proceeded to hear the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant and his representatives in the belief that they had  made  no
    contact with the Tribunal.  It goes on to say that if I  find  that  an
    adjournment request was received prior to the hearing which was not put
    before the judge then I should list a fresh oral hearing.



Conclusion on Error of law

 8. Through no fault of his own, the judge was unaware  of  an  application
    for an adjournment such that the judge materially erred in  determining
    the appeal.



Notice of Decision

 9. The judge's decision is set aside  in  its  entirety.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 30 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


