

         `[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: ia/00516/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2018                           |On 5 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                             mr stephen fordjour
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Simon Bethel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Kainth promulgated 16 April 2017.  The appellant is  a  citizen  of
         Ghana born on 4 April 1979 who appealed a decision of the Secretary
         of State dated 9 September 2014 to refuse him leave  to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom.

      2. The overall tenor of the determination is distinctly disorderly and
         unhelpful.  It  confuses  and  conflates  consideration  under  the
         Immigration Rules with the broader, yet separate, consideration  of
         human rights matters under the  structured  approach  of  Razgar  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27.

      3. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  Hollingworth  on  15
         December 2017. He found force in the two principal grounds advanced
         by Counsel on behalf of the appellant.

      4. The first concerned the paucity of reasoning in  relation  to  what
         constituted an insurmountable obstacle to the appellant's return to
         Ghana.  The only matter which seems to feature in the assessment of
         the judge was the fact that the appellant spoke the local language.
         Any more  detailed  consideration  of  integration  in  respect  of
         someone who had been absent from the country for  a  decade  and  a
         half and had established a long-term  and  meaningful  relationship
         elsewhere with little by way of family in his country of origin  is
         singularly  lacking.   Mr  Staunton  for  the  Secretary  of  State
         entirely properly conceded the inadequacy of the  determination  in
         this regard.

      5. The second ground, broadly stated, concerns the manner in which the
         judge dealt with family life and in particular the relationship  of
         the appellant with his natural son J and with  the  daughter  of  a
         previous partner, namely C.  There was material  before  the  judge
         concerning the  involvement  of  the  appellant  in  the  life  and
         upbringing of these children but it does not feature, save  in  the
         most cursory way, in the reasoning  of  the  judge.   Equally,  and
         perhaps more significantly, there is no reference to the welfare of
         the children which under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
         Immigration Act 2009. On this ground also, Mr Staunton conceded the
         inadequacy of the determination.

      6. So significant are the two flaws which I  have  briefly  identified
         that it is not open to the Upper Tribunal to remake that  decision.
         The issues go to the very core of the appeal and the proper  course
         is for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. It may
         be, however, that  on  a  proper  consideration  of  the  evidence,
         applying  the  law  as  it  should  have  been  applied,  the  same
         conclusion is reached.

Notice of Decision

      1) On the basis of the errors of law identified above, the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross
         to be determined afresh by a judge other than Judge Kainth.

      3) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
