
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/00060/2018
     ia/00061/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 October 2018                   |On 21 November 2018                  |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Monirul Islam
                                 Sriti Aktar
                       (anonymity directionS NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr P Sainiof Counsel, instructed by Shah Jalal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Freer promulgated on 11 June 2018.


2.   Although before me Mr Islam and Ms Aktar are the  respondents  and  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department is the  appellant,  for  the
    sake of consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal
    I shall hereafter refer to Mr Islam and Ms Aktar as the Appellants  and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


3.   The Appellants are citizens  of  Bangladesh,  husband  and  wife,  born
    respectively on 23 December 1984 and 10 September 1986.   They  entered
    the United Kingdom pursuant to entry clearance as a Tier 4 migrant  and
    the dependant of a Tier 4 migrant on 11 February 2011 with leave  until
    31 December 2012.  On 30 December 2012  an  application  was  made  for
    further leave to remain in the  same  capacity.   The  application  was
    granted on 27 February 2013 with leave being extended until 15 November
    2014.  On 16 June 2014 a curtailment decision was made to  take  effect
    from 18 August 2014.


4.   On 18 August 2014 further applications for leave to  remain  were  made
    on the basis of the First Appellant's study - with his wife, the Second
    Appellant, again being included as his dependant.  The First  Appellant
    submitted a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ('CAS')  from  Alpha
    Omega College (Annex E of the Respondent's bundle before the First-tier
    Tribunal).


5.   The Appellants' applications were  not  decided  until  February  2018.
    The applications were refused for reasons set out in a combined  Notice
    of Immigration Decision and  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  dated  28
    February 2018. A decision was also made  to  issue  removal  directions
    pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006.


6.   The primary reason for  refusing  the  applications  was  that  it  was
    considered that the First Appellant had relied on a  TOEIC  certificate
    from ETS dated 17 July 2012 following tests at the  London  College  of
    Media and Technology in support of his application for further leave to
    remain made in December 2012.  In short, analysis on the  part  of  the
    Respondent had led to a conclusion that the First Appellant had used  a
    proxy tester for the speaking test element.


7.   It should also be noted that by the time of  the  decisions  the  Alpha
    Omega College was  no  longer  on  the  register  of  Tier  4  approved
    sponsors, and accordingly the CAS  was  not  valid.   In  the  ordinary
    course of events the Appellants might have been allowed a 60 day period
    of grace to obtain a new CAS, but in circumstances where the Respondent
    considered that the applications failed for other reasons - in relation
    to the alleged deception - the Appellants were not granted that  period
    of grace.


8.   The Appellants appealed to the IAC.


9.   Because of the timing of the  Appellants'  applications  their  appeals
    fell for consideration under the regime prior to the amendments to  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  introduced  by   the
    Immigration Act 2014:  accordingly  the  Appellants  were  entitled  to
    appeal on the ground, inter  alia,  that  the  decisions  were  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules,  as  well  as  on  human  rights
    grounds.


10.  Indeed, the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed  the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules, but dismissed the appeals on human rights grounds.


11.  The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  now  challenges  the
    basis for allowing the appeals under  the  Rules.   The  focus  of  the
    challenge, developed before me, is on the standard of proof applied  by
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  and  the  Judge's  consideration  and
    application of the guidance set out in SM  and  Qadir  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC).


12.  In respect of 'standard  of  proof',  the  following  passages  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal are germane.


         (i) Under the heading 'The Procedure': "The burden  of  proof  upon
         the respondent is to a higher standard, the  criminal  standard  of
         proof not the civil standard." (paragraph 11).


         (ii) "The burden of proof is on the appellant and the  standard  of
         proof required is a reasonable likelihood or a serious possibility"
         (paragraph 16).



13.  Both of those self-directions are wrong. The burden  of  proof  on  the
    Secretary of State with regard to any allegation of  fraud  is  to  the
    civil standard of a balance of probabilities, not the  higher  criminal
    standard. The burden of proof on  the  Appellants  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules is also to the civil standard of proof of  a  balance
    of probabilities, not the 'reasonable likelihood' standard that applies
    in protection cases.


14.  The plain errors of misdirection are also manifest within the  body  of
    the decision. At paragraph 45 the Judge refers to a report amongst  the
    'generic  evidence'  relied  upon  by  the  Respondent  wherein  it  is
    concluded "that the TOEIC system attributing  a  genuine  test  taker's
    recording to a different candidate  would  be  very  unlikely",  before
    making the following observation

         "I am entitled to rely upon the legal presumption of  innocence  of
         the party until proved guilty.   While  I  find  the  phrase  'very
         unlikely' is a standard higher than the civil standard I find  that
         it is not the criminal standard since it does  not  extinguish  all
         reasonable doubt." (paragraph 46).




15.  The Judge continues at paragraph 47

         "In the absence of a criminal conviction  against  this  Appellant,
         the respondent is in some difficulty in meeting his burden of proof
         with its high standard against the Appellant, so the burden  almost
         inevitably shifts to the Appellant to rebut the accusation  to  the
         civil standard.  I find in this case the Respondent has  failed  to
         satisfy me to the high standard."


16.  This latter passage not only indicates that the Judge  was  seeking  to
    impose the criminal standard of proof upon the Respondent, but is  also
    indicative of confusion in respect of the shifting  evidential  burden.
    If the Judge thought the Respondent failed in the first  instance  that
    would be determinative and the burden  would  not  then  shift  to  the
    Appellants.


17.  Mr Saini on behalf of the Appellants  did  not  dispute  the  difficult
    nature of the passages set out above, and did not seek  to  defend  the
    Judge's self-directions; rather he sought to  argue  that  such  errors
    could be disregarded as immaterial.


18.  In respect of SM and Qadir, notwithstanding the  confusing  application
    of  principle  at  paragraph  47  (see  above),  the  Judge   correctly
    identified the three stages, paraphrasing them in these terms:

         "The three stages mentioned are in my  own  words:  (1)  where  the
         respondent alleges deception,  the  evidential  burden  is  on  the
         respondent Secretary of State, (2)  where  sufficient  evidence  is
         raised on a fact in issue the applicant has the burden  of  raising
         an innocent explanation, and then (3) the  burden  returns  to  the
         respondent to show that the apparently innocent explanation  is  to
         be rejected." (paragraph 19).


19.  However what the Judge appears to have failed  to  do  is  to  identify
    that the guidance also indicates that the generic evidence relied  upon
    by the Secretary of State is enough to satisfy the evidential burden at
    the first stage.  Even if that were not the  case,  the  Judge  appears
    ultimately to overlook the fact that the parties agreed that the  voice
    recording of the English language  test  was  not  that  of  the  First
    Appellant's voice. Whilst the Judge records this agreement at paragraph
    41, he nowhere subsequently  acknowledges  that  this  meant  that  the
    Respondent  had  discharged  the   evidential   burden,   but   becomes
    'distracted' by seeking to consider and apply the criminal standard  of
    proof - to what was in any event a conceded fact.


20.  For the avoidance of any doubt, before me Mr  Saini  did  not  seek  to
    urge  any  different  approach  to  the  generic  evidence  than   that
    identified in SM and Qadir, and accepted that the concession  that  the
    voice recording was  not  that  of  the  First  Appellant's  voice  was
    sufficient to discharge the  evidential  burden  on  the  Secretary  of
    State.


21.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge appears  in  substance  to  have
    disregarded both the effect of SM and Qadir and the concession  on  the
    facts of the Appellants' cases in concluding that "the  Appellant...has
    succeeded in each of the three stages of transfer  of  proof  burdens."
    (paragraph 61).


22.  On the basis of the foregoing  it  is  plain  that  the  Judge  was  in
    serious and fundamental error in his conclusion in respect of the first
    of the three stages.  Mr Saini did not seek to support this  aspect  of
    the Judge's decision or otherwise defend it; he sought  to  resist  the
    Respondent's challenge on the basis of materiality, submitting that the
    Judge had assessed and evaluated the second stage adequately.


23.  I do not  accept  that  such  a  conclusion  can  safely  be  drawn  in
    circumstances where the Judge has  so  clearly  fallen  into  error  on
    fundamental aspects of his analysis.  Indeed the Judge appears to  have
    elided the first two stages rather than looking at them discretely.   I
    have already noted the seeming confusion in one passage from  paragraph
    47; this follows on from  the  Judge  seemingly  evaluating  the  First
    Appellant's 'innocent explanation' by  detailed  consideration  of  the
    generic evidence (paragraphs 42-46).


24.  In the circumstances in my  judgement  the  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge are so fundamental as to render the decision unsafe such
    that it requires to be set aside.


25.  Mr Saini invited consideration of whether any findings  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal could be preserved  for  the  purposes  of  remaking  the
    decisions in the appeals. However, given the  context  of  the  Judge's
    erroneous self-directions on standard of proof and confused approach to
    discrete issues, I rule that that is inappropriate.


26.  Moreover -notwithstanding that  it  was  not  the  express  subject  of
    challenge - it is to be observed that much of the Judge's acceptance of
    credibility was seemingly based on  matters  of  demeanour.  The  Judge
    makes references to the First Appellant being  "level  headed",  "sober
    and professional", appearing "genuinely bewildered", and also  that  he
    had "consistently appeared to be a witness of  truth".  Whilst  perhaps
    not always wholly irrelevant, a considerable degree of caution needs to
    be  exercised  in  being  influenced   by   demeanour   in   evaluating
    credibility.  It is not clear that such  caution  was  exercised  here.
    All issues in the appeal need to be revisited afresh.


27.  In this context I note that there has  been  no  Rule  24  response  or
    cross-appeal challenging the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment  of
    human rights.  Mr Saini suggested that perhaps there was no more to  be
    said on the Appellants' behalves in this regard -  and  indeed  nothing
    further has been filed before the Upper Tribunal in  respect  of  their
    circumstances  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  may  be  that  in   such
    circumstances no further arguments will  be  pursued  in  this  regard.
    However, bearing mind that the appeals are to be reconsidered,  and  to
    ensure that there is not an unnecessary  multiplicity  of  applications
    and appeals it seems  to  me  prudent  to  permit  the  Appellants  the
    opportunity of raising any up-to-date matters in respect of Article  8.




28.  Finally I observe that if the Appellants do succeed  on  the  issue  in
    relation to ETS testing, it does  not  follow  that  they  satisfy  the
    requirement of the Immigration Rules because the Respondent's decisions
    were also based on the absence of a current CAS. The issue  would  then
    become the appropriateness of extending to the Appellants a  period  of
    grace in which the First Appellant could seek to obtain a new CAS.


Notice of Decisions

29.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and are set aside.


30.  The decisions in the appeals are to be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Freer  with
    all issues at large.


31.  No anonymity directions are sought or made.



Signed:                                 Date: 19 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
