
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00076/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 March 2016                     |On 25 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           fernando sanchez tamayo
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sawar, Counsel, instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gribble (the judge), promulgated on 28  April  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against  the
    Respondent's decision of 29 November  2013,  refusing  the  Appellant's
    human rights application and to remove him from the United  Kingdom  by
    way of directions under section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    1999.

 2. The Appellant is a Colombian national, born on  17  December  1966.  He
    originally arrived in this country back in 1996 as a student.  In  1997
    he clamed asylum. After one of several unexplained delays in processing
    the Appellant's applications, a substantive asylum interview  date  was
    set for  27  September  2000.  The  Appellant  failed  to  attend  this
    appointment, a fact which is central to the present appeal. The  asylum
    claim was summarily rejected. On an unspecified date in  2000-2001  the
    Appellant married British citizen. An application for leave  to  remain
    as a spouse was made and rejected. A subsequent appeal was dismissed on
    14 March 2003. Further representations and applications were then  made
    to the Respondent. On 22 July 2011 a final application was  made.  This
    was initially  refused  without  attracting  a  right  of  appeal,  but
    following a request the matter was reconsidered by the Respondent on 29
    November 2013  and  a  right  of  appeal  granted.  The  basis  of  the
    Respondent's refusal in respect of the Immigration  Rules  (the  Rules)
    was a  narrow  one:  the  Appellant's  failure  to  attend  the  asylum
    interview on 27 September 2000 was  deemed  to  bring  him  within  the
    meaning of S-LTR.1.7(a) of Appendix FM to the Rules.

The judge's decision

 3. The appeal was argued on Article 8 grounds  only  (paragraph  16).  The
    judge deals with the core issue of S-LTR.1.7(a) at paragraphs 38-42. In
    paragraph 40 the judge finds that  the  Appellant  had  no  provided  a
    satisfactory explanation for his failure to attend the asylum interview
    in September 2000.

 4. As a direct result of this finding the judge goes  onto  conclude  that
    the Appellant fell foul of the suitability requirement in  S-LTR.1.7(a)
    and in light of the case of Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not freestanding)
    [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC) he could not rely on EX.1. His  appeal  had  to
    fail under the Rules.

 5. Article 8 was then considered outside of the Rules in some detail.  The
    judge considered that  removal  would  be  proportionate,  largely,  it
    appears to me, on the basis that the Appellant could return to Colombia
    and make an entry clearance application from there in order to  re-join
    his wife in this country (paragraphs 60-62).

 6. It is clear that both the Respondent and the judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's relationship with his wife was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    one.

Grounds of appeal and the grant of permission

 7. In succinct and well-drafted grounds by Mr  Blundell  of  Counsel,  the
    Appellant asserted  that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in  law  by
    concluding that S-LTR.1.7(a) applied to historic failures to attend  an
    interview.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 1 July 2015.





The hearing before me

 9. At the outset, both representatives agreed that the sole basis  of  the
    judge's dismissal of the appeal under the Rules was the application  of
    S-LTR.1.7(a) to  the  Appellant's  historical  failure  to  attend  the
    interview in 2000.

10. Mr Sawar provided me  with  relevant  extracts  from  the  Respondent's
    guidance on Appendix FM (relating to the suitability requirements)  and
    the guidance on the general grounds of refusal in part 9 of  the  Rules
    (in particular paragraph 322(10) of the Rules). The former  dates  from
    August 2015, and I was informed that there has been no material changes
    in content from the guidance in place as  at  the  hearing  before  the
    judge. The latter is contained in version 24.0 of the current guidance,
    published on 4 February 2016. Again, I was told that there had been  no
    material changes in content since the relevant time.

11. Mr Sawar relied on the grounds. He was unaware of any case law  on  the
    construction of S-LTR.1.7(a). He submitted that the wording of the Rule
    itself, combined with the guidance, indicated  that  only  failures  to
    attend interviews connected to the current  application  were  relevant
    for the purposes of the suitability requirement. Other requirements  in
    the suitability section were serious in nature and this indicated  that
    only a current failure to attend an interview was  caught.  He  pointed
    out that whilst S-LTR.1.7(a) was mandatory, the equivalent provision in
    Part 9 (paragraph 322(10)) was only discretionary. On the  Respondent's
    case, this Appellant would always be refused outright  because  of  the
    2000 failure, whenever he made an application in the future.

12. Mr Sawar confirmed that no  issue  has  been  taken  with  the  judge's
    consideration of the Article 8 claim outside of the Rules.

13. Mr Richards asked me to interpret the provision in light of the natural
    and ordinary meaning of the words used. The outcome may be harsh to the
    Appellant but this was irrelevant: the Rules are the Rules.

Decision and reasons on error of law

14. The issue in this appeal is a narrow one: does a  historic  failure  to
    attend an interview, unrelated to the application currently being  made
    to the Respondent, fall within the scope of S-LTR.1.7(a) of Appendix FM
    to the Rules?

15. If the answer to this question is 'yes', the Appellant's appeal  fails.
    If it is 'no', he succeeds, as no other matters under Appendix  FM  are
    in dispute.

16. S-LTR.1.7(a) of Appendix FM states:

         'S-LTR.1.7. The applicant has failed without reasonable  excuse  to
         comply with a requirement to-

         (a) attend an interview;

         ...'

17. Having considered the submissions made, the materials provided  to  me,
    and what I consider to be all other relevant matters, I  conclude  that
    historic failures to attend  an  interview  unrelated  to  the  current
    application do not fall within the scope of  S-LTR.1.7(a)  of  Appendix
    FM. Only a failure, without reasonable excuse, to attend  an  interview
    connected to the  application  currently  under  consideration  by  the
    Respondent can trigger the mandatory refusal under S-LTR.1.7(a). I base
    this conclusion on the following matters.

18. First, it is of course right that I must give the  words  used  in  the
    provision their natural  and  ordinary  meaning,  insofar  as  that  is
    sensibly possible to do, as is made clear in Mahad [2009] UKSC  16,  at
    paragraph 10:

         "The Rules  are  not  to  be  construed  with  all  the  strictness
         applicable  to  the  construction  of  a  statute  or  a  statutory
         instrument but, instead, sensibly  according  to  the  natural  and
         ordinary meaning of the  words  used,  recognising  that  they  are
         statements of the Secretary of State's administrative policy."

19. In respect of  S-LTR.1.7(a),  the  words  actually  used  are  somewhat
    ambiguous: "has failed" could potentially mean any failure, current  or
    historical; equally, it could apply only to a failure connected to  the
    application being considered by the Respondent.

20. In my view the need to construe the provision without undue  strictness
    and in the context of sensible application is of particular  importance
    here. A strict view of  the  phrase  "has  failed"  could,  and  as  Mr
    Richards argues, should,  encompass  any  and  all  historic  failures,
    however disconnected from the application being  considered.  Yet  that
    construction would tend towards undue strictness and thus run  contrary
    to the approach laid down in Mahad.

21. Further, the strict construction urged upon me by the  Respondent  must
    be considered in the context of the effects  of  such  an  outcome.  S-
    LTR.1.7(a) is a mandatory basis for refusing an application made  under
    Appendix FM. Thus, an historic failure to attend an  interview,  wholly
    unconnected to  the  application  itself,  would  have  the  effect  of
    precluding success under the Rules in perpetuity. It would  apply  with
    equal effect to any applications made from abroad (in a scenario  where
    the individual returns to his home country to seek  re-entry,  in  line
    with what the Respondent normally considers to be the 'correct way'  of
    regularising status without jumping the queue) because S-EC.1.6(a) is a
    mirror image of S-LTR.1.7(a).

22. The present case places the point in sharp relief. The Appellant failed
    without reasonable excuse to attend an asylum  interview  in  September
    2000. No further asylum claim was made.  He  subsequently  marries  and
    makes a number of applications to  the  Respondent,  the  last  one  27
    August 2011, almost eleven years after the non-attendance in  2000.  By
    the time of the hearing before the judge, the failure in 2000 was  well
    over fourteen years distant. On any  rational  view,  the  2000  matter
    could not be said to have a material bearing on the  Appellant's  claim
    as the spouse of a  British  citizen,  certainly  not  a  determinative
    bearing, as would be the case if the Respondent's view of  S-LTR.1.7(a)
    were correct. The construction proffered by the Respondent  could  lead
    to outcomes bordering on the absurd.

23. One may think of another example where a failure to attend an interview
    occurred  only  a  short  time   prior   to   the   application   under
    consideration, perhaps in respect of a previous application made a  few
    of months beforehand. There would appear to be greater strength in  the
    Respondent's argument in this scenario. However, S-LTR.1.7(a) makes  no
    temporal or other distinction between a recent historical  failure  and
    one occurring in the distant past.

24. Turning to the application of the term "sensibly" to  the  construction
    issue before me, I would refer back to what  I  have  just  said  above
    concerning the significant  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  strict
    approach. Putting it rather bluntly, I find it very difficult indeed to
    see how the consequences of Mr Richard's view of S-LTR.1.7(a) could  be
    said to flow from a truly sensible meaning of the phrase "has failed."

25. Therefore, on an application of  the  "natural  and  ordinary  meaning"
    approach, the sensible and less-strict view of the  words  used  in  S-
    LTR.1.7(a)  favours  the  Appellant's  argument  above  that   of   the
    Respondent.

26. Second, there is a sensible and perfectly legitimate aim  in  providing
    for mandatory refusal where an applicant fails to attend  an  interview
    required  for  the  purposes  of  the   application   currently   being
    considered.  The  failure  is  an  inexcusable   frustration   of   the
    application  process:  it  prevents  the  Respondent   from   eliciting
    information from the individual. That information may  include  details
    about historical failures to attend other  interviews.  The  point  is,
    there is a rational and  logical  connection  between  the  failure  to
    attend, the application in  question,  and  the  consequences  for  the
    individual.

27. Third, and connected to the previous point, there is in  my  view  some
    value in looking at the other  suitability  factors  in  S-LTR.1.7.  It
    would seem to me perfectly sensible to have  a  mandatory  refusal  for
    failure to provide requested information or physical data, or to submit
    to a  medical  examination  in  connection  to  the  application  under
    consideration. Conversely, it would be nonsensical to be able  to  rely
    upon purely historical failures, however distant and irrelevant to  the
    current application.

28. Fourth, with respect to Mr Richards, I have not been provided with  any
    materials from the Respondent, whether by way of Ministerial statements
    or other sources, which support his  submissions  on  the  construction
    question.

29. Fifth, as far as I am aware, there are  no  decisions  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal or  elsewhere  on  the  proper  construction  of  S-LTR.1.7(a)
    itself. I have considered the decision of the President in Muhandiramge
    (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC). The ratio of this decision
    is that the burden of establishing that  an  appellant  has  failed  to
    provide a reasonable excuse under S-LTR.1.7 rests with the  Respondent,
    and that the standard of proof is that of the balance of probabilities.
    I am not concerned with that particular issue. Whilst it may have  been
    arguable that the judge in the Appellant's case placed  the  burden  on
    the wrong party, the point has not been taken in the grounds of  appeal
    and no amendment to those grounds has been sought.

30. I note that on  the  facts  of  Muhandiramge  the  failure  to  provide
    information related to the application under consideration and  not  an
    historical omission. However, as the issue in the case  before  me  did
    not arise in Muhandiramge, that decision is of  little  assistance.  In
    passing, I observe that the  President  noted  with  some  concern  the
    dichotomy between mandatory refusal on S-LTR.1.7  grounds  on  the  one
    hand,  and  discretionary  refusal   on   similarly-worded   provisions
    elsewhere in the Rules. In a slightly different context, there is  also
    a somewhat strange dichotomy here, as a failure to attend an  interview
    is only the basis for a discretionary refusal under  paragraph  322(10)
    of the Rules.

31. Sixth, Mr Sawar has urged me to look at the Respondent's guidance  when
    construing S-LTR.1.7(a). It is tempting to do so, given  what  is  said
    therein. However, Mahad precludes recourse to the Respondent's guidance
    when seeking to interpret  the  Rules.  My  conclusion  on  the  proper
    construction of S-LTR.1.7(a) is not based in any material way upon  the
    Respondent's guidance.

32. If one were permitted to consider the guidance, it  would  if  anything
    support my interpretation  above  that  offered  by  Mr  Richards.  The
    Appendix FM guidance refers the reader to the guidance on Part 9 of the
    Rules. At page 50 of that guidance paragraph 322(10) is considered. The
    opening passage on the page states:

         "This page contains guidance for caseworkers on  what  to  consider
         when an applicant applying for leave to remain fails to come to  an
         interview."

                                                           Underlining added

33. On a fair reading, this strongly suggests that the failure must  relate
    to  the  application  then  being  considered,  rather  than  a  purely
    historical one.

Conclusion on error of law

34. In light of the foregoing, I find that the judge did misdirect  himself
    in law as to correct meaning of S-LTR.1.7(a) of Appendix FM.

35. The error was clearly  material  to  the  outcome  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

36. I therefore set the judge's decision aside.

Remaking the decision

37. The only live issue in respect of Appendix  FM  has  always  been,  and
    remains, whether the Appellant was caught by S-LTR.1.7(a). Although  on
    the judge's unchallenged finding  the  Appellant  has  not  provided  a
    reasonable excuse for failing to attend the interview in 2000, in light
    of my conclusion on the proper construction of the relevant  provision,
    this is irrelevant. S-LTR.1.7(a) does not apply to the Appellant.

38. It follows  that  the  Appellant  satisfies  all  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM. His appeal therefore succeeds under the Rules.

Anonymity

39. No direction has been sought and none is appropriate.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules


Signed      Date: 21 April 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
This is because the Appellant's case involved a contentious question of  law
that required adjudication on appeal.


Signed      Date: 21 April 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
