

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/00057/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision and Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 25 January 2018                        |   On 14 February 2018           |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                                 REHAN AHMED
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Himself
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Specialist Appeals Team)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of Rehan Ahmed,  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  1
       February 1984, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  of  6
       April 2017 dismissing his appeal against the refusal of variation  of
       leave as a student on 9 June 2015.


    2. The Appellant arrived in the UK in 2011 to pursue  business  studies.
       He completed Diplomas at Level 4 and Level 5 in 2012  and  2013,  and
       then began his studies at Blake Hall College  at  degree  level.  The
       application of 29 November 2013 leading to this  appeal  was  for  an
       extension of leave to study at Blake Hall in order to  complete  that
       qualification. He learned that  the  college  had  lost  its  licence
       before his application was finally determined, and wrote to the  Home
       Office in November 2014, February 2015, and March 2015, asking for  a
       short grant of further leave in order to make an application to a new
       college. He received no reply from the Home Office until the  refusal
       letter came.


    3. The application was refused because


      a) Blake Hall college was no longer on the Tier 4 Sponsor list at the
         time the decision maker determined the application, and
         accordingly the Certificate of Acceptance for Studies (CAS)
         supplied was invalid;



      b) A bank statement supplied to evidence his ability to maintain
         himself was thought to be false.



    4. The appeal came on for hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  which
       noted that the burden of proof as to the allegation of dishonesty was
       on the Secretary of State, who had provided no  evidence  at  all  to
       back up  her  assertion  that  false  documents  had  been  provided.
       Accordingly she had failed to discharge the burden upon  her.  As  to
       the validity of the CAS, it  was  accepted  on  all  sides  that  the
       Sponsor  college  had  indeed  lost  its  licence  by  the  date  the
       application was considered.


    5. The First-tier Tribunal found that the CAS had indeed  been  invalid,
       and accordingly dismissed the appeal.  However,  it  noted  that  the
       Appellant had done all that he could to bring his difficulty  to  the
       Respondent's  attention,  and  had  indeed  received  an   offer   at
       Strathclyde  University  to  study   for   a   Master's   Degree   in
       International Management. It recommended that the Secretary of  State
       grant him sixty days of discretionary leave to remain to give him  an
       opportunity to regularise his immigration status,  to  recognise  the
       unfairness of the situation that had arisen.


    6. Grounds of appeal contended that the First-tier Tribunal,  given  its
       finding that the circumstances leading to the Appellant's plight were
       unfair, should have allowed the appeal in order to give him a  period
       of leave in order for him to find a new Sponsor.


    7. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal on  15  November
       2017 on the basis that there had been manifest  unfairness  and  that
       the First-tier Tribunal should have considered its powers  to  remedy
       this.


    8. A Rule 24 response from  the  Secretary  of  State  stated  that  the
       validity of the CAS was an end to the matter and that  there  was  no
       human right to study in this country.


    9. Before me, the Appellant was unrepresented, and  there  was  a  brief
       discussion as to the wisdom of an  adjournment  for  him  to  find  a
       lawyer. However, given my initial view of the lack of fairness of the
       proceedings so far, I considered  it  appropriate  to  determine  the
       appeal, as he would not be prejudiced.


   10. I enquired as to why it was that  the  attention  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had not been drawn to the well-known policy of the Secretary
       of State which is intended to protect the position of students  whose
       extension applications become invalid due  to  the  revocation  of  a
       Sponsor's licence in circumstances where no blame attaches  to  them.
       Ms Isherwood was unable to explain the reason for this.  Nevertheless
       she maintained that there was no material  unfairness  here,  as  the
       Appellant had had the opportunity to  complete  his  studies  in  any
       event.


Findings and reasons


   11. Although this decision post-dates 6 April 2015, it is  expressly  not
       one to  which  the  new  "relevant"  provisions  of  the  Nationality
       Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  have  application;  because  the
       application was made other than on human rights grounds and prior  to
       6  April  2015.  The  Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No.   4,
       Transitional and Saving Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015  inserts
       Article 9(1)(c)(iv) into Commencement  Order  No.  3  such  that  the
       "saved" provisions are preserved in relation to "a decision  made  on
       or after 6th April 2015 ... to refuse an application made before  6th
       April 2015 ... to vary a person's leave to enter or remain and  where
       the result of that decision is that the person has no leave to  enter
       or remain ... unless that decision is also a refusal  of  an  asylum,
       protection or human rights claim."


   12. The relevant Home Office Guidance around the time of the  Appellant's
       application in relation to applications for leave to remain under the
       Tier 4 Student category sets out:


           "Where the applicant was assigned a CAS by  the  sponsor  before
           they were removed from the sponsor register, the  applicant  can
           apply to extend their leave. ...
           2. Where the application does not meet the requirements,  refuse
           it.
           3. Where it does meet the requirements, put it on hold. ...
           5. If the student's application has been held and the  sponsor's
           licence is revoked, and the student has been a bona fide student
           and did not participate  in  the  practices  which  led  to  the
           revocation, the options for action depend on the leave that they
           have:
           If  they  still  have  at  least  60  days  permission  to  stay
           remaining, you must curtail their leave so that it  will  expire
           once the period of 60 days has run out. During this 60 days they
           can seek a new CAS from a  different  sponsor  and  either  vary
           their application, make a new application or leave  the  UK.  If
           their permission to stay runs out whilst they are waiting for  a
           decision on their application you  must  delay  the  refusal  of
           their application for 60 days to allow them to seek  a  new  CAS
           from a different sponsor and vary their leave."


   13. One appreciates that the precise wording of  the  Guidance  may  have
       changed from time to time, but Ms Isherwood did not suggest that  the
       summary I provided to her at the  hearing  was  anything  other  than
       accurate, which is reflected in the version found above.


   14. The Secretary of State is under a duty to bring relevant Guidance  to
       the attention of a Tribunal hearing the appeal.   As  was  stated  in
       Mandalia [2015]  UKSC  59  at  [19]:  "irrespective  of  whether  the
       specialist judge might reasonably be expected himself  to  have  been
       aware of it, the Home Office Presenting  Officer  clearly  failed  to
       discharge his duty to draw it to the tribunal's attention  as  policy
       of the agency which was at least arguably relevant to [the]  appeal".
       That is so whether or not the Guidance is relevant on  the  preferred
       case put by the Secretary of State: it is its potential relevant that
       is decisive: UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85.


   15. In the majority of the Court of Appeal in  EK  (Ivory  Coast)  [2014]
       EWCA Civ 1517, Sales LJ stated, at  [38],  that  whereas  in  general
       fairness did not necessarily require an applicant to  be  advised  of
       matters of which he  was  unaware  before  a  decision  was  made  in
       reliance upon them, nevertheless there might well be unfairness where
       "there had been a change of position of which the Secretary of  State
       was aware, and indeed which she had brought about,  in  circumstances
       in which the students were not themselves at fault in  any  way,  but
       had been caught out by action taken by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
       relation to which they had had no opportunity to protect themselves".
       That scenario is precisely the case here.


   16. It seems to me that the Appellant had done all he could reasonably be
       expected to do, by the series  of  letters  he  had  written  to  the
       Respondent expressly stating that  the  college's  licence  had  been
       revoked,  to  require  the  Respondent  to  consider   that   policy.
       Accordingly the  Appellant  should  have  received,  rather  than  an
       outright refusal,  a  sixty  day  grace  period  to  make  a  further
       application supported by a new Sponsor if he was able to find one.


   17. The policy does not differentiate  between  the  circumstances  of  a
       person who subsequently completes the next  course  of  studies  upon
       which they intended to embark, and one who does  not.  Indeed  it  is
       difficult to  see  that  this  would  be  relevant  to  the  policy's
       application, given that it is intended to operate from the time  that
       a decision is made on  the  present  application,  which  necessarily
       rules out taking account of later developments.


   18. The failure to bring this policy to the attention of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  led  it  into  a  material  error  of  law,  rendering  the
       proceedings  unfair.  The  very  unfairness  that  it  identified  as
       relevant to a recommendation outside its statutory powers was in fact
       capable of leading to a decision in the  Appellant's  favour,  within
       its jurisdiction.


   19. This being an appeal under the "saved" provisions of the  Nationality
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the appropriate disposition  of  the
       matter is to allow the appeal on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of
       State's decision was not in accordance with the  law.  The  Appellant
       has been treated unfairly because of the failure of the Secretary  of
       State to implement the relevant policy to ameliorate  the  unfairness
       occasioned by the Appellant's  Sponsor  losing  its  licence  shortly
       before his application was considered so depriving him of the benefit
       of a valid CAS.  Given his course of studies has moved onwards  since
       the date of application and decision, the Appellant  should  consider
       whether he should vary that application to something  more  befitting
       his present circumstances. That is a matter for him, and would  be  a
       decision better taken with the benefit of legal advice.



Decision:

    The appeal is allowed.
    The Appellant's application for an extension of leave to remain remains
    outstanding before the Secretary of State.



Signed:                                            Date: 25 January 2018


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes






