


                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00208/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UT(IAC) Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 12 June 2017                     |On : 14 June 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                noman khurram
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Woodhouse of SH & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington  allowing
   Mr Khurram's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse his human
   rights claim.

2. For the purposes of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr  Khurram  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  7  June  1990.  He  first
   entered the United Kingdom on 30 December 2010 with leave to enter  as  a
   Tier 4 student until 21 December 2012  and  was  subsequently  granted  a
   further period of leave as a Tier 4 student until 21  June  2014.  On  11
   February 2014 he made an FLR(M) application for  leave  to  remain  as  a
   spouse. His application was refused but his appeal against that  decision
   was allowed to a limited extent for the decision to  be  reconsidered  in
   relation  to  a  TOEIC  certificate  produced  by  the   appellant.   The
   application was then refused again on 21 December 2015.


4. The respondent refused the appellant's application under the  suitability
   requirements in paragraph S-LTR.2.2(a) of Appendix FM of the  immigration
   rules on the basis that he was considered previously to have obtained his
   TOEIC English language certificate through deception  by  using  a  proxy
   test taker for the language test, as confirmed by the Educational Testing
   Service (ETS). The respondent considered further that the appellant could
   not meet the eligibility criteria under the five-year partner route as he
   did not meet the financial requirements in  paragraph  E-LTRP.3.1(a)  and
   (b) in relation to his partner's income and savings.  It  was  considered
   that the appellant could not meet the criteria under the 10-year  partner
   route as there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing
   in Pakistan for the purposes of paragraph EX.1(b), that he could not meet
   the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis of private life  and
   that there were no exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of  leave
   outside the immigration rules.

5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His  appeal  was  heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington on  15  September  2016  and  was
   allowed in a decision promulgated on 24 October 2016. The  judge  refused
   to admit the  respondent's  evidence  which  was  produced  only  at  the
   hearing, in breach of the  Tribunal's  directions,  and  found  that  the
   respondent had failed to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty
   and that the suitability grounds were not made out. The judge went on  to
   find that the appellant met the financial requirements  under  the  five-
   year partner route and that there were insurmountable obstacles to family
   life continuing in Pakistan. He allowed the appeal under the  immigration
   rules and on human rights grounds.

6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had acted unfairly by refusing to admit the
   respondent's evidence which identified the appellant as an individual who
   had  exercised  deception  and  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
   suitability requirements of Appendix FM.  The  judge  did  not  give  any
   consideration to the possibility of the appellant returning home to apply
   for entry clearance.

7. Permission to appeal was granted on 5 April 2017.

8. The appeal came before  me  on  12  June  2017.  Mr  Woodhouse  raised  a
   timeliness issue, in that the  respondent's  permission  application  had
   been made out of time and the grant of permission had not  addressed  the
   matter. He asked that the respondent's application be  struck  out.  Both
   parties made submissions in the alternative.


9. I advised the parties  that  I  was  extending  time  and  admitting  the
   application.  An  application  to  extend  time  had  been  made  by  the
   respondent. The reason provided by the respondent for the delay  was  not
   particularly persuasive but the grounds had strong  merit  and  raised  a
   question of importance, namely deception on the part of the appellant. In
   all the circumstances, and considering the period  of  the  delay  which,
   albeit not trivial, was not significant, it seemed to me that it  was  in
   the interests of justice for time to be  extended.  I  also  advised  the
   parties that, in my view, the judge had made significant  errors  of  law
   such that his decision could not stand, and my reasons for so  concluding
   are as follows.

10. Whilst Mr Woodhouse submitted  that  the  judge  had  been  entitled  to
   refuse to admit the documents as  it  was  unfair  for  an  unrepresented
   appellant to be ambushed with a large bundle of evidence, it seems to  me
   that the judge's approach in excluding the evidence and  proceeding  with
   the appeal was procedurally unfair. The  majority  of  the  evidence  was
   generic evidence in ETS cases and was in the public domain and  had  been
   considered in detail in relevant case law including SM and Qadir  (ETS  -
   Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 and MA (ETS - TOEIC  testing)
   Nigeria [2016] UKUT  450.  The  evidence  relating  specifically  to  the
   appellant was minimal and could easily have been considered without undue
   delay. The judge ought to have been  aware  from  those  cases  that  the
   generic evidence was  sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial  evidential
   burden of proof upon the respondent and it was incumbent upon him to then
   invite oral evidence from the appellant to ascertain whether  he  had  an
   "innocent explanation". Alternatively the judge could have adjourned  the
   proceedings  to  enable  the  appellant  to  consider  the   respondent's
   evidence.  Although  he  recorded  that  neither  party  applied  for  an
   adjournment, it is not clear from his decision if such an opportunity was
   provided to the respondent once it was made clear that the  evidence  was
   to be excluded.

11. In the circumstances  it  was  procedurally  unfair  for  the  judge  to
   exclude the evidence which formed the basis of the respondent's case  and
   to then dismiss the appeal on the basis that the respondent had failed to
   make out her case. As  such  the  judge's  decision  on  the  suitability
   provisions in Appendix FM was materially flawed. That  in  turn  impacted
   upon the decision under the immigration rules, although  separate  errors
   arose in that regard. As Mr Mills submitted the judge  appeared  to  have
   accepted that the required evidence of adequate  maintenance  or  savings
   was not available at the time of the application, yet allowed the  appeal
   under the immigration rules on the basis that it had been made  available
   for the appeal. Clearly that was wrong.  Likewise  the  judge's  decision
   outside the immigration rules was flawed in that it failed to  take  into
   account the  appellant's  inability  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
   immigration rules and included no consideration of section  117B  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Act.


12. For all of these reasons the judge's decision is unsustainable and  must
   be set aside in  its  entirety  and  re-made  afresh  with  no  preserved
   findings. The appropriate course, as accepted by the parties, is for  the
   matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

DECISION

13. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside.

14. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice  Statement  7.2(b),  before   any   judge   aside   from   Judge
   Heatherington.








Signed[pic]                                  Date: 13 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
