

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00501/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th August 2014                           |On 19th August 2014          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                          NICOLA ANNE-MARIE HARDING
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwinycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     Mr B Marshall of NBS Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State seeks to appeal a decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal allowing the appeal of the claimant against a decision of the
      SSHD dated 28th November 2013 refusing to vary her leave to remain  in
      the UK and to remove her from  the  UK  pursuant  to  s47  Immigration
      Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. Permission was granted on the grounds
      that it was arguable that  the  conclusion  drawn  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge that the claimant had severed all ties with her country
      of origin was in error given the findings of fact made. Permission was
      also sought (and not refused) on the grounds that the judge had failed
      to identify circumstances such as  would  permit  consideration  under
      Article 8 'directly' (Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC),  Nagre  [2013]
      EWHC 720 (Admin)). The First-tier Tribunal judge  had  not  reached  a
      decision on the 'Article 8 grounds' having allowed  the  appeal  under
      the Rules.


   2. The claimant served a Rule 24 response  through  solicitors  asserting
      that the grounds amounted to no more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
      findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge.


        Background

   3. The claimant, who was born in Jamaica on 8th July 1976, arrived in the
      UK on 14th January 1999 aged 22, having  left  Jamaica  aged  18.  She
      remained lawfully  in  the  UK  until  11  July  2002  and  thereafter
      overstayed until on 5th October 2009 she was granted leave  to  remain
      on  a  discretionary  basis  until  5  October  2012  because  of  her
      relationship with Craig McIntyre.  Her application for  further  leave
      to remain made on 1st September was refused firstly under Appendix  FM
      on the grounds that she was  no  longer  in  a  relationship  with  Mr
      McIntyre; secondly that she did not  meet  the  requirements  of  Rule
      276ADE and thirdly, under Article 8, that although she and Mr McIntyre
      were working towards a reconciliation this was insufficient reason  to
      grant further leave to remain.

   4. The claimant has extensive family members in the UK and a half  sister
      in Jamaica. The claimant had been abandoned by her family  in  Jamaica
      and brought up in care from the age of 4; from age 14 to  18  she  had
      been in the care of an elderly aunt who was now dead. Her half  sister
      in Jamaica was aged 11 when the claimant left Jamaica and they had not
      been brought up  together.  That  half  sister  has  a  daughter.  Her
      evidence was that she did not consider them to be 'family'. She and Mr
      McIntyre had been together for 12 years by the  date  of  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal and they had separated in May 2013.

   5. The First-tier Tribunal found, and this is not  challenged,  that  the
      claimant does not meet the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  notably  E-
      ELTRP.1.7 and thus her application to remain  as  the  partner  of  Mr
      McIntyre was justifiably refused under the Rules.

        Error of law

   6. The First-tier Tribunal judge found  that  although  she  had  a  half
      sister in Jamaica who has a daughter, she was not brought up with  her
      half sister and this does not amount "to "....family ties' such as  to
      prevent the appellant from relying on Paragraph  276ADE(vi)..........I
      find that the appellant can properly claim to have severed all of  her
      ties with Jamaica."


   7. The judge allowed the appeal because he  found  the  claimant  had  no
      remaining ties with Jamaica. In reaching that decision he made a clear
      and unambiguous finding of fact that there was no family  tie  between
      her and her half sister or indeed with the child of that sister.

   8. Mr Diwinycz specifically  accepted  before  us  that  the  grounds  as
      formulated do not seek to raise a challenge  on  the  basis  that  the
      judge should have looked beyond  the  existence  of  family  ties  and
      considered whether, as a person who had spent the first  18  years  of
      her life in Jamaica, there remained  cultural  and  social  links.  Mr
      Diwinycz accepted that that issue was not at large  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal and the Secretary of State's appeal could succeed only if  we
      found that the finding of fact that there was no family tie  with  the
      half sister was perverse and not open to the Judge.  He  confirmed  he
      did not seek to widen the grounds of appeal.

   9. We have no hesitation in concluding that the finding was open  to  the
      Judge who had before him all that  was  advanced  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal and the response in the refusal letter and the various  witness
      statements.

  10. Mr Marshall submitted that, in any event, when the grounds  of  appeal
      and evidence  in  the  papers  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
      considered it was plain that the judge was entitled  to  conclude  and
      had concluded that the appellant had severed all ties and was entitled
      to succeed under the 276ADE(vi).

  11. It might well have been better if the judge had made that clearer  but
      we agree with Mr Diwinycz and Mr Marshal that the focus of the  appeal
      before us  is  upon  the  narrow  finding  of  fact  relating  to  the
      relationship with the half sister. Mr Diwinycz did  not  seek  to  say
      anything further in support of the Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of
      challenge. He accepted also that there was no arguable  merit  in  the
      first ground relating to the 'Gulshan point',  there  having  been  no
      findings by the First-tier Tribunal judge as regards Article 8 because
      the appeal had been allowed under the Immigration Rules. We agree  and
      need say no more than that.

  12. On this basis we are satisfied that the challenge by the Secretary  of
      State is not made out.

      Conclusion


         The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is not made out and is dismissed.


         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.







                                    Date
               Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
