

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00194/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|On 20 May 2014                                |On 27th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD BANNATYNE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                            BUNCHUAI CHAMPANGOEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, instructed by Sivaramen, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Thailand, born on 1  January  1952  whose
    appeal against the respondent's decision of 7  December  2012  refusing
    her further leave to remain as  the  spouse  of  her  British  national
    husband was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a  decision  issued
    on 29 November 2013.  Permission to appeal was granted  and  a  hearing
    before DUTJ Shaerf on 24 February 2014 found that there was an error of
    law such the decision should be set aside.  He gave directions for  the
    re-making of the decision at a resumed hearing.

 2. At the hearing before us Mr Melvin indicated that  the  respondent  had
    had an opportunity to reconsider this appeal and, in the light  of  the
    fact that it was now accepted that the relationship  was  genuine,  she
    sought to withdraw the original decision so that a new  decision  could
    be made.

 3. Mr Sharma indicated that he was not in a  position  to  agree  to  this
    request but he did not seek to make any further submissions.

 4. As confirmed in SM (withdrawal of appealed decision: effect) [Pakistan]
    [2014] UKUT 64, the respondent does not need the Tribunal's consent  to
    withdraw the decision against which there was an appeal  to  the  Fist-
    tier Tribunal.  However, in such cases the Tribunal does  need  to  re-
    make the  decision  notwithstanding  the  withdrawal  of  the  appealed
    decision.

 5. SM sets out the matters to be taken into account in  deciding  how  the
    Upper Tribunal should approach that task,  as summarised in [4] of  the
    italicised head note.  Having taken those factors into account, we  are
    satisfied that we should not consider the  substantive  merits  of  the
    appeal which will be considered by the respondent on the basis that  it
    is accepted that there is a genuine and  subsisting  marriage.   If  an
    adverse decision is reached, the appellant will have a right of appeal.
     We therefore propose formally to allow this appeal on the  basis  that
    the original decision was not in accordance with the law and  has  been
    withdrawn by the respondent who will now re-make the decision.

Decision

 6. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law for the reasons  set  out  in  the
    Decision and Directions dated 27 February 2014 which has  already  been
    served on the parties.  The First-tier Tribunal decision was set aside.
     The appeal is allowed as the original decision was not  in  accordance
    with the law and will remain with the respondent to be remade.










Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter                  30 May 2014


