
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00484/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 January 2018                   |On 21 February  2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Muhammad Usman Javed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Proudman, of Counsel, instructed by Britain
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against a decision  of
       Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Adio,  who  in  a  determination
       promulgated on 10 May 2017 allowed the appeal of the  respondent,  on
       human rights grounds, against a decision of the Secretary of State to
       refuse to vary his leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

    2. Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I will for
       ease of reference refer to her as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
       respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly, I will refer to Mr Muhammad
       Usman Javed as the appellant as he was the appellant  in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

    3. The appellant came to Britain with leave to enter  as  a  student  in
       September 2007.  He was granted further leave in that capacity  until
       May 2013.  On 30 April 2013 an application for leave to remain  as  a
       Tier 1 Entrepreneur was refused.  In August 2013 he was granted leave
       to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 24 October 2013.  On 23
       July 2013 he had made an application under the Tier 2  scheme.   That
       was  refused  on  17  February  2015.   The  appellant's  appeal  was
       subsequently allowed to the  extent  that  it  was  remitted  to  the
       respondent for a further decision.

    4. It is that decision against which the appellant  appealed.   However,
       subsequent to that decision his grounds  were  amended  so  that  the
       appeal before Judge Adio was solely on the  issue  of  human  rights.
       There was, in fact, no evidence to indicate that the initial decision
       had been wrong nor indeed has it been challenged.  The basis  of  the
       human rights application was that  the  appellant,  who  had  in  the
       meantime made an application for leave to remain as the spouse of  an
       EEA national which was  quickly  withdrawn,  had,  in  January  2016,
       married a Pakistani woman who had leave to remain as a student.  They
       have a child born in May 2016.  The case was put on the basis that as
       his wife was studying the appellant had to look after the  baby,  who
       had been born prematurely, to enable his wife to complete her studies
       here.  In his determination Judge Adio, having noted that the  appeal
       was brought  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,  considered  the
       circumstances of the appellant and his wife in Britain.

    5. He noted the role which the appellant took in looking after his child
       while  his  wife  was  either  studying  or  working  part-time.   He
       considered that should the appellant have to leave Britain  his  wife
       would not be able to both look after the baby  and  to  continue  her
       studies and her work. He found that family life was  being  exercised
       in Britain took into account the fact that the appellant  was  not  a
       burden on the state and was able to speak English and had  integrated
       into society.  He stated  that  the  appellant  was  not  in  Britain
       unlawfully but accepted that he had got involved  in  a  relationship
       with his wife when his immigration status was precarious.   He  found
       that his required "the immense support of the appellant at a time  in
       which she is still recovering from childbirth as  well  as  combining
       her studies".  He concluded that it would be disproportionate for the
       appellant to be removed from the United Kingdom as that would lead to
       the break-up of the  stability  of  family  life  and  would  have  a
       negative effect on the child. He therefore allowed the appeal.

    6. The Secretary of State appealed, asserting that the judge  had  erred
       by failing to give full reasons  as  to  why  there  were  compelling
       circumstances which would entitle  the  appellant  to  remain.    The
       grounds emphasised that the family life was precarious and  that  the
       family could return together to enjoy family life  in  Pakistan.   It
       was stated that given that they could do  this  the  judge's  finding
       that the decision would lead to a break-up of the stability of family
       life was irrational, particularly given that the  appellant's  wife's
       student status was not on a route that could lead to settlement.   It
       was submitted that the family had the option of returning to Pakistan
       where the appellant's wife could receive support from family  members
       resident there.  On those grounds permission to appeal was granted by
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson on 14 November 2016.

    7. At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Tufan relied on the grounds
       of appeal, emphasising that the sponsor was  here  as  a  student  on
       leave  which  was  shortly  to  expire.   He  pointed  out  that  the
       appellant's wife had only come to Britain as a student in  May  2016.
       Given the fact that the appellant's wife's leave was shortly to  end,
       he stated that the appeal was, almost, academic but argued  that  the
       judge had erred by not placing weight on the  precariousness  of  the
       appellant's stay or indeed that of his wife.

    8. In reply Ms Proudman, who accepted that no application had been  made
       for the appellant to be considered as the  dependant  of  a  student,
       argued that the judge  had  properly  considered  the  provisions  of
       Article 8 outside the Rules and had reached conclusions, having heard
       evidence from the appellant and his wife, which  were  open  to  him.
       She emphasised the closeness of the family unit and the importance of
       the appellant's wife completing her education and the fact  that  the
       appellant was required to look after the baby while she did  so.   It
       was not realistic, she suggested, that the family should be  expected
       to return to Pakistan at the present time.  In reply Mr Tufan  relied
       on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11.   He
       stated that it was clear from that  judgment  that  there  should  be
       shown to be exceptional circumstances,  that  is,  "circumstances  in
       which refusal would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
       the individual such that refusal of  the  application  would  not  be
       proportionate".  He stated that there was no reason why  this  family
       could not return to Pakistan and continue their life there.

    9. I consider that there is  a  clear  material  error  of  law  in  the
       determination of the Immigration Judge.  He appears not to have taken
       into account that the appellant's wife  had  only  limited  leave  to
       remain and did not have a prospect  of  settlement  here.   Not  only
       therefore was the appellant's stay in Britain precarious but  so  was
       that of his wife.  Similarly, there was  simply  no  reason  why  the
       appellant and his wife could not return to Pakistan with their  child
       as a family unit.  The appellant's wife has  only  lived  in  Britain
       since 2016.

   10. I consider that, when assessing the proportionality of the refusal of
       leave to remain, the judge  erred  in  law  by  placing  insufficient
       weight on the necessity of immigration  control  and  the  fact  that
       there would be no interference in family life if these two  Pakistani
       parents returned to Pakistan with their child.  For that  reason,   I
       set aside the determination of the First-tier Judge.

   11. I asked whether or not it was appropriate that I  should  proceed  to
       redetermine the appeal.  Ms Proudman asked that I  remit  the  appeal
       back to the first-tier to allow an opportunity for the  appellant  to
       raise a further ground, which was that he should be allowed to remain
       because of ten years' lawful residence in Britain.  I do not consider
       that that would be an appropriate step to take.  I consider  that  on
       the clear evidence which was given before the judge it is appropriate
       for me to remake this decision.

   12. In so doing I take into account the fact that the appellant's wife is
       studying and that he is looking after their child while  she  studies
       and  indeed   also   works.    However,   more   important   in   the
       proportionality exercise is the fact that the immigration  status  of
       both is precarious and that they could return  to  Pakistan  together
       with their child.  I consider that there is  no  factor  which  would
       mean that their circumstances would make it such that they would  not
       be able to return or it would not be appropriate that  they  did  so.
       For these reasons, having set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Judge, I remake the decision and dismiss this appeal.

Decision

This human rights appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]   Date: 11 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


