
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00228/2016
                                                               IA/00568/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 February 2019                  |On 06 March 2019                     |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                               Mr KHURRAM BAIG
                               Mrs SIDRA BAIg
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by AWS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 29 October 2018 Judge  Burns  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed the appeal of the appellants, citizens of  Pakistan,
    against the decision made by the  respondent  on  12  January  2016  to
    refuse leave to remain.  (The appellants are husband and  wife.   Since
    the wife's appeal is heavily dependent on the first appellant, I  shall
    hereafter refer for convenience to "the appellant").  The judge set out
    at paragraph 5:

         "5.  The Respondent's  remaining  substantive  reason  for  refusal
             obstacle of both applications is that for the purposes of  the
             First  Appellant's  application  dated   29/10/2011   he   had
             (subsequent to the date of the original application) submitted
             a TOEIC certificate from the Educational Testing Service (ETS)
             which certificate was based on a test allegedly taken  by  the
             Appellant at the Premier  Language  Training  Centre,  Trocoll
             House, Wakering Road Barking Essex 1G118PD on  16/1/2013,  and
             that there was  significant  evidence  to  conclude  that  the
             certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
             test-taker.  Hence paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules
             applied, which requires that leave to remain must  be  refused
             where false representations or false documents or  information
             has been submitted, and 322(5) which provides that  leave  may
             be refused in the light of the Appellant's prior conduct".

2.   The judge referred to leading cases on  TOEIC/ETS  cases,  specifically
    Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) and  Shehzad  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615  and
    concluded at paragraphs 33-36 as follows:

         "33. In the particular case before  me  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Respondent's evidence (which  includes  generic  evidence  but
             also  a  spreadsheet  showing  that  the   First   Appellants'
             particular test was tested and found to  be  invalid),  passes
             the onus to the Appellants to show he  was  not  complicit  in
             fraudulent testing.

         34.  For the reasons set out in paragraphs 15 to 27  above  I  find
             the evidence of the  First  Appellant  and  Mr  Arshad  to  be
             inconsistent and unreliable.

         35.  On the one hand I have admissible generic  but  also  specific
             evidence of the type recently accepted by the Court of Appeal,
             which suggests that there is a  substantially  less  than  one
             percent chance of error in the finding  that  the  Appellant's
             test taken in January 2013 was taken by a proxy rather than by
             the  Appellant  himself.   On  the  other  hand  I  have   the
             Appellant's unsatisfactory and inconsistent assertions that he
             did take the test himself.

         36.  I find on a balance of probabilities that the Appellant's test
             was taken by a proxy rather than by him, and it  follows  that
             he must have been complicit in false test provision in support
             of his 2011 application, and so he was rightly refused ILR  by
             the Respondent under the Immigration Rules".

3.   The judge went on to state, as regards Article 8, that:

         "45. The First Appellant has a bad immigration record as it is  now
             established that he has attempted to deceive  the  Respondent.
             To allow him to remain now undermines immigration control.

         46.  The private and family life on which the Appellants  rely  was
             established when they were in the UK  precariously  so  little
             weight should be given to it.

         47.  The Appellants do not have a genuine and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with a qualifying child as their son is not yet 7
             years of age.  However I accept that he is nearly that age and
             he will have started to put down some roots in the UK.

         48.  I have had regard to the fact that under Article 3(1)  of  the
             UN Convention on the Rights  of  the  child  "in  all  actions
             concerning children ... the best interests of the child  shall
             be a primary consideration" and that Section 55 of the Borders
             Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  requires  immigration
             decisions to be  discharged  having  regard  to  the  need  to
             safeguard and promote the welfare of children who are  in  the
             UK.

         49.  I find that the best interests of the Appellant's son will  be
             served by him being removed with his parents to Pakistan.   It
             would be reasonable for him to be  so  removed.   His  parents
             have spent most of their formative years in Pakistan and  they
             have relatives and family there to help and support them.

         50.  I have taken what the Second  Appellant  has  written  in  her
             witness statement  about  family  matters  and  conditions  in
             Pakistan into account.

         51.  Taking all the above matters into account, I find that  public
             interest outweighs the family and private life  considerations
             and that the refusal of the Appellants' human rights claim  is
             proportionate and lawful under section 6 of the  Human  Rights
             Act 1998".

4.   There are two sets of grounds, one drafted  by  Mr  Karim,  one  by  Mr
    Balroop.  The latter essentially goes  into  more  detail  rather  than
    raising further grounds.  As amplified by Mr Karim the  grounds  raised
    the following main submissions.  It was said that the judge erred in:

    (1)  wrongly relying on paragraph 322(1A) as well as  paragraph  322(5)
         against the appellants when the former had no application;

    (2)  in failing to consider the discretion and the  balancing  exercise
         required by paragraph 322(5) (reference was made to  Ngouh,  R  (on
         the application of) v SSHD [2010]  EWHC  2218  (Admin)  (27  August
         2010);

    (3)  in failing to apply the three-stage test as adumbrated in Qadir;

    (4)  in failing to make  clear  and  properly  reasoned  findings  with
         regards to the appellant's evidence  regarding  the  test  and  his
         innocent explanation;

    (5)  in not having regard to the factors set out  in  paragraph  69  of
         Qadir; and

    (6)  in conducting a flawed and  inadequate  assessment  of  Article  8
         treating the ETS issue as being determinative.

5.   I am grateful to both representatives for their helpful submissions.

6.   I consider ground (1) does not identify any error of law.   Whilst  the
    respondent's decision letter and the  respondent's  submissions  before
    the FtT Judge did invoke paragraph 322(1A)  in  addition  to  paragraph
    322(5) (see paragraph 5), the judge's decision focussed on the issue of
    deception, the judge concluding at paragraph 36 that:

         "36. I find on a balance of probabilities that the Appellant's test
             was taken by a proxy rather than by him, and it  follows  that
             he must have been complicit in false test provision in support
             of his 2011 application, and so he was rightly refused ILR  by
             the Respondent under the Immigration Rules".

    Irrespective of whether this assessment was  intended  to  address  the
    paragraph 322(1A) issue, the judge's reasoning as set out here  clearly
    addressed the subject matter of paragraph 322(5).  I would accept as  a
    matter of construction that paragraph 322(1A) must be  referring  to  a
    current, not an historic, act of deception, but that  does  not  affect
    the applicability of paragraph 322(5). If there was any error here,  it
    was not material.

7.   I would agree with ground (2)  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account that paragraph 322(5) was a discretionary provision, but  I  do
    not consider this resulted in any material error  because  the  judge's
    findings as to the appellant's use of deception were  clearly  informed
    by the view that the appellant's conduct was intentional  and  that  it
    merited the application to him of paragraph 322(5).

8.   Mr Karim submits as part of ground (2) that the judge  also  failed  to
    treat application of paragraph 322(5)  as  one  requiring  a  balancing
    exercise.  It is correct that the judge does not expressly identify the
    need to undertake a balancing exercise, but I agree with Ms Cunha  that
    the judge's assessment was in substance one that balanced  factors  for
    and against.  An illustration of that is at paragraph  35  wherein  the
    judge found:

         "35. On the one hand I have admissible generic  but  also  specific
             evidence of the type recently accepted by the Court of Appeal,
             which suggests that there is a  substantially  less  than  one
             percent chance of error in the finding  that  the  Appellant's
             test taken in January 2013 was taken by a proxy rather than by
             the  Appellant  himself.   On  the  other  hand  I  have   the
             Appellant's unsatisfactory and inconsistent assertions that he
             did take the test himself".

9.   I see no merit in ground  (3).   The  judge  addressed  at  length  the
    guidance given in Qadir and his summary at  paragraph  29  encapsulates
    the three-stage test set out in Qadir:

         "29. In such cases the legal burden of proof  (of  the  Appellant's
             dishonesty)  rests  on  the  Respondent  throughout  and   the
             standard of proof "belongs to the higher end of the balance of
             probabilities".  There is also an initial evidential burden on
             the Respondent to adduce  sufficient  evidence  to  raise  the
             facts in issue.  Once this initial burden  is  discharged  the
             onus passes to the Appellant to raise an innocent explanation.
              If he does so then the onus passes back to the Respondent  to
             show that on a balance of probabilities that  the  Appellant's
             prima facie explanation is to be rejected".

10.  The grounds contend that the judge erred in failing to  apply  in  full
    the guidance contained in paragraph 57  of  Qadir,  in  particular  the
    second stage.  Having explained at 57(a) that the respondent bears  the
    initial evidential burden, Mr Justice McCloskey stated that:

         "(b) The spotlight  thereby  switches  to  the  applicant.   If  he
             discharges the burden - again, an evidential one - of  raising
             an innocent explanation, namely an account which satisfies the
             minimum level of  plausibility,  a  further  transfer  of  the
             burden of proof occurs".

    Mr Karim submits  that  the  reference  herein  to  "minimum  level  of
    plausibility" imports a lower standard of proof  than  the  balance  of
    probability.

11.  However, first of all, I do not understand the  Tribunal  in  Qadir  to
    have been dealing in (b) with the standard of  proof  at  all;  it  was
    concerned therein solely with the burden  of  proof.   Second,  on  the
    basis of the judge's findings of fact as set out at  paragraphs  33-36,
    the appellant had clearly failed to give an account which satisfied the
    minimum level of plausibility.   Third,  the  judge  only  applied  the
    balance of probabilities in the context of paragraph 57(c), that is, at
    the stage when the respondent has discharged the  initial  burden  (a);
    the appellant has then attempted an innocent explanation (b);  and  the
    inquiry had moved on to (c).  Paragraph 57(c) states:

         "(c) Where (b) is satisfied, the burden rests on the  Secretary  of
             State to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that  the
             Appellant's  prima  facie  innocent  explanation  is   to   be
             rejected".

12.  Strictly speaking, on the basis of  the  findings  of  fact  made,  the
    judge should in the appellant's case have ended the three-stage test at
    stage (b), but in any event the conclusion as stated  in  paragraph  36
    (which is directed at stage (c)) and strictly speaking only  arises  if
    an applicant has provided a prima facie innocent explanation),  is  one
    that was entirely within the range of reasonable responses.

13.  As regards ground (4), I am unable to agree that the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for disbelieving the appellant's  attempt  at  an
    innocent explanation.  Ground (4) targets paragraph 15, but in fact the
    judge's reasons on the issue of deception commence at paragraph 10  and
    continue until paragraph 27, addressing matters  for  and  against  the
    appellant.  Mr Balroop's grounds  take  issue  with  a  number  of  the
    judge's identifications of inconsistencies, but I consider none  amount
    to more than a mere disagreement with the judge's finding to  different
    effect.

14.  Turning to ground  (5),  Mr  Karim  highlights  the  list  of  relevant
    factors which the Upper Tribunal in Qadir saw as necessary to consider,
    namely:

         "69. We turn thus to  address  the  legal  burden.   We  accept  Mr
             Dunlop's submission  that  in  considering  an  allegation  of
             dishonesty in this context the relevant factors to be  weighed
             include (inexhaustively, we would add) what the person accused
             has to gain from being dishonest; what he  has  to  lose  from
             being dishonest; what is known about his  character;  and  the
             culture or environment in which he operated.  Mr  Dunlop  also
             highlighted the importance of  three  further  considerations,
             namely how the Appellants performed under  cross  examination,
             whether the Tribunal's assessment of  their  English  language
             proficiency  is  commensurate  with  their  TOEIC  scores  and
             whether their academic  achievements  are  such  that  it  was
             unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated".

    Mr Karim also assails what the judge said in paragraph 14:

         "14. Mr Balroop submitted that the First Appellant had no reason to
             cheat  in  2013  because  by  then  also  he  must  have  been
             proficient in English having been already  taught  English  in
             Pakistan; he had already successfully studied in the  UK  from
             2005 completing courses taught in English, and he had  already
             successfully passed the City and Guilds English exam in  2011.
             I accept  these  studies  and  exams  and  have  examined  the
             certificates.  I accept these as providing  some  evidence  in
             the First Appellant's favour of some level of  proficiency  in
             English on his part by January 2013.  However, I have  no  way
             of comparing the standard of the 2013 TOEIC English test  with
             the standard of English which the  First  Appellant  may  have
             required to complete his earlier studies  and  to  obtain  the
             City and Guilds test certificate.  Furthermore, even if he was
             sufficiently proficient in English to  have  passed  the  2013
             TOEIC English test, he may have  had  some  other  undisclosed
             motive for preferring not to take it personally".

15.  In my judgement, the grounds are incorrect to  assert  that  the  judge
    failed to have regard to these factors.  A fair reading  of  paragraphs
    10-27 discloses that all these factors were in the mind of  the  judge.
    Significantly, when it came  to  the  issue  of  prior  proficiency  in
    English, the judge stated at paragraph 14 that  he  accepted  that  the
    appellant's previous exam results provided "some evidence  in  the  ...
    Appellant's favour of proficiency in English on  his  part  by  January
    2013".  Mr Karim is right to say that the final sentence  of  paragraph
    14 is speculation (he points to the words "... he  may  have  had  some
    undisclosed motive for preferring not to take it personally") but  that
    was simply part of a proper weighing of the possibilities in advance of
    concluding at paragraphs 15-27 that the  evidence  the  appellant  gave
    about the circumstances in which he claimed to have taken the test  was
    "unconvincing",  "vague",  "evasive"  and  marred  by  a   "number   of
    inconsistencies".

16.  In light of the appellant's failure  to  succeed  on  grounds  (1)-(5),
    ground (6) really lacks traction since the appellant's  representative,
    Mr Balroop, conceded at the hearing that if dishonesty in the test  was
    accepted "it would be difficult to make out any successful argument for
    the Appellants in this regard" (paragraph 37).  The assessment  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 circumstances which the judge went on to  conduct
    at paragraphs 38-51 was one that the judge was entitled to  make  which
    took into account all relevant considerations.   It  is  wrong  of  the
    grounds to state that the judge treated  his  adverse  finding  on  the
    deception  issue  as  determinative.   That  ignores  the  purport   of
    paragraphs 46-51 entirely.

17.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the  appellants'  appeal
    must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:28 February 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

