
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00295/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th July 2014                               |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                        miss Beatrice Amanakwh Adowah
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Thornhill
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Ghana  born  on  2nd  May  1958.   The
    Appellant was detained in Manchester on 2nd  November  2013.   She  was
    reported to have entered into a  suspicious  marriage  with  a  British
    citizen Mr George Aitchison and presented a Ghanaian passport issued on
    17th January 2005 valid  for  ten  years.   During  her  interview  she
    admitted that she entered the UK in 2003 on a Ghanaian  passport  which
    has subsequently been lost and that her leave expired in 2004 and  that
    she did not attempt to regularise her status  or  leave  the  UK.   She
    contends that she is in a subsisting relationship akin to marriage with
    Mr Aitchison since 2004 and that they live at  the  same  address.   On
    14th November 2013 application was made on her behalf to formalise  her
    status by way of seeking leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the
    basis of her relationship with Mr  Aitchison.   By  Notice  of  Refusal
    dated 12th December 2013 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's
    application and issued removal directions from the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Chambers sitting at Manchester on 14th April 2014.  In  a
    determination promulgated on 25th April 2014 the Appellant's appeal was
    allowed under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 6th May 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:

      1) That the judge  had  misdirected  himself  in  law  by  failing  to
         identify compelling grounds not sufficiently recognised  under  the
         Rules such that there was an  arguable  case  for  considering  the
         appeal outside the Rules.

      2) The judge when assessing proportionality failed  to  consider  that
         the Appellant's family life was formed while her immigration status
         was precarious.

      3)  The  judge  failed  to  consider  the  public  interest  in   firm
         immigration control this being  a  relevant  consideration  in  any
         proportionality assessment under Article 8.

 4. On 21st May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted permission  to
    appeal.  In granting permission Judge Kelly noted that the Tribunal did
    consider the relevant reported decisions but that it was arguable  that
    it did not apply the principles enunciated therein to the facts of  the
    appeal.  In particular Judge Kelly considered that it was arguable that
    it failed to consider whether the Sponsor's age (61 years) was such  as
    to present an insurmountable obstacle from  family  life  taking  place
    outside the United Kingdom, or was otherwise a compelling circumstances
    that rendered the Appellant's  removal  unjustifiably  harsh  and  thus
    disproportionate for the purposes of the Article 8 assessment.

 5. It was on that basis that the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For
    the purpose of continuity within proceedings the Secretary of State  is
    referred to herein as the Respondent and Miss Adowah as the  Appellant.
    Miss Adowah appears by  her  instructed  solicitor  Mr  Thornhill.   Mr
    Thornhill is familiar with this matter having appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Diwnycz.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Diwnycz does no more than stand behind the Grounds  of  Appeal.   Mr
    Thornhill reminds the Tribunal that each  case  is  fact-sensitive  and
    submits that in this case Judge Chambers  had  identified  factors  and
    reached the conclusion that for the Appellant and her partner to return
    to rural Ghana was  untenable.   He  submits  that  reasons  have  been
    provided and that the judge was entitled to  reach  those  conclusions.
    He points out that this is not a run-of-the-mill case.  He refers me to
    the relevant case law of AB (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1302 and points out that at paragraph 19  of
    the determination whilst not specifically referring to  that  authority
    Judge Chambers has given due consideration to the relevant features  of
    the appeal.  He submits that it is not disputed if the Sponsor and  the
    Appellant returned as a family unit to Ghana they would have to live in
    rural Ghana and that the judge has given full and detailed  reasons  as
    to why that was not possible nor practical and that having followed the
    guidance in case law he has made a finding of fact he was  entitled  to
    and that the determination does not contain any material error of  law.
    He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 9. The bases of the Grounds of Appeal are set out above.  Those Grounds of
    Appeal amount to little more  than  disagreement/argument.   The  judge
    made findings at paragraphs 16 to 21.  They are detailed  findings  and
    ones that he was entitled to reach.  He  has  set  out  the  historical
    background of how the Appellant and Sponsor came to  know  each  other.
    He accepts their joint factual account relating to their  relationship.
    He has made specific findings relating to the features  of  the  appeal
    namely that if the Appellant is removed the parties would be  separated
    and there is little likelihood that the Sponsor would be in a  position
    to follow her to Ghana due to his age,  that  he  would  not  have  any
    prospect of employment in Ghana, that they would lose  their  means  of
    support if he went to Ghana and it would damage the Sponsor's prospects
    in relation to his pension arrangements.  Judge Chambers has considered
    that the  prospective  degree  of  family  disruption  is  a  necessary
    ingredient and that it would be severe and that the Sponsor  given  his
    age and history would not fare well in a rural area of Ghana.   Further
    he would not fare well elsewhere.  These are all findings that  he  was
    entitled to make.  These are all the factors effectively set out within
    the Court of  Appeal  determination  of  AB  (Jamaica)  and  they  were
    findings that the judge was entitled to come to.

10. In granting permission to appeal  Judge  Kelly  acknowledged  that  the
    Tribunal had considered the relevant reported  decisions  and  went  on
    solely to concentrate on the suggestion that it was arguable  that  the
    Tribunal had failed to consider whether the Sponsor's age (61) was such
    as to present an insurmountable obstacle to family  life  taking  place
    outside the United Kingdom and was otherwise a compelling circumstances
    rendering  the  Appellant's  removal  unjustifiably  harsh.   With  the
    greatest of respect to the judge granting permission  that  is  exactly
    the approach that has been adopted by Judge Chambers in his analysis at
    paragraph 19 of his determination.  In such circumstances the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose any material error of  law
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld and the appeal of
    the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error of law.  The appeal of the Secretary of State  is  dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

