
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00009/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th July 2014                               |On 24th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                          MR Bashir Olaitan ADEBAYO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 7th January 1976 is a citizen  of  Nigeria.   The
    Appellant had first entered the United Kingdom on 21st  September  2004
    as a student.  His lawful leave to remain had expired on 10th  February
    2010 following the refusal of his appeal for further leave  to  remain.
    Thereafter the Appellant had applied outside of the Rules on 30th March
    2010 and had made further application for leave to  remain  outside  of
    the Rules on 9th May 2011.   That  application  had  been  refused  and
    certified in November 2012 but had then been further considered  and  a
    refusal had been maintained on 29th November 2013.  The Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Law sitting at Manchester on 10th April 2014.  The  judge
    had refused the Appellant's  application  under  both  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.  Application for permission to  appeal
    had been made and granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kelly  on  21st
    May 2014.  It was found arguable that the Tribunal had failed  to  find
    whether the claim that one of the children could not return to  Nigeria
    because of  exposure  to  bright  sunlight  following  burns  had  been
    considered  and  whether  or  not  that  amounted   to   a   compelling
    circumstance for the matter to have been considered under Article 8  of
    the ECHR.  Directions were issued to the parties.  On 9th June 2014 the
    Home Office had opposed the application by letter.

 2. The matter comes before me in accordance with the directions set.

The Appellant's Submissions

 3. The Appellant and his wife were both present and spoke  English.   They
    were unrepresented.  I indicated that the Grounds of Appeal  which  had
    been submitted in their case and upon which permission  to  appeal  had
    been granted would be regarded by me as the basis of their submissions.



The Respondent's Submissions

 4. Mr Harrison relied upon the  letter  of  9th  June  2014  and  made  no
    separate submissions.

 5. I provide my decision with reasons below on the issue of the  error  of
    law.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The Appellant's application  to  remain  outside  of  the  Rules  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR  was  made  on  9th  May  2011  and  not  finally
    determined  by  the  Respondent  until  November  2013.   There  is  no
    suggestion that the Appellant or  his  dependants  had  any  basis  for
    remaining within the terms of either the old  or  the  new  Immigration
    Rules following changes made on 9th July  2012  to  those  Rules.   The
    application and consideration  of  this  case  has  always  focused  on
    whether there was a right to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. The Respondent in their consideration of the Appellant's  case  finally
    on 29th November 2013 was considered solely on the basis  of  the  new
    Immigration Rules.  There does not appear to have been  an  examination
    of the case generally to see  whether  there  were  any  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances that would  allow  the  Appellant  to  remain
    outside of the Rules.

 8. The case of Edgehill  and  the  commencement  legislation  of  the  new
    Immigration Rules suggests that for an application predating  9th  July
    2012 a consideration of that case should have taken  place  within  the
    ambit of the case law at that time in particular the  case  of  Razgar.
    That does not appear to have been done by  the  Respondent  within  the
    refusal letter.

 9. The judge at the First-tier Tribunal had set out  the  evidence,  facts
    and submissions.  The judge's findings are contained between paragraphs
    16 and 21 of the determination.  Paragraphs 16 to 20 was essentially  a
    consideration of, and a finding that the Appellant failed to  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  new  Immigration  Rules.   Given  the  date   of
    application it may well be that the new Immigration Rules were  not  in
    any event applicable to this case that the  consideration  of  the  new
    Rules by the judge did not lead to any material error of law because it
    has never been suggested or pleaded the Appellant met  the  Immigration
    Rules old or new.

10. The  central  consideration  of  this  case  therefore  was  always  an
    examination of Article 8 of the ECHR.

11. At paragraph 21 of the determination the judge stated  "the  Respondent
    had correctly analysed the Appellant's claims and dealt with the family
    and private life elements within the new Immigration Rules.   In  going
    further and bearing in mind the decision in Gulshan I  have  looked  at
    the five  stage  test  in  Razgar."   As  indicated  above  it  is  not
    necessarily the case that the Respondent  had  correctly  analysed  the
    Appellant's claim by referring to the new Immigration Rules but that is
    an academic point.  Whilst the judge at paragraph 21 refers to  Gulshan
    he does not appear to have applied the test in Gulshan or given reasons
    why if he followed Gulshan he had found compelling  circumstances  that
    would then allow him to examine the Appellant's  case  outside  of  the
    Rules exceptionally and by reference to the five stage test in  Razgar.
    He had then referred to the final stage test in Razgar whether it would
    be proportionate for the  Appellant  and  his  family  to  be  removed.
    Essentially that had always been the central if not sole basis  of  the
    Appellant's application and therefore that  aspect  of  the  case  that
    required the central or indeed sole consideration of the evidence.  The
    judge's consideration of this aspect of the case amounts to seven lines
    and is in essence merely a statement that he found nothing  within  the
    Appellant's case that would establish the actions of the  Secretary  of
    State to be disproportionate.  Whilst brevity is exemplary this  was  a
    case that did require  a  greater  examination  of  the  facts  and  an
    explanation for the decision reached by the  judge.   The  only  reason
    given within those seven lines appears to be based on  the  Appellant's
    behaviour as being an overstayer  since  2010.   That  is  certainly  a
    factor worthy  of  consideration.   The  Appellant  was  an  overstayer
    because of the failure of the Respondent to remove him.   However  this
    was a case where the Appellant had been in the UK for nearly ten  years
    was married and at the date of hearing had three children all  of  whom
    were born in the UK.  The reference by the Appellant within his witness
    statement to the unfortunate burns suffered by one of his children  was
    a factor although it should be noted that there was no medical evidence
    within the Appellant's bundle.  However  the  length  of  stay  of  the
    Appellant within the UK, the birth of three children within the UK  and
    the circumstances of the family generally did  mean  it  was  incumbent
    upon a judge to have provided clear reasons why  he  did  not  find  it
    disproportionate for the removal of  all  the  Appellants  to  Nigeria.
    Additionally, if as the judge indicates he had  in  mind  the  case  of
    Gulshan that would suggest that  he  had  already  decided  there  were
    compelling circumstances  that  allowed  him  to  consider  the  matter
    outside of the new Immigration Rules by  application  of  the  test  of
    Razgar.

12. It cannot be said that the ultimate decision of the judge is  wrong  or
    entirely unreasonable because in reality there are  simply  no  reasons
    provided for that decision reached.  It is an error  capable  of  being
    material to fail to provide adequate reasons to  support  a  conclusion
    reached in such a case.  It is for those reasons I find an error of law
    was made in this case.

Decision

13. An error of law was made by the judge in this  case  such  that  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and issue directions  for
    remaking the decision afresh.






Signed                          Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

