
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/00148/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Bradford                    |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 19 October 2017                   |          On: 20 October 2017        |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                           BELAL SAEED SALEM AMIEH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mrs Peterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is from the Palestinian authority.  He arrived in the  UK
    in May 2008 when he was 21.

 2. In a decision dated 3 May 2017 the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds,  against  the  respondent's
    decision dated 21 December 2015 to refuse him leave to remain.


 3. In a decision dated 15 June 2017 the First-tier  Tribunal  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal, observing it to be  arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal should have (i) undertaken a fuller analysis of the
    facts given the extent of the evidence submitted, and (ii)  taken  into
    account the impact of the respondent's policy prior to July 2012.

 4. The matter now comes before me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law.

Hearing

 5. The appellant attended  the  hearing  unrepresented  but  with  several
    supportive friends.  He relied upon the grounds of appeal  prepared  by
    his previous solicitors and  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeared to have made no clear findings regarding his fears upon return
    to Pakistan.


 6. Mrs Peterson submitted that the decision  is  adequately  reasoned  and
    does not contain an error of law.


 7. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which  I  now  provide
    with reasons.

Error of law discussion

 8. When the decision is read as a whole, I am  satisfied  that  First-tier
    Tribunal made three material errors of law.


 9. Before turning to these I propose to  address  the  second  basis  upon
    which permission was granted.  I do  not  accept  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in failing to take into account a previous policy
    of the respondent.  The First-tier Tribunal was not obliged to consider
    for the purposes of an Article 8 balancing exercise in 2017,  a  policy
    of considerable vintage and no longer applicable.  In  any  event,  the
    policy would not  assist  the  appellant  because  it  states  that  he
    requires six years discretionary leave to qualify for indefinite  leave
    to remain.  Even assuming that discretionary  leave  continued  pending
    the  appeal  process,  the  appellant  has  not   accrued   six   years
    discretionary leave from 2012.


10. I now turn to the matters I consider to be errors of law.   First,  the
    First-tier Tribunal  has  not  made  adequate  findings  regarding  the
    appellant's fear of persecution if returned  to  Palestine.   This  was
    outlined in his witness statement, the witness statement  of  Ms  Allot
    and in a skeleton argument prepared on his behalf.  It  is  clear  from
    the First-tier Tribunal's own summary of the appellant's case  at  [13]
    that  he  continued  to  fear  arrest  and  detention  if  returned  to
    Palestine.  It is therefore difficult to understand why  this  was  not
    fully addressed and why at [28] the First-tier Tribunal found that  the
    appellant did not rely upon a fear of persecution.  Although the First-
    tier Tribunal referred to the previous Tribunal decision dismissing the
    asylum appeal  at  [31],  it  did  not  make  any  updated  credibility
    findings, using that decision as a starting point.


11. Second, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  its  approach  to  the
    appellant's private life.  I acknowledge that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    directed itself to many relevant factors in the appellant's favour.  In
    particular, the First-tier Tribunal took into account  the  appellant's
    private life in the UK at [9-11 and 34-36] which included: a period  of
    lengthy residence of nine years in the UK from the age of 21; a finding
    that he "has worked hard" and supported himself financially when he has
    had his own business; he  has  a  network  of  supportive  friends  and
    customers in the UK; and is able to speak English.


12. I accept the submission in the grounds of appeal  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to take into  account  the  evaluative  nature  of  the
    concept of 'precarious' as set out in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    803.  The First-tier  Tribunal  noted  at  [34]  that  the  appellant's
    immigration  status  "has  been  precarious",  without  addressing  the
    submission that his private life was established  and  developed  at  a
    time when he  had  discretionary  leave  to  remain  and  had  entirely
    immersed himself or 'settled'  into  UK  life  in  terms  of  language,
    friendships and employment,  such  that  his  private  life  should  be
    considered to be strong and / or of a special and compelling character.


13. Third, the reasons  provided  for  concluding  the  balancing  exercise
    against the appellant are inadequate.  The conclusion itself is set out
    in brief terms at [37] -  "however  in  all  the  circumstances,  I  am
    satisfied that it is proportionate that  his  application  for  further
    leave to remain is refused".  Whilst it is not necessary  to  structure
    an Article 8 decision following the 'balance sheet'  approach  referred
    to by Lord Thomas in Hesham Ali v SSHD at [82], it is important to  set
    out reasoned findings as  to  the  strength  of  the  private  life  in
    question and to balance this against the strength of any countervailing
    factors or public interest considerations.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings appear to accept that the appellant has a very strong  private
    life but there is inadequate reasoning as to why this is outweighed  by
    public interest considerations.


Conclusion

14. When the errors identified above are considered together I am satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal's findings are inadequately reasoned,  and
    the First-tier Tribunal has materially erred in law.


Disposal

15. I have had regard to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement and the nature and extent of  the  factual  findings
    required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this  is  an
    appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

16. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.


17. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 19 October
2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
