

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00107/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |        Decision & Reasons        |
|On 26 January 2016                            |Promulgated                       |
|                                              |On 4 February 2016                |
|                                              |                                  |
|                                              |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    o o o
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr Reynolds, counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Malins ("the FTTJ") promulgated on  6  August  2015,  in
    which she allowed the appellant's appeal against  the  refusal  of  her
    application for leave to remain on human rights grounds on 12  December
    2014.  She allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human
    rights grounds.


 2. For ease of  reference  and  continuity,  throughout  this  decision  I
    maintain the descriptions of the parties as appellant  and  respondent,
    as set out in the FTTJ's decision, notwithstanding it is the  Secretary
    of State who pursues this appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-Tier Tribunal,  but  given
    my reference to the appellant's personal circumstances, such  an  order
    is appropriate now.

 4. The respondent  considered  the  human  rights  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  She decided that the appellant had not demonstrated
    that she fulfilled the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), namely that
    there were very significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  into  the
    country to which she would have to go if  required  to  leave  the  UK.
    However, the FTTJ considered whether the appellant had demonstrated she
    had no ties  to  Nigeria,  ie  she  applied  the  previous  version  of
    276ADE(1)(vi).


 5. It was agreed by the parties' representatives before me that  the  FTTJ
    had  erroneously   applied   the   incorrect   version   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv). Paragraph 12(j) of the decision refers.   I  agree  with
    this analysis and find  that  the  decision  of  the  FTTJ  contains  a
    material error of law.

 6. There being no challenge to the FTTJ's findings of fact as regards  the
    circumstances of the appellant, I invited submissions  on  whether  the
    facts could be preserved and the decision remade by  me.   Both  agreed
    that should be the case.

 7. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted for the respondent  that  the  FTTJ  had
    found the relationship between the appellant and her mother in  the  UK
    fell short of that required for family ties.  There was  no  dependency
    between them. With regard to private life,  the  Article  8  assessment
    should be through the  lens  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Her  primary
    submission was that there were no exceptional circumstances.   However,
    in the alternative, she would rely on s117B. Limited weight  should  be
    given to the appellant's private life when her immigration  status  had
    been precarious. The appellant spoke English and would  be  financially
    secure. However, this did not bestow  a  grant  of  leave.  The  public
    interest was in her removal. She did not meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. She would be returning to Nigeria as a healthy adult
    female who had spent 19 years in her country of  nationality  and  only
    four years in the UK. Although she had immediate family members in  the
    UK, the oral evidence before the FTTJ was that contact with  people  in
    the UK could be maintained by  modern  methods  of  communication.  The
    appellant's mother could visit Nigeria with the  appellant's  siblings.
    The  appellant  was  receiving  monetary  assistance  and  that   could
    continue.  The appellant was well educated and  had  extensive  skills.
    She was not married. No reasons had been given as to why she could  not
    reintegrate into Nigerian society.  It  had  been  the  choice  of  the
    appellant's family to relocate to the UK without the  appellant.    The
    appellant had not made out her case that she would  be  an  unprotected
    individual in Nigeria; there was no evidence to suggest that she  would
    be subject to an enhanced degree of "threat" on return. It  was  normal
    for there to be a degree of apprehension in such circumstances.

 8. For the appellant, Mr Reynolds accepted  that  the  appellant  did  not
    fulfil  the  criteria  in  paragraph  276ADE.  He  submitted  that  her
    circumstances were such that they should be considered in the light  of
    the Article 8 jurisprudence outside the Immigration  Rules.   He  noted
    that  the  appellant  had  been  at  boarding  school  and  under   the
    guardianship of an adult friend when last in Nigeria in 2011. She would
    not have the benefit of such support and guidance on return. She was  a
    single Muslim woman  and  would  be  vulnerable  as  such  (albeit  her
    situation fell short of requiring protection).  Her close ties  to  her
    family, now living in the UK, rendered  her  circumstances  exceptional
    and  compelling  such  that  they  should  be  considered  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was acknowledged that limited weight  should  be
    given to her private  life  established  here  whilst  her  immigration
    status was precarious but it was submitted she was a useful  member  of
    society; she had used her time in the UK well to gain a  pharmaceutical
    degree. It would not be in the public interest for her to  be  removed.
    It was  thanks  to  her  close  relationship  with  her  family,  newly
    regained, that she had achieved so much.  She had no support network in
    Nigeria.

Discussion and Findings

 9. I rely  on  the  findings  of  the  FTTJ  as  regards  the  appellant's
    circumstances and, with that factual matrix in mind, make the following
    findings.


10. The appellant does not fulfil the criteria in the Immigration Rules  as
    regards her family or private life.  That was conceded by  Mr  Reynolds
    on her behalf and his concession was appropriate given the  appellant's
    circumstances.

11. It was submitted  that  the  matter  should  be  consider  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. I bear in mind the principles in R (Oludoyi & Ors) v
    SSHD (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT  00539  (IAC)
    where it was held that nothing in Nagre, R (on the  application  of)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct
    approach) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  or  Shahzad  (Article  8:
    legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC) indicated that  a  threshold  test
    was being suggested as opposed to making it clear that there was a need
    to look at the evidence to see if there  was  anything  which  had  not
    already been adequately considered in the context  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and which could lead to a  successful  Article  8  claim.   These
    authorities must not be read  as  seeking  to  qualify  or  fetter  the
    assessment of Article 8.  This was consistent with paragraph 128  of  R
    (MM & Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 that there was no  utility  in
    imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as   a   preliminary   to   a
    consideration of an Article 8 claim beyond the relevant criterion-based
    Rule. As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014]  EWHC  2712  (Admin),
    there was no prior threshold which dictates  whether  the  exercise  of
    discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the  assessment
    and the reasoning which were called  for  were  informed  by  threshold
    considerations.

12. I consider that the evidence has been considered adequately  under  the
    Immigration Rules insofar as the appellant is  concerned.  Nonetheless,
    given the submission that the appellant would be returned to Nigeria as
    a lone single Muslim female without family support, I go on to consider
    her appeal outside the  Immigration  Rules.  I  do  so  preserving  the
    findings of fact made in the First-tier Tribunal.

13. The appellant is an unmarried Muslim woman of  24.   According  to  the
    FTTJ (paragraph 12(c)), "Of her original birth family, her father  died
    in Nigeria, her mother and full brother and sister, are all settled  in
    the UK as citizens". Thus  I  find  she  has  no  immediate  family  in
    Nigeria; her immediate family is living in the UK.  However,  the  FTTJ
    did not find there was dependency between the appellant and her  mother
    "rather, a very close (and novel) mother adult daughter  relationship".
    The appellant  is  described  as  "unusually  close  to  her  aunt  and
    cousins". I am unable, in the absence of evidence to demonstrate it  or
    submissions in support, to find that this adult appellant has a  family
    life with either her mother or her aunt and cousins in the UK. She  has
    not demonstrated that Article 8 is engaged in her case.

14. Insofar as her private life is concerned, I  find  that  Article  8  is
    engaged, because there will be grave consequences for the appellant  as
    a result of the decision to remove her: she will be separated from  her
    family and friends in the UK and unable to  pursue  her  pharmaceutical
    career here.

15. It is conceded that the appellant is unable to  demonstrate  there  are
    very significant obstacles to  her  reintegration  into  Nigerian  life
    (paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)).  She does not fulfil any of the criteria  in
    the Immigration Rules for the grant of leave to remain.

16. I take  into  account  the  public  interest  factors  in  s117B.   The
    maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public interest
    (s117B(1); the appellant  speaks  fluent  English  and  has  undertaken
    studies in that language; she would be less of a  burden  on  taxpayers
    and is better able to integrate into society here. The appellant is not
    currently financially independent but is a graduate and is  capable  of
    becoming so.  That said, little weight should be  given  to  a  private
    life established at a time when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
    precarious (s117B(5)). In the present case, the appellant  was  granted
    leave to remain in the UK as a student. Thus her leave  to  remain  was
    granted for a specific purpose (to study)  and  for  periods  mirroring
    with her studies here.  Her leave to remain for that purpose expired in
    October 2014, a few months short of four years after her arrival.   The
    appellant's private  life,  including  her  relationship  with  various
    members of her family in the  UK,  has  been  established  during  this
    period. The appellant could have had no expectation of being  permitted
    to remain in this country once her studies had been completed.


17. The appellant has spent the majority of her life in Nigeria  where  she
    received most of her education. She left Nigeria at the age of  19,  as
    an adult.  Whilst it is said that she spent her latter years in Nigeria
    at boarding school, she would have  spent  school  holidays  elsewhere.
    Furthermore, I note that she returned to Nigeria in 2012, from the  UK,
    for a visit which suggests that, at that time, she had not lost ties to
    that country.  That said, I note that the FTTJ found that the appellant
    had "lost all ties" in Nigeria.  I do not depart from that finding  but
    I do consider the appellant would be able, on return, to  rekindle  her
    social ties, contacts and cultural links  to  that  country  where  she
    lived until the age of 19. Whilst she has no immediate family there,  I
    am satisfied that she would be able to rekindle former social  contacts
    and to call on friends in Nigeria to  give  her  practical  support  at
    least during the initial period of her return until she  re-establishes
    herself there.  It is  submitted  on  her  behalf  that  she  would  be
    returning as a single Muslim lady and that she would be vulnerable as a
    result.  I adopt the finding  of  the  FTTJ  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant would have "cause to feel nervous and anxious for her  safety
    to a sufficient extent to interfere in her freedom of action, including
    her peace of mind". However, she would have a degree of  financial  and
    practical support from her mother and relatives in  the  UK  and  could
    rekindle relationships with friends in Nigeria on return and this would
    assist her in resettling into her country of nationality. She would  be
    able to continue her religious practice and attend  a  mosque,  if  she
    wished.  Thus, although she would be nervous and anxious on return  and
    this might impact on her well-being, at least in the  short  term,  she
    would benefit from being able to practise her  faith  freely  and  from
    rekindling her relationships with former friends and contacts.

18. I also find that the appellant, who is highly educated  and  motivated,
    would be able to find work in Nigeria on return, using the  skills  and
    education she has obtained in the UK.  She is a resourceful young  lady
    who has achieved much in this country. Her education  and  skills  will
    enable her to resettle on return. Whilst she  lacks  the  support  from
    specific individuals which she had previously, she would  be  returning
    as a mature and educated adult with the potential  to  take  employment
    and live independently.

19. According to the FTTJ (paragraph 8), the appellant's oral  evidence  is
    that her mother would be  able  to  provide  her  with  some  financial
    support on return and contact could be maintained by "modern methods of
    communication such as facebook and Skype". This would also  assist  her
    in setting herself up, at least in the short term,  on  return  pending
    her relocating her friends there and  finding  permanent  accommodation
    and employment.

20. Taking the evidence in the round I am unable to find that the degree of
    interference with the appellant's right to a  private  life  (including
    her life with her family  in  the  UK)  is  such  as  to  outweigh  the
    respondent's legitimate objective of maintaining effective  immigration
    control.

21. I set aside the decision of the  FTTJ  and  remake  it  dismissing  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

Decision

22. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  an
    error on a point of law.


23. I set aside the decision.

24. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed           A M Black                   Date        1 February 2016




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black







Direction  Regarding  Anonymity  -  Rule  14,  Tribunal   Procedure   (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed           A M Black                   Date        1 February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


