

                                            [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00616/2014


                                         THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination Promulgated|
|On August 21, 2014              |On August 22, 2014       |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                               MR MUSTAFA BERK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Braitch RB
      Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, born November 26, 1979, is a citizen of Turkey. On  July
    12, 2013 the appellant applied for a residence card as the  partner  of
    Grazyna Barbara Wiacek.

 3. The respondent refused his application on October 2, 2013 on the  basis
    she was not satisfied the appellant and Ms Wiacek  were  in  a  durable
    relationship.

 4. On October 17, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. And Regulation 26 of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Williams
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on April  24,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on May 12, 2014 he  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal under article 8 ECHR. He did however find the appellant was  not
    in a durable relationship.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on May 21,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Plumptre on June
    24, 2014. She found the FtTJ may have erred because:

     a. He failed to consider the provisions of Appendix FM  and  paragraph
        276ADE and failed to follow the approach  set  out  in  R  (on  the
        application of) Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).


     b. By not first considering the best interests of Adam  as  a  primary
        consideration  rather  than  considering  his  interests  last   at
        paragraph 29.

     c. He gave comparative lesser weight to  the  appellant's  immigration
        history, which he termed as "appalling".

 7. The appellant was in attendance  but  was  not  required  to  give  any
    evidence.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 8. Mr McVeety relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted the FtTJ erred
    by  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the  2006  Regulations   and   then
    immediately proceeded to consider  the  appeal  under  article  8  ECHR
    without any regard to the approach set out in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640
    (IAC) and Nagre. This was a  material  error.  Additionally,  the  FtTJ
    treated  Adam  as  a  trump  card  that  outweighed   his   "appalling"
    immigration history despite the adverse findings made  on  his  contact
    claims. Whilst Adam was a primary consideration more weight should have
    been given to his "appalling" immigration history and the fact  he  had
    never had any lawful status.


 9. Mr Dhanji agreed the determination was not perfect  but  there  was  no
    material error.  The appellant never argued the Immigration  Rules  for
    private/family life were met and the failure by the FtTJ to mention  it
    does not amount to an error because the FtTJ proceeded on the basis the
    Rules were not met. Having decided article 8 was engaged the  FtTJ  did
    consider the best  interests  of  the  Adam  and  at  the  end  of  the
    determination  he  concluded  that  this  outweighed  his   immigration
    history.


    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


10. The FtTJ had before  him  a  bundle  of  documents,  including  witness
    statements from the appellant and his partner. He  took  oral  evidence
    and having heard that evidence he rejected the appellant's claim to  be
    in a durable relationship. His findings  between  paragraphs  [17]  and
    [21] are quite damning with him finding:


     a. The appellant's credibility was undermined by his poor  immigration
        history and his propensity to act in a deceptive and evasive manner
        throughout his time in the United Kingdom.


     b. The claimed durability of the relationship was  undermined  by  the
        inconsistencies in the evidence regarding the frequency of  contact
        with Adam.

     c. The appellant's "partner" evidence was also full of  errors,  which
        she would not have made if she had  regularly  taken  Adam  to  his
        house as she claimed.

     d. The witness Mr Celebi, claimed he drove from Shotton  to  Blackpool
        (160 mile trip) two to three times a week to take the appellant  to
        his partner's lacked credibility bearing in mind the appellant only
        live three miles apart.

     e. There  was  a  lack  of  evidence  that  they  were  in  a  durable
        relationship.


11. Having dismissed the application under the Regulations the FtTJ  should
    have then considered whether the appellant met  the  Immigration  Rules
    and in particular Appendix FM and paragraphs 248A and 276ADE.


12. As this appeal was lodged after July 2012 it was incumbent on the  FtTJ
    to follow the approach set out in Gulshan and Nagre. However,  what  he
    did was to immediately consider his article 8 claim.

13. The FtTJ was probably not assisted by the representatives who  did  not
    address him on either article 8 or the Immigration Rules.  However,  as
    the appellant raised  article  8  in  his  grounds  of  appeal  it  was
    incumbent on the FtTJ to address the issue in his determination.

14. His approach is flawed because before considering an  article  8  claim
    outside of the Rules (assuming the Rules cannot be met)  he  must  find
    circumstances in which refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the individual such that refusal  of  the  application
    would not be proportionate.

15. In paragraph [30] of his determination he found Adam  should  have  the
    opportunity to grow up knowing his father and that the only  reasonable
    place that could happen was in the United Kingdom. The FtTJ effectively
    treated the child as a trump card, which the Courts have made clear  is
    incorrect. He belatedly referred to the appellant's immigration history
    but despite finding it appalling he failed  to  properly  consider  the
    importance of maintaining  proper  immigration  control  especially  in
    circumstances where the appellant had entered the country illegally and
    had remained here illegally since July 2007.

16. In all the circumstances I am satisfied there is a material error and I
    therefore set aside the article 8 decision.

17. Mr Dhanji agreed no further oral evidence was necessary and  I  invited
    the representatives to make final submissions firstly on the  issue  of
    whether article 8  should  be  considered  outside  of  the  Rules  and
    secondly, if it should be, whether removal was proportionate.

    SUBMISSIONS


18. Mr McVeety submitted that the appellant had applied to remain  here  as
    an EEA national based on a durable relationship. The FtTJ had  rejected
    this claim and  made  adverse  findings  on  the  alleged  relationship
    between the appellant and Ms Wiacek and Adam. Their relationship had no
    legal status in the United Kingdom for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
    determination and whilst Adam is his son the level of contact was  less
    than he had claimed. The FtTJ rejected all  the  evidence  although  he
    accepted there was  some  contact.  The  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    Regulations and he could not meet the Immigration Rules. The Rules were
    a complete code as they offered him a number of options to stay  namely
    as a parent having contact (Paragraph 248A), as a parent of a child and
    based on his private life. He failed to meet any of these Rules and  in
    light of the FtTJ's finding on the level of contact a refusal would not
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual.


19. Mr Dhanji submitted that although the appellant could not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules there would be  good  grounds  for  considering  this
    appeal outside of the Rules. There was a young child who  was  entitled
    to see both his parents and it was  not  the  child's  fault  that  his
    father had a poor immigration history.  It  was  in  the  child's  best
    interests to have direct contact with the appellant and this is why the
    appeal  should  be  considered  outside  of  the  Rules.   Whilst   the
    Immigration Act 2014 applied to this appeal it should be noted that the
    appellant could speak some English and was able to work and  not  be  a
    burden on the State. If he were removed then his child would be  unable
    to see him  because  it  seemed  they  were  no  longer  in  a  durable
    relationship. Whilst his relationship took place when  his  immigration
    status was precarious this was only one factor  to  take  account.  The
    appellant's appeal should be allowed under article 8 ECHR.

    CONSIDERATION OF SUBSTANTIVE APPEAL

20. The issues in this appeal were as follows:-


     a. Did the Appellant meet the Immigration Rules.
     b. If not, were there compelling reasons to consider it outside of the
        Immigration  Rules  that  would  result  in   unjustifiably   harsh
        consequences for him.
     c.  If  the  case  was  considered  outside  of  the  Rules   was   it
        proportionate to remove him.

21. The appellant was unable to meet the Immigration  Rules  despite  being
    able to apply, in theory, under a variety of  routes.  If  he  met  the
    Rules he could have applied to stay on the basis of  contact  with  his
    son or under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.


22. The Immigration Rules do offer a route to remain but the appellant  was
    unable to meet them. Significantly, his unlawful status  and  the  fact
    the child is not settled here meant he would never be able to meet  the
    Rules.

23. I am invited to consider the appeal under article 8 ECHR. The Courts in
    MM (Lebanon) & Ors, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State  for
    the  Home  Department  &  Anor  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  considered  the
    approaches in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720
    Admin and confirmed the approach to be taken.

  24. The Court of Appeal in MM examined numerous authorities and stated:


         "128. ... In Nagre the new  rules  were  themselves  attempting  to
         cover, generally,  circumstances  where  an  individual  should  be
         allowed to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds... Nagre does  not
         add anything to the debate,  save  for  the  statement  that  if  a
         particular person is outside the rule then he has  to  demonstrate,
         as a preliminary to a consideration outside the rule, that  he  has
         an arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting  leave
         to remain outside  the  rules.    I  cannot  see  much  utility  in
         imposing this  further,  intermediary,  test.    If  the  applicant
         cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or  there  is  not  a
         further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be  determined  by  the
         relevant decision-maker.


         134. Where the relevant group  of  Immigration  Rules,  upon  their
         proper construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing  with  a
         person's Convention rights in the context of  a  particular  IR  or
         statutory provision, such as in the case  of  "foreign  criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with that  code,  although  references  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality  exercise.    But  if   the   relevant   group   of
         Immigration  Rules  is  not  such  a  "complete  code"   then   the
         proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.


         159. ... It seems clear from the statement of Lord Dyson MR  in  MF
         (Nigeria) and Sales J in Nagre that a court would have to  consider
         first whether the  new  MIR  and  the  "Exceptional  circumstances"
         created a "complete code" and,  if  they  did,  precisely  how  the
         "proportionality test"  would  be  applied  by  reference  to  that
         "code".


         162. ... Firstly, paragraph GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM states that  the
         provision of the family route  "takes  into  account  the  need  to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of children  in  the  UK",  which
         indicates that the  Secretary  of  State  has  had  regard  to  the
         statutory duty.   Secondly, there is no legal requirement that  the
         Immigration Rules should provide that the  best  interests  of  the
         child should be determinative.   Section 55 is not a  "trump  card"
         to be played whenever the interests of a child arise..."


  25. I have to consider whether a refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably
      harsh consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  refusal  of  the
      application would not be proportionate.


  26. The FtTJ found he was here illegally (since 2007)  and  subject  to  a
      removal that was served on him over three  years  ago.   Despite  this
      precarious position he then entered into a relationship  that  led  to
      Adam being conceived. The FtTJ rejected his claim  of  regular  access
      although found he  had  some  contact.  That  finding  is  significant
      because the appellant is not a large figure in Adam's life and  whilst
      he has a role to play that role appears to be  minimal  based  on  the
      FtTJ's findings.

  27. If the appellant had been in a durable relationship he would have been
      granted a residence card to stay and he would have been  able  to  see
      his son. He is unable to stay under the Immigration Rules  because  he
      is here illegally.

  28. Whilst it is incumbent to consider Adam's  interests  I  am  satisfied
      that those interests are covered by the  Rules  and  Regulations.  The
      appellant's relationship with Adam was limited and  such  relationship
      could be maintained by other means.

  29. Based on the evidence presented I am  unable  to  find  good  arguable
      grounds or compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under
      Appendix FM, paragraphs 248A or 276ADE or the 2006  Regulations  where
      refusal would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
      appellant.

  30. In these circumstances I find there is no basis to allow  this  appeal
      under article 8 ECHR.

  31. Even if there had been good reason I am satisfied that I would have to
      have regard to Section 117B as inserted into the 2002 Act  by  Section
      19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.  Relevant  to  any  assessment  on
      proportionality would have been Sections 117B(3), (4),  (5)  and  (6).
      Section 117B(6) recognises genuine and subsisting relationships with a
      qualifying child but Adam is neither a  British  citizen  nor  has  he
      lived here for seven years. The remaining  sections  of  117B  do  not
      assist the appellant. I am satisfied that even if article 8  had  been
      engaged  it  would  not  have  been  disproportionate  to  remove  the
      appellant.


    DECISION


32. There is a material error of law and I set aside the original decision.




33. I have remade the article 8 decision and I  dismiss  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

34. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award, as the appeal did not succeed.

Signed:                           Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
