

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00057/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Birmingham Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 22nd February 2019                      |On: 26th February 2019         |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Norman, Counsel instructed by Bassi Solicitors


                            DECISION and REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of  India  born  in  1985.   On  the  28th
    September 2017 her appeal was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes on human  rights  grounds.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision.








    The Scope of the Grant of Permission


 2. Permission was granted in limited terms by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Norton-Taylor.  The Respondent was refused permission to argue that the
    determination contained contradictory findings as to whether  HK  would
    have the support of her family should she be returned to India.  Before
    me the Respondent did not seek to renew that aspect of his grounds.


 3. Permission was granted to the Secretary of  State  to  argue  that  the
    determination was flawed for an insufficient clarity as  to  the  legal
    framework of the appeal,  or  the  basis  upon  which  the  appeal  was
    allowed. The grant would also appear to  extend  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's  complaint  that  the  medical  evidence  was  not  capable  of
    establishing a case under Article 3.



    Error of Law

 4. I am satisfied that if the First-tier Tribunal purported to allow  this
    appeal simply on the grounds that HK is unwell, either  with  reference
    to Articles 3 or 8, it erred in so doing.   It is  trite  human  rights
    law that a case can only succeed on health grounds where  the  evidence
    demonstrates that a very high threshold of harm has been  reached,  and
    there is insufficient reasoning in the determination to support such  a
    finding.


 5. I am further satisfied that the  Secretary  of  State  is  entitled  to
    complain that the structure of the determination is unclear.  There  is
    no clear delineation between the consideration of the  applicable  rule
    (276ADE(1)(vi)) and Article 8 'outside of the  rules'.  Insofar  as  it
    might be thought that the Tribunal found  for  HK  in  respect  of  the
    latter, then any such analysis would be flawed for a failure  to  weigh
    in the balance the public interest factors set out in section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002

 6. I am not however satisfied that any errors in  this  determination  are
    such that it should be set aside. That is because at paragraph  22  the
    First-tier Tribunal makes this finding:  "in  the  circumstances  there
    would be very significant obstacles to her reintegration in India  that
    could not be overcome".  Although she agreed that this would amount  to
    a finding that the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  were  met,
    Mrs Aboni submitted that this finding was unsupported by reasoning.

 7.  Setting  to  one  side  Ms  Norman's  complaint  that  this   was   an
    impermissible variation of the grounds,  it  is  a  submission  without
    merit. The basis of the decision is clear. At paragraph 19  the  First-
    tier Tribunal finds that this is a young woman who would not  have  the
    support of her family should she return to India. At paragraph 21  (and
    indeed throughout the determination) the Tribunal  makes  reference  to
    her exceedingly fragile mental health, and to  the  fact  that  she  is
    emotionally withdrawn and dependent upon  her  cousins  in  the  United
    Kingdom, to whom she is close.   The background to  those  matters  was
    not lost on the  Tribunal:  6  years  of  domestic  violence  including
    coercive and controlling behaviour by her in-laws, and  HK  facing  the
    'blame' for the fact that she did not fall pregnant during the currency
    of her marriage.


 8. The reasoning was therefore clear, and having  had  an  opportunity  to
    read the medical evidence that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
    find it was manifestly open to the Tribunal to  reach  the  conclusions
    that it did.  Consultant Psychiatrist Dr Jayaprakash Rajendran, in  his
    detailed report, diagnoses a severe episode of clinical depression  and
    expresses a concern that even thoughts of her  parents  may  not  be  a
    sufficient 'protective factor' to prevent KH committing  suicide.   The
    conclusions of the Psychiatrist Dr Rajendran are borne out  by  the  GP
    notes which detail repeated referrals for depression, anxiety,  stress,
    self-harm and indeed the domestic violence which formed the backdrop to
    HK finding herself her current predicament.   That  HK  is  emotionally
    (as well as practically) reliant on her cousins in the  United  Kingdom
    does not appear to have been contested. Nor does the Secretary of State
    appear to have submitted at any stage that  this  extremely  vulnerable
    young woman would be  able  to  'integrate'  in  India  without  family
    support there.

 9. For that reason I do not set the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    aside.


      Anonymity

10. Having regard to  the  facts  in  this  case,  involving  a  vulnerable
    appellant with mental health  concerns,  I  am  prepared  to  make  the
    following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".














    Decision


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


12. An anonymity order is in place.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            22nd February
                                    2019
