
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN/sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00135/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 01 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                Mr oumar bah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION nOt made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy, Solicitor, Rana & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bart-Stewart sitting at Hendon  Magistrates'
    Court on 1 July 2015) dismissing his appeal  against  the  decision  to
    remove him under Section 10 of the  Immigration  Act  1999,  his  human
    rights claim having been refused.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make
    an anonymity direction, and I  did  not  consider  that  the  appellant
    requires to be accorded anonymity for these proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Ivory Coast, whose date of birth  is  26
    February 1983.  He claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom  on  27
    January 2003 using a passport  in  someone  else's  name.   He  claimed
    asylum on 28 January 2003, and his asylum claim was refused on 11 March
    2003.  At the same time he was issued with an IS15A document  notifying
    him of his liability to removal.  His appeal against the refusal of his
    asylum claim was eventually dismissed in a decision  promulgated  on  7
    June 2006, and his appeal rights became exhausted on 16 June 2006.

 3. The appellant submitted an application for leave to remain outside  the
    Rules on 14 January 2010, and his application was refused on  17  March
    2010.  On 30 March 2010 he submitted an application for leave to remain
    on Article 8 grounds, and this was refused on 1 July 2010 with no right
    of appeal.  On 28 August 2011 the Home Office agreed to reconsider  the
    decision of 1 July 2010.

 4. According to the eventual  reconsideration  letter  dated  10  December
    2010, between 1 July 2010 and 28 November 2014 the  appellant  and  his
    legal representatives made repeated representations  in  correspondence
    claiming that his removal from the  United  Kingdom  would  breach  his
    rights under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 5. On 10 December 2014 the respondent gave her reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's human rights claim on reconsideration.  In respect  to  his
    claim under Article 3, the respondent rehearsed the findings made by  a
    panel of Immigration Judges when dismissing his appeal on 8 June  2006.
    They found that he did not have a well-founded fear of persecution  for
    a Convention reason on return to Ivory Coast, and also that the refusal
    of asylum would not constitute a breach of Article 3 ECHR.   They  also
    found that no other Article of the Human Rights Convention was engaged.

 6. Consideration had been given as to whether he qualified for a grant  of
    leave under Appendix FM on account of his relationship with his partner
    Mariama Dalada Bah.  She was a national of Sierra Leone, who  had  been
    granted ILR in 2006 and had become a  naturalised  British  citizen  in
    2007.  He had provided a marriage certificate dated  20  November  2009
    showing that he was married to Mrs Bah.  It was accepted  that  he  met
    the relationship requirements of Appendix FM.  He was  on  a  reporting
    regime with temporary admission, however E-LTRP.2.2 allowed him to take
    advantage of paragraph EX.1(b).  Although he and his partner were in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, and his partner was settled in the
    United Kingdom, this did not mean that both of them were unable to live
    together in Ivory Coast in order to continue their family  life  there.
    Although his wife had been granted leave to remain, it was  not  for  a
    protection reason.  He stated that the official  national  language  of
    Ivory Coast was French, whereas his wife did not  speak  French.   This
    was not considered to be an insurmountable obstacle to his wife joining
    him "as a family unit" in Ivory Coast.

 7. A  decision  had  been  made  on  exceptional  circumstances,  applying
    paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules.  They had been  trying  for  a
    child.  The evidence showed that IVF treatment was available  in  Ivory
    Coast, and therefore the fertility treatment that  his  wife  had  been
    seeking in the UK was not considered to be a compelling circumstance or
    reason as to why he should be provided with a grant of leave.

 8. It had been considered whether his claimed length of residence  in  the
    United Kingdom had been accrued for reasons outside his  control.   The
    answer was in the negative. He could have left the  country  after  his
    asylum claim was refused in March 2003.  But he chose to appeal against
    the decision.  Following his appeal rights becoming exhausted  in  June
    2006, he should have left the country at that point.  Instead,  he  had
    chosen to remain in the United Kingdom illegally, and there was a  very
    significant period of time when he was not in  contact  with  the  Home
    Office.  It was considered his residence in the United Kingdom had been
    by no means beyond his control, and accordingly his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom was appropriate.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. Both parties were legally represented before Judge  Bart-Stewart.   The
    judge received oral evidence from the  appellant  and  his  wife.   The
    appellant's bundle compiled for the hearing contained  some  background
    evidence  relating  to  Ivory  Coast,  and  a  small  amount   of   NHS
    correspondence relating to Mrs Bah.

10. The Ivory Coast 2015 Crime and Safety Report  said  that  although  the
    government needed to make considerable progress in restoring peace  and
    security, serious security challenges remained as the 2015 presidential
    elections approached.  The government had made economic and  commercial
    development its top priority and achieved significant growth  rates  in
    2013  and  2014.   Nevertheless,  the  average  have  already  not  yet
    benefited from this growth or from the renewed investor  confidence  in
    the economy.  The Ivory Coast ranked 168 out of 186 for the UN's  Human
    Development Index in 2013, and nearly half the population  (46%)  lived
    below the international poverty line of 2 US dollars per day.

11. At page 12 of the bundle there was travel advice  downloaded  from  the
    gov.uk website.  Under the  heading  of  security,  it  said  that  the
    security situation at Abidjan could deteriorate at short notice.  While
    the risk of return  to  the  levels  of  conflict  experienced  between
    December 2010 and May 2011 was low, travellers staying  longer  in  the
    Ivory Coast should continually review  personal  security  arrangements
    and take professional security  advice.   Travellers  were  advised  to
    avoid all large public gatherings and public rallies and to adopt a low
    profile, particularly at night.

12. On the topic of local travel to various specified western  regions,  in
    particular the area to the west  of  Duekoue  up  to  the  border  with
    Liberia, this was not advisable, owing to the risk of serious  violence
    by local militias.  A fatal clash between militias and security  forces
    had taken place in this area as recently as February 2015.   Travellers
    were advised to seek professional local advice before embarking on  any
    travel to these areas.

13. The NHS documentation in the appellant's bundle  related  to  fertility
    treatment undertaken by the appellant's partner  at  the  beginning  of
    2011.

14. In his oral evidence, the appellant said he  did  not  believe  it  was
    reasonable and proportionate to expect him and his wife to relocate  to
    Ivory Coast, given the respondent's warning to British nationals not to
    travel to Ivory Coast save for essential reasons.  She had  applied  to
    come to the UK during the civil war in Sierra Leone,  and  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect her to place herself at risk in  a  country  where
    security could not be guaranteed.

15. In cross-examination, the appellant confirmed that both he and his wife
    spoke the Fula dialect which was spoken both in Ivory Coast and  Sierra
    Leone.  His wife still had her Sierra Leone passport.  He said that she
    could not live in Sierra Leone as she was a student,  and  she  was  on
    medication for infertility and diabetes.  He agreed that his  wife  was
    aware of his immigration status as soon as they met.

16. In her evidence, Mrs  Bah  said  that  the  situation  in  Ivory  Coast
    reminded her of Sierra Leone, and she did not  want  to  go  through  a
    similar experience.   She  was  receiving  treatment  from  her  GP,  a
    consultant and a gynaecologist and it was unlikely that  the  treatment
    she was receiving here would be readily available or affordable abroad,
    as her husband was not  from  any  of  the  major  cities.   In  cross-
    examination, she initially said that her Sierra  Leonean  passport  had
    expired.  She then said she given up her  Sierra  Leonean  nationality,
    and  then  changed  her  mind  and  said  she  had  not  given  up  her
    nationality, and her passport was at  home.   She  could  not  live  in
    Sierra Leone because of the war.  She had run  away  from  the  war  in
    2002.  She also could not live there because of her health.  She saw  a
    doctor every three months.  She had looked  into  treatment  in  Sierra
    Leone, but there was "no way".  She took insulin twice a week.  It  was
    very tough in Sierra Leone with regards to medication.

17. In his closing submissions on behalf of the respondent, Mr Lowton  said
    that the appellant had to show insurmountable obstacles to family  life
    being carried on abroad.  He and his  wife  had  a  choice  whether  to
    return  to  Sierra  Leone  or  Ivory  Coast.   There  was  no  language
    difficulty.  The appellant had entered the United Kingdom illegally and
    had made a false asylum claim.  He had entered  into  the  relationship
    when he had no leave.  He relied on Agyarko [2015] EWCA  Civ  440.   He
    submitted there was nothing exceptional, and also referred  to  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act, noting that  family  life  had  been  established
    while the appellant was in the UK illegally.

18. Mr Adophy, who appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant,  relied  on  his
    skeleton argument and the documentary evidence relating to Ivory Coast.
     He submitted that the case  was  distinguishable  from  Agyarko.   The
    appellant had been granted a certificate of approval to marry  and  had
    been on reporting conditions since 2010.  He submitted  the  old  Rules
    should apply because the Article 8 application was made  in  2010.   He
    submitted there was a legitimate expectation of leave being granted and
    he also referred to the delay on the  respondent's  part  in  making  a
    decision.  He stated the appellant's private and family life  had  been
    enhanced by the tardy response of the respondent.

19. In a subsequent decision, the judge set out her findings and reasons at
    paragraphs [15] to [20].  The judge continued as follows  in  paragraph
    [21]:

         (Note: judge to insert paragraph with regards to Section 117B).

The Application for Permission to Appeal

20. The appellant applied for permission to  appeal,  contending  that  the
    judge had erred in law by not engaging with any of the issues raised by
    way of appeal.  The judge had also erred in holding at  paragraph  [18]
    that there was no medical evidence before her with regards to Mrs Bah's
    medical history.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

21. On 17 December 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher granted permission
    to appeal, noting that the decision appeared to be incomplete,  in  the
    light of the contents of paragraph [21].  There  was  little,  if  any,
    evidence that the judge had engaged with the original grounds of appeal
    and no firm conclusions were reached by her.  In the circumstances,  it
    was clearly arguable that the judge had erred in law.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the hearing before me, Ms Fijiwala said she was  resiling  from  the
    position taken by her colleague in a Rule 24 response dated  4  January
    2016.  In the Rule 24 response, Ms Powell  of  the  Specialist  Appeals
    Team  stated  that  the  respondent  did  not  oppose  the  appellant's
    application for permission to  appeal,  and  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal in a fresh oral (continuance) hearing.  The reason
    for withdrawing the apparent concession made by Ms Powell was  that  on
    analysis there was no material error of law, having regard, among other
    things, to the case  of  Agyarko  which  the  judge  had  discussed  at
    paragraph [19] of her decision.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

23. It is essential that the losing party is informed as to the reasons why
    he or she has lost.  The findings and  reasons  given  by  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart are incomplete.  Not only has she not addressed Section 117B of
    the 2002 Act, but more  generally  she  has  not  made  some  essential
    findings.  She has not expressed a conclusion on the  following  issues
    raised by Mr Adophy or by the respondent in the refusal decision:

      a) whether the respondent was wrong to consider the  Article  8  claim
         through the prism of Appendix FM, given that  the  application  was
         originally made before the introduction of the new Rules;

      b) whether the appellant qualified for leave to remain  under  EX.1(b)
         of Appendix FM; or

      c) if not,  whether  there  were  compelling  circumstances  (such  as
         legitimate expectation and/or delay on the part of the  respondent)
         such as to justify the appellant being  granted  Article  8  relief
         outside the Rules.

24. Justice must not only be done, but must  be  seen  to  be  done.   Even
    though there is a strong argument that the judge's answers to the above
    questions can be inferred from her  reasoning  in  paragraphs  [15]  to
    [20], I do not consider that it would  be  proper  to  dispose  of  the
    appeal on this basis.  Accordingly, I find the decision is vitiated  by
    a material error of law such that it must be set aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

25. The parties were in agreement that I should remake the decision on  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, taking account of  Mr
    Adophy's development before me of the case which he had advanced before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

26. In his skeleton argument prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    first point taken by Mr Adophy is that the Secretary of State had  been
    wrong to decide the application by reference  to  the  post  July  2012
    Rules.  He relied on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Edgehill  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402, and submitted that the decision  in  Edgehill
    was not affected by the later decision in Singh v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

27. I explored this proposition with Mr Adophy in  oral  argument,  and  he
    conceded that he had taken a bad point.  He accepted that the Court  of
    Appeal decision in Singh established that the Secretary  of  State  was
    right to consider the application through the prism of Appendix FM.

28. It is convenient at this stage to address a subsidiary point raised  by
    Mr Adophy in the skeleton argument when relying on Edgehill.   He  said
    that, but for the respondent's delay, the appellant would have had  the
    benefit  of  relying  upon  the  now  defunct  paragraph  395  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  I find that the appellant has not  been  materially
    disadvantaged by losing the benefit of relying upon  paragraph  395  of
    the Rules.  Broadly the same  matters  which  arose  for  consideration
    under paragraph 395 of the Rules  now  arise  for  consideration  under
    paragraph 353B of the Rules, which the Secretary of State considered at
    some length in the decision under appeal.

29. Mr Adophy did not advance a case in  his  skeleton  argument  for  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to family life between the appellant
    and his partner being carried on in Ivory Coast.  The way he put it was
    that the current security situation in the Ivory Coast coupled with the
    medical history of the partner was sufficient to find that it  was  not
    reasonable to expect family  life  to  continue  outside  the  UK.   In
    support of this proposition, he cited Sanade  and  VW  (Uganda)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 5.  As was held in  Agyarko  at  paragraph  [21],  the  phrase
    "insurmountable obstacles" as used  in  EX.1  clearly  imposes  a  high
    hurdle to be overcome by an applicant for leave  to  remain  under  the
    Rules.  The test is significantly more demanding than a  mere  test  of
    whether it would be reasonable to expect a  couple  to  continue  their
    family life outside the United Kingdom.  I find that the appellant  has
    not discharged the burden of proving that he meets the requirements  of
    EX.1(b), and in reality Mr  Adophy  does  not  contend  otherwise.   By
    invoking the concept of reasonableness, he is contending that this is a
    case where the appellant should be accorded Article  8  relief  outside
    the Rules, in circumstances where the high threshold of EX.1(b) is  not
    met.

30. For the sake of completeness, I also find that it  is  not  shown  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to family life being carried  on  in
    Sierra Leone as an alternative to Ivory Coast. Although Mrs Bah claimed
    that she could not access medical treatment for infertility or diabetes
    in Sierra Leone,  this  claim  was  not  supported  by  any  background
    evidence in the appellant's bundle.  The limited background evidence in
    the  appellant's  bundle  was  solely  directed  towards  the  security
    situation in the Ivory Coast.

31. The appellant did no bring forward any background evidence  to  counter
    the evidence referred to in the  refusal  decision,  which  is  to  the
    effect that treatment for infertility is available in Ivory Coast.

32. Turning to an  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules,  I  accept  that
    questions 1 and 2  of  the  Razgar  test  should  be  answered  in  the
    appellant's favour.  Questions 3 and 4  of  the  Razgar  test  must  be
    answered in favour of the  respondent.   On  the  crucial  question  of
    proportionality, Mr Adophy relies on the fact that  the  appellant  was
    given a certificate  of  approval  to  marry  in  2009  when  the  then
    Secretary of State was fully aware that the appellant had no  leave  to
    remain.  Therefore, he submits it is unreasonable for the  Home  Office
    to seek to remove the appellant six years later.  He also  submits  the
    appellant has not contributed to the delay in any manner whatsoever.

33. I do not consider that there is any merit in  these  submissions.   The
    fact that the appellant obtained a certificate of approval to marry Mrs
    Bah did not give rise to a legitimate expectation that he would be able
    to carry on family life here, as opposed to family life elsewhere.   In
    refusing his initial application to remain in the United Kingdom on the
    basis of his relationship to Mrs Bah, the Secretary of  State  informed
    the appellant in a letter dated 1 July 2010 (pages  27  to  28  of  the
    appellant's bundle) that it was  open  to  the  appellant's  spouse  to
    return with him to Ivory Coast while he applied for entry clearance  to
    return  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis   of   his   marriage.
    Alternatively, she might remain in the United  Kingdom  to  support  an
    application which he made from abroad for entry clearance on the  basis
    of his marriage. In considering this application, the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer would, in addition to the requirements of the Rules, take  into
    account the right to a family and private life under  Article  8.   The
    appellant was informed that the application had been considered in line
    with the recent decision of Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department.  The Secretary of State was satisfied it was  proportionate
    to interfere with his family life for a short period.  As the appellant
    had used deception to enter the United Kingdom and had remained in  the
    full knowledge that he had no legal immigration status,  the  Secretary
    of State was satisfied that his removal was  conducive  to  the  public
    good and was therefore proportionate.

34. It has always been open to  the  appellant  to  follow  the  course  of
    conduct recommended in the letter of 1 July 2010.   The  delay  in  the
    respondent making a decision on  reconsideration  does  not  avail  the
    appellant, as he had no legitimate expectation of achieving a different
    outcome from previous outcomes.  He has  never  been  absolved  of  the
    responsibility of regularising his status by returning to  Ivory  Coast
    to seek entry clearance, instead of seeking to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom through protracted representations.

35. Following AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC), there is nothing  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act which materially assists  the  appellant's
    case  on  proportionality.   What  is  firmly  against   him   is   the
    consideration that he has established family life with Mrs Bah when, to
    the knowledge of both of them, his status here  was  unlawful.   Little
    weight can be attached to  such  family  life  in  the  proportionality
    assessment.  The couple  face  a  reasonable  choice.   The  choice  is
    between either  settling  in  Sierra  Leone  or  Ivory  Coast,  or  the
    appellant returning to Ivory Coast on his own with a  view  to  seeking
    entry clearance as the spouse of a settled person.   I  find  that  the
    interference consequential upon the decision to  remove  the  appellant
    strikes a fair balance  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  rights  and
    interests of the appellant and Mrs Bah, and, on  the  other  hand,  the
    wider interests of society.  It  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
    public end sought be achieved,  namely  the  maintenance  of  firm  and
    effective immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal against removal is dismissed under  the  Rules  and
also outside the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
