
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00493/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 17 February 2016                  |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                       HARPREET KAUR AJIT SINGH MUNDE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon (counsel), instructed by Aschfords Law,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  Designated
First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Manuell  promulgated  on  26  June  2015,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 17 May 1985 and is a national of India.

4.    On 7 December 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for an EEA residence card.

The Judge's Decision

5.    The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Designated  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Manuell ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 24 October  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Plimmer gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "This is a case in which credibility was in dispute and it was  clearly
    necessary for the appellant to  have  an  opportunity  to  address  any
    issues of concern to the Judge. In addition, the Judge was  aware  that
    if an adjournment was not granted the appellant would be  unrepresented
    at the hearing. In all the circumstances it is arguable that the  Judge
    acted unfairly in refusing to  adjourn  the  hearing.  As  set  out  in
    Nwaigwe (adjournment; fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC) the  question  is
    not whether the Judge acted reasonably  but  whether  the  Judge  acted
    fairly.

    "2.    The renewal grounds set out two grounds of appeal and permission
    is granted in relation to those grounds only"

The Hearing

7     (a)   Mr Solomon, for the appellant, told me  that  he  had  discussed
this case with the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer and  that  parties'
agents have agreed that the decision contains a material error  of  law.  He
adopted the terms of the grounds of appeal and told  me  that  the  material
error of law is found that at [6], where the Judge refused  to  adjourn  the
appeal. He referred me to Nwiagwe (adjournment; fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  418
(IAC), and told  me  that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  refuse  to  grant  an
adjournment, and that the Judge's forthright findings about the  appellant's
lack of credibility are  demonstrative  of  the  lack  of  fairness  in  the
procedure adopted by the Judge. He took me to the  grant  of  permission  to
appeal, made by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  on  24  October  2015,  and
adapted Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer's reasons for granting leave to  appeal
as part of his submission.

    (b)    He urged me to set the decision aside and to remit this case  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new. When  I  suggested  that  I
could hear evidence and decide  the  case  today  (in  accordance  with  the
directions issued to parties in advance of today's hearing), he referred  me
to  the  President's  guidance  and  argued  that  because  there  had  been
unfairness in the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 22nd June  2015,  the  most
appropriate course of action is to follow Presidential  guidance  and  remit
this case to the First-tier.

8.    Mr Bramble, for the respondent, agreed that the  decision  contains  a
material error  of  law.  He  did  not  agree  entirely  with  Mr  Solomon's
submission. Instead he told me that the was no error of law in  refusing  to
adjourn the case, but having decided to deal with the case  in  the  absence
of the appellant, (Mr Bramble argued that) the Judge's findings in  relation
to the appellant's honesty at [16] and the Judge's findings in  relation  to
credibility are flawed because those findings could not  be  tested  against
the appellant's oral evidence. He urged me to set  the  decision  aside  and
remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to determine of new.

Analysis

9.    The 2014  Procedure  Rules  Rule  4(3)(h)  empowers  the  Tribunal  to
adjourn a hearing. Rule 2 sets  out  the  overriding  objectives  under  the
Rules which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when  exercising  any
power under the Rules. The  overriding  objective  is  to  deal  with  cases
fairly and justly.  This is defined as  including   "(a)  dealing  with  the
case in ways which are proportionate to the  importance  of  the  case,  the
complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of  the
parties and of the Tribunal; (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and  seeking
flexibility in the proceedings; (c) ensuring,  so  far  as  is  practicable,
that the parties are able to  participate  fully  in  the  proceedings;  (d)
using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay
so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues".

10.   In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it  was
held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably.  Rather, the test  to  be  applied  is
that of fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
to a fair hearing?

11.   At [6] the Judge accepts that  the  appellant  could  not  attend  the
hearing because she was unwell. Three days before the hearing the  appellant
had an emergency admission to an antenatal clinic. The  Judge's  refusal  to
adjourn  resulted  in  the  appellant's  representatives'  withdrawal   from
acting, so that the consequences  of  refusing  to  adjourn  were  that  the
appellant was neither  present  not  represented.  It  was  clear  that  the
appellant wanted to be both present and represented.

12.   Between [13] and [21] the Judge sets out strident  findings  of  fact.
There he finds, on the basis of the documentary  evidence  alone,  that  the
appellant is not a reliable witness; that the appellant is  not  a  credible
witness;  that  the  appellant  is  dishonest  and  that  application  is  a
contrivance. None of those matters  have  been  put  to  the  appellant  for
comment. The respondent's own reasons for  refusal  letter  does  not  raise
questions of honesty, but proceeds on the basis that the appellant  has  not
produced  sufficient  evidence  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof.   The
appellant did not therefore have fair notice of the case  pled  against  her
which lead to the Judge's findings of fact.

13.   I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a material  error  of
law. I must set the decision aside.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because the Appellant did not have a fair hearing. In this case none of  the
findings of fact are to stand and the matter will be a complete re  hearing.


16.   I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Richmond  or
Hatton Cross to be heard before any First-tier Immigration Judge other  than
Designated Judge Manuell.

CONCLUSION

Decision

17.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

18.   I set aside the decision. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed      Date 22 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
