
IAC-fH-ar-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2015                            |On 3 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                          JOSEPH MICHAEL PRASAANTHA
                     (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE/NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Solanki, Counsel, instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  brought  by  the  appellant  against  the  decision
    promulgated on 6 October 2014  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  P  W
    Harris.  The decision of Judge Harris refused the appellant's appeal as
    regards his claim for further leave to  remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and his Article 8 appeal.

 2.  The  appellant's  case  centres  on  the   provisions   of   paragraph
    245DD(e)(vi) which requires him at the time of  his  application  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant to "have" or  "have  last  been  granted"
    leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  It is not in dispute that
    this is the only part of  paragraph  245DD(e)  that  could  avail  this
    appellant so as to meet the Immigration Rules.

 3. It is common ground before me as it was before the First-tier  Tribunal
    that at the time of his application for his Tier 1 leave this appellant
    did not have leave as a Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.   He  had
    discretionary leave.

 4. How is it then that the appellant says that  he  can  come  within  the
    provisions of paragraph 245DD(e) of the Immigration Rule?  His argument
    is based on the fact that in May 2013 the respondent  issued  a  policy
    entitled "Immigration Directorate Instructions - family  members  under
    the Immigration Rules - Section FM1.0 -  partner  and  ECHR  Article  8
    guidance".

 5. At paragraph 5.12 of that policy document, at page 63  of  the  version
    before me, the policy indicates, that

         "Where an appeal against refusal of an application under the points-
         based system has been allowed on Article 8 grounds which relate  to
         the initial application e.g. refusal of a  student  application  is
         held to be a breach of Article  8  because  the  student  would  be
         unable to complete their course, the appellant  should  be  granted
         leave of the same type and duration and on the same  conditions  as
         if the relevant points-based system application had been granted."

 6. The appellant maintains that the view of  the  Secretary  of  State  as
    expressed in this policy published in 2013 should be read  as  in  some
    way creating a presumption that the discretionary leave granted to  him
    in 2011 should be considered as if it was post-student migrant leave.

 7. I could not see how that could be so.  The  documents  most   helpfully
    provided by Miss Solanki at the hearing before me show that at the time
    of the previous grant of leave, as  above,  undisputedly  discretionary
    leave, there was no policy expressed by the Secretary of State  guiding
    her or providing guidance to any appellant as to  what  the  nature  of
    their leave would be.  The judge whose decision  in  2011  led  to  the
    grant of discretionary leave (First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cox)  allowed
    the appeal under Article 8. As now, he did not have  power  in  law  to
    direct the respondent as to the length or conditions attached  to  that
    discretionary leave even where he made a suggestion that it  should  be
    "commensurate" with Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.

 8.  At no time was there any suggestion that the leave should be  anything
    other than discretionary leave.  There is nothing before me to indicate
    that the respondent acted in any way unlawfully or that there  was  any
    legitimate  expectation  provided  at  any  time  for  this   appellant
    regarding his previous grant of discretionary leave, the leave that  he
    had at the time of the application that is at the heart of  the  appeal
    before me.

 9. It is not my view therefore that the appellant can in any  way  benefit
    from the policy issued by the Secretary of State in May 2013.   He  was
    not entitled to anything other than discretionary leave in 2011 and did
    not have the requisite leave  to  be  able  to  qualify  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant at the time of his  application  on  29  October
    2013.

10. This was the conclusion, although  somewhat  differently  reasoned,  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Harris who at paragraphs  10  to  11  decided
    that the fact that the appellant had discretionary leave meant that  he
    could not qualify as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur. I therefore  find  that  no
    error arises in this regard.

11. Before me the appellant also  raises  the  same  issue  in  a  slightly
    different way, arguing that the respondent's policy as expressed in the
    May 2013 document created a "fairness"  point  which  should  have  led
    Judge Harris to at least consider the issue as part of  his  Article  8
    proportionality assessment and, according to the appellant, have  found
    it sufficient to afford the appeal under Article 8 being allowed.

12. I have indicated above that it is not my view that the  appellant  ever
    had any expectation of leave other  than  discretionary  leave.   Where
    that is so the "fairness" argument in the Article 8 context  before  me
    must fall away.  It additionally falls away, in  my  view,  given  that
    this point was not argued at all before Judge Harris so  he  cannot  be
    said to have erred in failing to consider it.  The fairness points made
    before him as expressed in paragraphs 40-45 of the skeleton argument do
    not in any way relate to  the  discretionary  leave  point  but  to  an
    entirely other matter concerning documents provided after the  date  of
    the original application but before the respondent's decision.

13. I would merely add that Judge Harris's consideration of  Article  8  at
    paragraphs 29-30 appears to me entirely  sound  given  the  appellant's
    limited residence in the UK and the limited residence of  his  partner.
    It is very questionable in my mind that  even  were  there  a  fairness
    point to consider under the Article 8 proportionality assessment,  that
    given the backgrounds of the appellant and his partner they could  ever
    have qualified under Article 8  in  any  event,  bearing  in  mind,  in
    particular, the comments of the Supreme Court at paragraph  57  of  the
    case Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 indicating that those  with
    limited leave coming as students or in similar categories cannot expect
    Article 8 to afford them the opportunity of remaining longer in the  UK
    as this is not the purpose of that provision of the ECHR.

14. For all of those reasons I do not find an error occurs in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]         Date: 2 February 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
