

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/00893/2013

                                                    IA/01568/2013





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House on
Determination promulgated on
1 July 2013


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DIGNEY

                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                      Appellant
                                     and


                                 JIWANJOT KAUR (MRS)
                                  MANINDER SINGH (MR)


                      Respondents
Representation:

For the appellant: Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondents: Mr Bellara


                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. On 26 November 2011 the first respondent made an application to remain
      as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. The second  respondent  applied
      as her dependent husband. It is accepted on both sides that the  cases
      stand or fall together. The applications were refused on  10  December
      2012 because the first respondent had  not  provided  bank  statements
      demonstrating the necessary amounts of money for the required  period.
      An appeal against the decisions was heard on 11  April  2013  and  the
      appeal was allowed.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted. The trial judge concluded  that  the
      appellant had not properly applied her flexibility policy as  set  out
      in the case of Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC).
      That case is authority for the proposition that the UKBA  is  under  a
      public law duty to give effect to its policy that applicants  will  be
      contacted where mandatory evidence is missing from their  applications
      and they will be given an  opportunity  to  provide  this.  The  judge
      concluded that the policy had not been applied here,  and  if  it  had
      been  the  applications  would  have  been  successful  as  the  first
      respondent would have been able to provide  bank  statements  for  the
      required period had she been asked to provide them. The judge  allowed
      the appeal outright.

   3. The judge granting permission concluded that it was arguable that  the
      original judge was not entitled to adopt this approach and should have
      considered remitting the matter to the Secretary of State for  her  to
      make a lawful decision. This is in fact the approach that was followed
      in Rodriguez; see the final sentence  of  the  determination.  Ms  Pal
      urges us to take this course. Mr Bellara says that  it  is  proper  to
      allow the appeal outright where the  position  is  clear.  We  do  not
      agree; we are here dealing with questions of fairness and  flexibility
      and it seems to us that such decisions are better made, in  the  first
      place, by the Secretary of State.

   4. It follows that we are satisfied that the original judge did make an
      error of law and we remake the decision  by allowing the appeal to the
      extent that the matter remains before the Secretary of State for a
      lawful decision in accordance with her policy. We would add that there
      was here an unlawful section 47 decision but that was properly dealt
      with by the original judge.




The appeal is accordingly allowed



Designated  Judge Digney
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                 1 July 2013






