
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
ia/00206/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11 July 2016                           | On 20 July 2016                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                                IRFAN SHEIKH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bajwa, counsel, instructed by A Bajwa & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is a resumed appeal by the Appellant against decisions  by  the
       Secretary of State to refuse to grant him leave to remain as a  Tier
       4 (General) Student and  to  remove  him  from  the  UK  by  way  of
       directions  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,   Asylum   and
       Nationality Act 2006.  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Raymond
       allowed the Appellant's appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  28
       October 2015 but I identified a material error of law in the judge's
       decision following a hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 07 June  2016.
       My reasons for finding a material error of law are contained  in  my
       decision promulgated on 09 June 2016.

Background

    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10 March 1983. He was
       granted leave to enter the UK as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  on  10
       December 2010, valid until 28 December 2011. On 19 June 2012 he  was
       granted further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  valid
       until 13 January 2014. On 01 July 2013  the  Appellant  applied  for
       further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  to  study  at
       the Academy De London. This institution lost  its  licence  and  the
       Appellant then varied his application to enable him to study at  the
       London Academy of Management Sciences (LAMS). The  application  form
       relating to this application was dated  19  February  2014  and  was
       proceed by the Respondent on 21 February 2014. This application form
       gives the Appellant's 'UK correspondence  address'  as  '3-5  Ripple
       Road, Barking'. This is the address of LAMS. Although the  Appellant
       also gave his home address [               ], he indicated that this
       was not to be his correspondence address. He then  confirmed,  in  a
       further section of the application  form,  that  his  correspondence
       address was '3-5 Ripple Road, Barking'.


    3. In a decision dated 04 December 2014, which  was  addressed  to  the
       Appellant  at  his  home  address,  the   Respondent   refused   the
       application. The application was refused  for  4  reasons.  (1)  The
       Appellant was said to have been invited to attend an interview on 27
       November 2014 to establish the genuineness of  his  application.  He
       failed to attend the interview and the application was refused under
       paragraph 245ZX(o) of the immigration rules (by which the  Secretary
       of State has  to  be  satisfied  that  an  applicant  is  a  genuine
       student). (2) The Appellant failed to prove that he had knowledge of
       English equivalent to level B2 of the  Council  of  Europe's  Common
       European Framework for Language  Learning  because  his  TOEIC  test
       certificate had been cancelled by ETS (there was  no  suggestion  he
       had ever used a proxy tester) and he failed to provide a new test as
       requested in a letter written by the Respondent dated 27  July  2014
       (which was sent to  the  LAMS  address).  (3)  The  application  was
       refused under paragraph 322(9) of the immigration rules, one of  the
       general grounds of refusal, on the basis that the  Appellant  failed
       to provide a document (a new English language  test),  and  (4)  the
       application was refused under paragraph 322(10) on  the  basis  that
       the Appellant failed to attend an interview (the one arranged for 27
       November 2014 to assess the genuineness of his application).  It  is
       clear that (1) and (4) relate to the same issue, as do (2) and (3).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    4. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  a  handwritten  witness
       statement prepared on behalf of the Appellant at the  hearing.  This
       stated, in material part,


         The college informed me through email Irfan got a letter from  Home
         Office (interview letter) on 20th November and  they  mentioned  we
         have just received letter now and get it ASAP.  But  they  gave  me
         only that letter  in  which  home  office  just  requested  English
         language test but there were not mentioned for interview call  even
         that date been expired as well because college got letter very late
         [sic].

    5. The First-tier Tribunal noted the provision by the Appellant  of  an
       IELTS test certificate with an overall band  score  of  5  dated  29
       January 2015. The judge did not take account of this certificate  as
       it was provided after the decision under appeal.


    6. The judge then heard, by  way  of  oral  evidence,  the  Appellant's
       'somewhat convoluted account of his  educational  history'.  In  his
       oral evidence the Appellant stated that LAMS  gave  him  the  letter
       dated 27 July 2014 but that this did not mention  an  interview.  He
       believed he was not sent the letter because it was sent to LAMS. The
       Home Office Presenting Officer was unable to provide a copy  of  the
       letter requiring the Appellant to attend an interview on 27 November
       2014, although there was  produced  a  letter  from  the  Respondent
       relating to the provision of biometric information dated 27 February
       2014 which was addressed to  the  Appellant  at  '3-5  Ripple  Road,
       Barking'.


    7. The judge allowed the appeal based on the absence of  evidence  that
       the Appellant was made aware of the request to attend  an  interview
       in November 2014. The judge found the Appellant's 'tortuous' account
       of  his  educational  progress  undermined  his   credibility,   but
       nevertheless gave the Appellant the "... benefit of the  doubt  over
       not having been informed in time of the opportunity to  take  a  new
       test by September 2014 in a letter addressed to him on 27.07.14 at 3-
       5 Ripple Road in  Barking,  which  is  the  LAMS  address,  because,
       according to his evidence, in the chaos surrounding  the  revocation
       of its licence, during  which  students  were  not  able  to  attend
       classes, he was not informed by the  college  of  this  Home  Office
       letter until November 2014, after which  he  successfully  took  the
       IELTS as soon as he could."


    8. The judge then noted that the refusal decision under appeal was send
       to the Appellant's home address. The judge found  this  address  was
       available to the Appellant and should have been appreciated  by  her
       as  being  the  most  viable  address  given  that   the   college's
       sponsorship licence had been or was in the process of being revoked.
       The judge found that the seriousness  of  the  matter  required  the
       Respondent to copy any correspondence to the Appellant's residential
       address.


The error of law in the First-tier Tribunal judge's decision

    9. At [25] the First-tier Tribunal judge allowed  the  appeal  "...  as
       regards non-attendance of a November 2014 interview as there  is  no
       evidence that the Appellant was made aware of this."  This assertion
       was however contradicted by the Appellant's handwritten statement in
       which he claimed his college did inform him of an 'interview letter'
       from the Home Office received on 20 November 2014. Although the HOPO
       in the First-tier Tribunal was unable to  provide  a  copy  of  this
       letter, and the college did not, on the Appellant's account, provide
       him with the interview letter, it was apparent  from  his  statement
       that  the  college  has  received  a  letter  from  the   Respondent
       requesting that the Appellant attend an interview. The judge  failed
       to take the content of the handwritten  statement  into  account  in
       reaching his conclusion and failed to resolve a factual conflict  in
       the evidence.


   10. Moreover, in his application dated 19 February  2014  the  Appellant
       provided the Respondent with a correspondence address of 3-5  Ripple
       Road, this being  the  address  of  his  college  (LAMS).  This  was
       confirmed as the correspondence address at two separate parts of the
       application form. The Appellant had received correspondence from the
       Respondent sent to this address. This was clear from the  letter  he
       produced at the First-tier Tribunal hearing dated 27 February  2014.
       The Appellant also accepted that he received from  LAMS  the  letter
       dated 27 July 2014. I was satisfied that the  Respondent  was  fully
       entitled to regard '3-5 Ripple Road,  Barking'  as  the  Appellant's
       correspondence address. There was no requirement for  the  Appellant
       to send correspondence to any address other than the  correspondence
       address. By giving his college as  his  correspondence  address  the
       Respondent   effectively   authorised   the   college   to   receive
       communication on his behalf (Hosier v Goodall [1962] 1 All E.R. 30).
       In these circumstances,  and  to  the  extent  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal judge considered there was  procedural  unfairness  because
       the college had not informed the Appellant of the two letters  in  a
       timely manner, no consideration was given to  the  case  of  Marghia
       (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC). Nor was it clear  how
       the judge could have allowed the appeals under the immigration rules
       as the Appellant had clearly not met the requirements of Appendix A.
       For these reasons I was satisfied the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
       was vitiated by material errors of law. I  relisted  the  matter  to
       enable further evidence to be given by either party and for  further
       submissions to be made in light of my identification of  the  errors
       of law.


    The resumed hearing


   11. Prior to the resumed hearing the Respondent served a further copy of
       the letter of 27 July 2014, addressed to the Appellant at  the  LAMS
       address and indicating that a new English  language  test  would  be
       required following the cancellation of his  earlier  ETS  test.  The
       Respondent additionally served the letter of 17 November 2014, again
       addressed to the Appellant at  3-5  Ripple  Road,  inviting  him  to
       attend and interview on 27 November 2014. The  Appellant  served  no
       further documentary evidence.


   12. In his oral evidence the Appellant confirmed that he was  happy  for
       his witness statement to stand as evidence  in  chief.  He  claimed,
       without any supporting evidence, that the college's licence had been
       revoked by the time he received an email from the college  informing
       him that a letter had arrived from the  Respondent  relating  to  an
       interview. He claimed the college's licence  was  revoked  in  March
       2014. The Appellant confirmed  that  the  college  office  was  open
       during this period (that is, up to and including November 2014). The
       Appellant had been informed by a lady in the office that  they  were
       still fighting the decision by the Home Office and that when lessons
       were back he would be informed by  email.  The  Appellant  confirmed
       that he had provided his college address in his Tier  4  application
       form, and that the principal  had  completed  the  form  giving  the
       college address as the correspondence address. The Appellant claimed
       that the letter dated 27 July 2014 was the only one he received from
       the Respondent and that this letter was given  to  him  by  LAMS  in
       November 2014.


   13. In cross-examination the Appellant accepted  that  the  college  had
       received the November 'interview' letter but that they had not given
       it to him. When asked whether he  had  any  evidence  of  the  email
       communication with the college the Appellant said he  did  not.  The
       Appellant accepted that he did not  chase  up  the  Home  Office  in
       relation to his interview. In re-examination the Appellant confirmed
       that the refusal to grant him further leave was  sent  to  his  home
       address.


   14. In submissions  Ms  Isherwood  invited  me  to  find  the  Appellant
       incredible. The Respondent was not required to  send  correspondence
       to 2 different addresses. It was accepted that  the  refusal  letter
       from December 2014 was sent to the  Appellant's  home  address,  but
       this possibly occurred because there had  been  no  earlier  contact
       from the Appellant. The interview date was to have been 27  November
       2014 and the Appellant accepts that he went to  the  college  on  20
       November 2014. This  suggests  that  the  college  did  receive  the
       'interview' letter. It was open to the Appellant to  have  contacted
       the Respondent if he had not given  an  'interview'  letter  but  he
       failed to do so.


   15. Mr Bajwa submitted that the letter of 27 July 2014 and the letter of
       17 November 2014 could not be reconciled with each other.  This  was
       because, if the Appellant failed to provide a new  English  language
       test by September 2014, there  would  have  been  no  point  in  the
       Respondent then seeking to invite the Appellant for an interview  if
       his Tier 4 (General) Student application was bound to be refused. Mr
       Bajwa submitted that there had been a serious procedural impropriety
       in  the  Respondent  sending  letters  to  the  college  address  in
       circumstances where the  college's  licence  had  been  revoked.  He
       submitted that the  college  was  in  effect  'dead'  and  that  the
       Respondent ought to have been corresponding with  the  Appellant  at
       his  home  address.  Mr  Bajwa  additionally  submitted   that   the
       cancellation of  the  Appellant's  ETS  English  language  test  was
       illegal given the dubious nature of the evidence relied  on  by  the
       Respondent in respect of the proxy tester  scandal.  Mr  Bajwa  made
       reference to a recent Court of Appeal decision dealing with the  ETS
       cases but he was unable to provide a  citation  or  a  copy  of  the
       authority. I indicated that I would reserve my decision.

Discussion

   16. Mr Bajwa contended that the Secretary of State should not have  sent
       correspondence to 3-5 Ripple Road, the  address  of  LAMS,  because,
       from March 2014  onwards,  the  colleges  licence  had  either  been
       suspended or revoked. Mr Bajwa did not provide any  evidence  as  to
       when the college had its licence either revoked or  suspended.  What
       was however clear from the Appellant's oral evidence  was  that  the
       college had an office that was open throughout the period from March
       2014 up to and including the end of  November  2014.  The  Appellant
       claimed he received an email from the college on  20  November  2014
       indicating that an 'interview' letter from the Respondent  had  been
       received by them. This was confirmed by the Appellant  in  his  hand
       written statement taken on the day of the appeal before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal. The Appellant attended the  college  on  20  November
       2014, spoke to a lady working in the office, and,  on  his  account,
       received a letter sent by the Respondent to the college on  27  July
       2014. It is abundantly clear from this evidence that the college was
       not 'dead'. It may not have been operating so as to provide  classes
       to students, but it is clear the administration was functioning.


   17. The Appellant did not produce the emails he claims to have been sent
       by the college. This  is  surprising  given  the  relative  ease  of
       printing out email correspondence. In any event, even accepting  the
       Appellant's claim that he never received the letter of  17  November
       2014, I am entirely satisfied that that letter was  properly  served
       on him by reference to the correspondence address given by  him.  It
       was entirely reasonable for the Respondent to send correspondence to
       the particular correspondence address  provided  by  the  Appellant,
       especially in circumstances where  it  is  clear  that  the  college
       administration was still  functioning.  If  the  Appellant  did  not
       receive the 'interview' letter from LAMS this was the fault  of  the
       college  and  not  the  Respondent.  If  the  Appellant  wanted  the
       Respondent to send correspondence to his home address following  the
       suspension or revocation of his colleges licence, then it  was  open
       to the Appellant to have informed the Respondent accordingly.  There
       has been no procedural impropriety on behalf of the Respondent.  Any
       unfairness to the Appellant has accrued  because  of  the  college's
       maladministration, not that of the Respondent.


   18. Mr Bajwa makes the valid observation  that  there  would  have  been
       little point  in  the  Respondent  seeking  an  interview  with  the
       Appellant  to  test  the  genuineness  of  his  application  if  the
       Appellant had already failed to provide  a  fresh  English  language
       test. But this does not undermine the validity of the service by the
       Respondent of her letters of 27 July 2014 and 17 November  2014.  Mr
       Bajwa pointed out that the refusal to grant further leave to remain,
       dated 4 December 2014, was served on the Appellant's  home  address.
       It  is  however  unclear   whether   there   was   any   intervening
       correspondence between the Appellant and the Respondent that altered
       the correspondence address. For the reasons I have already  given  I
       am entirely satisfied that the Respondent acted lawfully in  serving
       her letters of July and November 2014 at the LAMS address. Mr  Bajwa
       additionally relies on an unspecified Court of  Appeal  decision  to
       support  a  vague  submission  that  the  decision  underlying   the
       cancellation of  the  Appellant's  ETS  English  language  test  was
       illegal. I have been unable to locate any relevant Court  of  Appeal
       decision. In any event the Respondent  was  unarguably  entitled  to
       cancel English language tests obtained via ETS  given  the  concerns
       relating to proxy testers.


   19. The Appellant's application for further leave to remain was rejected
       because he did not have a new English language test and  because  he
       failed to attend an interview designed to test  the  genuineness  of
       his application. For the reasons I have given  I  am  satisfied  the
       Appellant  was  lawfully  served  with  letters  requesting  him  to
       undertake  a  further  English  language  test  and  to  attend   an
       interview, and that his failure to do either  constituted  a  lawful
       basis for the Respondent  to  reject  his  claim.  This  appeal  is,
       accordingly, dismissed.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law.
The appeal is remade and is dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 19 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


