
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00055/2017
                                                               IA/00056/2017
                                                               IA/00057/2017
                                                               IA/00058/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2019                              |On 26 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     B S
                                   s k C g
                                   s c s k
                                   p c s k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, counsel instructed by KTS Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Boyes, promulgated on 10 July 2017. Permission to appeal was granted by
    the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal on 22 January 2019.

Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is
    reiterated below.

Background

 3. The first appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  during  March  2010
    with leave to enter as a Tier  4  migrant.  The  second  appellant  was
    granted leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  migrant  in
    September 2010. The third and  fourth  appellants  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 8 June 2011 as dependents of the first appellant. The  first
    appellant sought further leave to remain under Tier 4  in  April  2012.
    The remaining  appellants  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  as
    dependants. Those applications  were  refused,  however  their  appeals
    against those decisions  were  allowed,  to  a  limited  extent,  in  a
    determination promulgated  on  24  July  2013  for  the  respondent  to
    reconsider  the  applications.  It  is  the  reconsideration  of  those
    applications which led to the instant appeal.

 4. On 17 January 2017, the respondent refused the applications for further
    leave to remain. The respondent asserted  that  a  false  document  was
    provided  with  the  application  of  3  April  2012,  namely  a  TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing Service which related to the first
    appellant.  Consequently, the application of the  first  appellant  was
    refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules and no  points
    were awarded for a Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)  or
    maintenance. Brief consideration was given to the duty under section 55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,  however  it  was
    considered that the need to maintain the integrity of  the  immigration
    laws outweighed the effect on the  appellant  and  her  children  which
    might result from having to re-establish family life outside the United
    Kingdom. The applications of  the  remaining  appellants  were  refused
    because in view of the refusal of the  first  appellant's  claim,  they
    could not meet the requirements for leave to remain as dependants under
    paragraph 319 of the Rules.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The First-tier Tribunal considered the appeals on  the  papers  because
    insufficient fees were paid for the appeals to proceed as oral hearings
    as requested by the appellants in their notices of  appeal.  The  judge
    concluded  the  generic  evidence  from  the  respondent  shifted   the
    evidential burden onto the  appellant  but  owing  to  the  paucity  of
    evidence before him from the appellant, she  had  not  discharged  this
    burden. The appeal was also dismissed under Article 8 ECHR based on the
    limited information before the judge.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds took issue with the efforts made by the appellants to  have
    an oral hearing, which they say was not acted upon. It was argued  that
    the hearing had been unfair as the first appellant had not  been  given
    an  opportunity  to  provide  a  witness  statement  or  oral  evidence
    regarding the allegation of dishonesty. Both  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and Upper Tribunal refused permission to appeal.

 7. The appellants applied for judicial review of the refusal of permission
    to  appeal  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Their  grounds  focused  on  the
    procedural history, it being said that the appellants were  waiting  to
    be provided with a fee adjustment form and reference number in order to
    pay the additional fees, when the appeal was determined.  In  addition,
    the second ground was that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected
    himself as to the legal burden of proof. Thirdly, it  was  argued  that
    the first appellant was prevented from presenting her case and was,  in
    effect, denied a right of appeal altogether. Permission to  appeal  was
    granted by the Administrative Court on 13 November  2018,  the  grounds
    being described as "arguable."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the Vice President in light of  the
    order by Master Gidden dated 12 December 2018 quashing the  refusal  of
    permission to appeal.

 9. There was no Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State.

The hearing

10.  Mr Slatter took me through the procedural history in this  matter  and
    referred me to evidence that two emails and two  telephone  calls  were
    made by those representing the appellants in  an  attempt  to  pay  the
    additional fees required for an oral hearing in  the  period  preceding
    the paper consideration of the appeals. I indicated that there  was  no
    sign of any of this correspondence on the IAC case file.

11. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that at [9]  the  judge  noted  that  the
    requests for additional fees had not been  attended  to  and  that  his
    decision to proceed was correct. As for the Tribunal's email of  8  May
    2018 acknowledging the appellant's earlier email regarding fees,  there
    was no explanation as to why the solicitors did not  respond  until  24
    May 2018 and why payment was not made sooner.

12. In  reply,  Mr  Slatter  argued  that  there  had  been  a  fundamental
    misunderstanding as to the process of converting a paper hearing to  an
    oral hearing in that there was a need to wait for  an  adjustment  form
    and reference number before payment was made.

13. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge  had  unwittingly  made  a  procedural  error  in  proceeding  to
    determine the appeals on the papers.  The error  was  material  because
    the first appellant,  in  particular,  was  prevented  from  giving  or
    providing evidence to address the allegation of dishonesty.

Decision on error of law

14. As indicated above, the judge unwittingly erred  in  considering  these
    appeals on the papers. According to the correspondence pin on  the  IAC
    case file, the appellants had been asked to pay the  full  fee  for  an
    oral hearing on 6 March 2017 and had failed to do so. What was  missing
    from the file was correspondence from the appellants'  solicitors  (KTS
    Legal) sent in response to the notice of 3 May 2017  stating  that  the
    appeal would be decided on the  papers.   On  5  May  2017,  KTS  Legal
    telephoned and then emailed the Tribunal to state that  the  appellants
    wanted an oral hearing and to  request  the  necessary  fee  adjustment
    form. The Tribunal acknowledged that correspondence, by email, on 8 May
    2017. That email included a request that no efforts are made  to  chase
    the matter for two weeks. On 24 May  2017,  KTS  Legal  telephoned  the
    Tribunal and were advised that a letter with  details  of  the  payment
    required and reference number would be sent. Having  received  no  such
    letter, KTS Legal sent a further email on 30  May  2017  repeating  the
    earlier request and requesting that the matter be looked into urgently.
    There was no response from the Tribunal and the appeals were passed  to
    First-tier Tribunal Boyes for a decision on the papers.

15. I accept the  argument  that  it  was  not  a  simple  matter  for  the
    appellants to pay the fees because they required a form and a reference
    number so that any payment could be married  with  the  correct  appeal
    reference. There is also a  satisfactory  explanation  as  to  why  the
    outstanding  fees  were  not  paid  in  March  2017,  that  being   the
    intervening indication that the appeals had been lodged out of time, to
    which the appellants needed to give priority. It  was  only  after  the
    Tribunal caseworker found in their favour on the timeliness  issue  (on
    28 April 2017) that the outstanding fees were payable. Since that time,
    the appellants having been waiting in vain for a form and  a  reference
    number to pay the outstanding fees.

16.  The  judge  could  not  have  known  any  of  the  foregoing  matters.
    Nonetheless, the result of the matter proceeding on the papers is  that
    the first appellant has been unable  to  challenge  the  allegation  of
    dishonesty and all four appellants have been denied a fair  hearing  of
    their appeals.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of half a  day  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes.



Directions

      1. The First-tier Tribunal is to send the appellants the relevant form
         and reference number to enable them to  pay  the  outstanding  fees
         within the next 28 days.

      2. The Secretary of State is to  decide,  within  the  next  28  days,
         whether to give consent for the new matter raised in correspondence
         to be  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  new  matter
         concerns the 4th appellant's 7-year plus residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom and which was raised in the appellants' letter of  4  March
         2019

      3. The Secretary of State is  to  serve  the  respondent's  bundle  of
         evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal on the appellants
         within the next 14 days.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 20 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

