
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/00339/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          | Determination Issued             |
|on 21st April 2016                        | On 26th April 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           OCHUKO DAFIAGHOR-OLOMU
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant present; no legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 17th February 1974.   She
    has not sought an anonymity order, and none has been made.

 2. The appellant has a lengthy immigration history, set out in the  papers
    provided by both parties and in the  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Clough,  promulgated  on  8th  September  2015,  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant had been in the UK  lawfully  since  2003  and  had  been
    lawfully  employed.   Dismissal  from  her  employment  led  to  fairly
    protracted  proceedings  before  an   Employment   Tribunal,   resolved
    eventually in her favour, but  after  the  decision  leading  to  these
    proceedings  was  made.   The  Employment  Tribunal  had   to   resolve
    difficulties over the orders which might be made, having regard to  the
    appellant's immigration status.

 4.  The  application  to  the  respondent  which  leads  to  the   present
    proceedings was for leave to remain in the UK.  It was not  made  under
    Tier 2 of the points-based system (the PBS), with which  the  appellant
    could not at the time comply.  It was for leave to be  granted  outwith
    the terms of the Immigration Rules.  Such applications  are  considered
    by the respondent on the basis of family and private life in the UK and
    under reference to the relevant paragraphs of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, the essence of the appellant's application was that discretion
    should be exercised in her favour because of the unusual situation: the
    ongoing proceedings in the  Employment  Tribunal  and  her  prospective
    reinstatement in her previous employment.

 5. The respondent's decision on that application is  dated  19th  December
    2014.  It refers to the appellant's application as having been made  on
    27th December 2014, but that appears to be an error.

 6. The respondent's decision says that on 3rd November 2014 the  appellant
    had been asked to advise whether she still wished to be  considered  on
    an exceptional basis outside the Rules, or whether  she  wished  to  be
    considered within the Tier 2 route under which she had previously  been
    granted leave.  The decision says, "We requested  your  reply  by  10th
    November 2014.  To date, we have not received any reply from you".

 7. The appellant continues to be considerably aggrieved by the  fact  that
    she  was  given  short   notice,   under   complex   and   longstanding
    circumstances, and by the fact that it is not correct to say  that  she
    did not reply.   Rather,  she  says  that  she  explained  the  current
    position and asked for further time.

 8. The respondent's decision states that the application is refused  under
    paragraph 322(9) of the Rules - that is to say, for failure to  produce
    within a reasonable time information required by the Secretary of State
    to establish the claim to remain.

 9. The decision goes on to consider the application by  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules, in particular private life under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR; finds that the Rules  are  not  met;  and  finds  no  exceptional
    circumstances consistent with the right  to  respect  for  private  and
    family life contained in Article 8 of the ECHR which  might  warrant  a
    grant of leave outside the Rules.

10. In her decision, Judge Clough found that the application  was  properly
    refused under paragraph 322(9) and went on to dismiss the appeal "under
    the Immigration Rules".

11. The appellant, who did not at this stage have legal advice (although it
    seems from the file she did have advice earlier  in  the  proceedings),
    appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  what  are  frankly  extensive  and
    confused grounds.  She seeks to raise a  number  of  points  about  her
    immigration history, including her communications with  the  respondent
    since the decision under appeal was made, which are irrelevant to these
    proceedings.  She refers, for example, to the respondent's  "evidential
    flexibility   policy",   which   operates   under   precisely   defined
    circumstances which have nothing to do with the present case.

12. The appellant thinks it significant that the respondent may have  erred
    in saying that she had not replied by the date the decision  was  made.
    Unfortunately for her, however, and as  correctly  pointed  out  by  Mr
    Matthews, that makes no difference to the outcome.  What was before the
    respondent  was  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  outwith   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant had no  case  for
    leave to  remain  under  reference  to  the  family  and  private  life
    provisions of the Immigration Rules, or based on similar considerations
    going  beyond  the  Rules.   She  asked  the  respondent  to   exercise
    discretion in her favour and to depart from the Immigration Rules based
    on the very specific circumstances of her case.

13. Whether or  not  that  was  a  reasonable  request,  and  even  if  the
    respondent made a mistake about  whether  she  replied,  there  was  no
    ground on which the First-tier Tribunal could possibly have allowed her
    appeal.

14.  Section 86(3)(b) of the 2002 Act permitted the Tribunal  to  allow  an
    appeal insofar as it thought that "a discretion exercised in  making  a
    decision against which the appeal  is  brought  ...  should  have  been
    exercised differently".  However, by section 86(6) "refusal  to  depart
    from or to authorise  departure  from  Immigration  Rules  is  not  the
    exercise for discretion for the purposes of sub-section (3)(b)".

15. The effect of that provision was that the First-tier Tribunal could not
    have allowed the appellant's appeal, on any view of the facts.  Whether
    to exercise discretion to grant leave was up to  the  respondent  only.
    It had nothing to do with the tribunal.

16. The Upper Tribunal may interfere with the decision made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal only if it has made a material error of law.  In  respect
    of the Immigration Rules, it is not possible to find an  error  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision in this case which is  material  because
    there could have been no outcome in favour of the appellant.

17. The one point which might go in the appellant's favour  is  not  to  be
    derived from her Grounds  of  Appeal,  but  was  helpfully  and  fairly
    pointed  out  by  the  Presenting  Officer.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  did   not
    explicitly make a decision based on the grounds procedurally  available
    to the appellant that her removal as  a  consequence  of  the  decision
    might be incompatible  with  her  rights  under  the  ECHR.   Taking  a
    generous view,  that  was  not  simply  a  procedural  but  a  material
    omission.

18. It is not possible to vary an application for leave  to  remain  during
    the period while leave is extended pending an appeal.  However, were it
    to be found that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's position under Article 8 of the ECHR, that would lead to  a
    period of time during which she might (possibly upon  advice)  consider
    withdrawing her appeal.  She would then have 28 days to  make  a  fresh
    application under Tier 2, if she is in a position to  support  such  an
    application.

19. The appellant was not content with that possible outcome.  She insisted
    that given the whole history of her  case  the  Upper  Tribunal  should
    grant her indefinite leave to remain in the  UK,  which  she  said  she
    would by now have achieved had it not been for the interruptions caused
    by her unfair dismissal (later remedied) and the  shortcomings  of  the
    respondent.  She would not be satisfied with anything less.

20. I reserved my decision.

21. I have some sympathy with the position in which the appellant has found
    herself, and no doubt it has caused  her  anxiety  over  the  last  few
    years.  However, the Upper Tribunal does not have  a  broad  overriding
    jurisdiction to grant the remedy she would like to have.

22. The FtT and the UT have only the powers which Parliament gives them  by
    statute.  The FtT is limited to allowing or dismissing the appeal which
    is before it.  The UT is governed by the requirement to find a material
    error of law in the FtT decision.

23. The statutory appeal process is not, as the appellant seems to imagine,
    an ongoing negotiation between her and the  respondent,  supervised  by
    the tribunals, based on her evolving circumstances.  There is no  legal
    route by which the outcome the appellant sought might be achieved.

24. There is no material error in the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    insofar as it dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules.   Even
    if there was any slip in respect of the appellant's reply and paragraph
    322(9), there was no application before the respondent which might have
    succeeded within the terms of the Immigration Rules.

25. Discretionary leave was for the respondent to decide, not the tribunal,
    so her appeal was not capable of being allowed on that basis.

26. Perhaps stretching a point in the appellant's favour, I find that there
    is error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to the extent  that
    it failed to deal with the human rights grounds before it, and that the
    case should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that  matter  to
    be remedied.

27. The appellant should not take this decision as any indication that  the
    outcome on human rights grounds in the FtT at  any  future  hearing  is
    likely to be in her favour, if she allows matters to go that far.

28. The appellant will have the opportunity to take the  steps  which  have
    been hinted at above, but that is a matter entirely for  her.   Nothing
    in this decision (and nothing said by the  Presenting  Officer,  as  he
    properly made  clear)  should  be  taken  as  an  indication  that  any
    application made in the future to the  respondent  will  succeed.   The
    appellant is further reminded that it is not for  the  respondent,  the
    First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal  to  advise  her  on  how  to
    proceed, or to grant  her  overriding  remedies  to  make  up  for  any
    perceived past misfortune.  If she does make any further application to
    the respondent, she may expect only that it will be  decided  according
    to its own merits, within the terms of the Immigration Rules.

29. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law,  because  it
    omitted to deal with human rights grounds.  To that extent only, it  is
    set aside.  The decision under the Immigration Rules is to stand.

30. In order for the decision to be remade, taking account of human  rights
    grounds, the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   It  may  be
    decided by any member of that Tribunal.  (There is no reason to exclude
    Judge Clough.)


                           [pic]


                           22 April 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
