
IAC-BFD- MD
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00084/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 28th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                                  mr waheed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Singh of Counsel, instructed by Kabir Ahmed &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Waheed, was born on 9th February 1985 and is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan. On 12th December 2014 the  Respondent  refused  to
    vary his leave to remain in the UK, outside the Immigration Rules,  and
    gave directions for his removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and
    Asylum Act 1999. In addition the  Respondent  certified  the  claim  as
    clearly unfounded under Section 94(2) of  the  Nationality  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The Appellant had applied on 31st October  2014  for  leave  to  remain
    exceptionally under Article 8 ECHR (right to family/private life).

 3. He appealed the refusal by the Respondent to vary his leave to  remain,
    to the FtT (Judge Mensah). In a decision promulgated on 23rd April 2015
    she dismissed the appeal. The Appellant now appeals with permission  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in January 2010 as  a  Tier  4
    (Student) with leave granted only until June 2014. In 2012, he began  a
    relationship with Muneeba Kauser, a British citizen. She  is  currently
    expecting their child.

 5. In July 2014 the Appellant's leave to remain was curtailed  because  of
    irregularities with the college attending. It is said that he  was  not
    aware of the curtailment of leave. However his original leave to remain
    was only valid in any event until June 2014. Needless to say he did not
    leave the UK on the expiry of his leave.

 6. The application for leave to remain outside the Rules  was  dated  31st
    October 2014. It  claimed  that  the  Appellant  could  not  return  to
    Pakistan and continue his private life/family life with Ms Kauser there
    because both sets  of  their  respective  parents  disapproved  of  the
    relationship.

 7. It is said that, in October 2014, when Ms Kauser's  parents  discovered
    the relationship, they kept her in a locked room. Somehow she was  able
    to escape and both she and the Appellant reported  the  matter  to  the
    police. Ms Kauser was found a place in a refuge and the  Appellant  was
    arrested as an overstayer.

 8. By October 2014 the Appellant, having  been  released  by  the  police,
    moved to Scotland accompanied by Ms Kauser. The couple  married  in  an
    Islamic marriage ceremony and returned to Leeds in late  October,  when
    he made the application for leave to remain.

 9. The application for leave added that Ms  Kauser  could  not  travel  to
    Pakistan.  She has other family members living there and she  would  be
    in danger from them because of her relationship with the Appellant.  In
    addition the Appellant's own family members will not accept her as  she
    is 'westernised' and they are a 'conservative' family.

10. At the hearing before the FtT, it was accepted that the Appellant could
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, notably Appendix FM
    and 276ADE. The Judge noted further that there was no prospect  of  him
    being able to do so, because Ms Kauser said in evidence, once her child
    is born, she will not be able to work, as she will be  caring  for  the
    child.

11. The Judge went on to conclude that,

         "Taking all of the evidence together I firstly find  no  reason  to
         depart from the Immigration Rules and no exceptional  circumstances
         however, even if I were to depart from the Immigration Rules and go
         on to consider Article 8 I  find  it  is  not  disproportionate  to
         remove the Appellant."

12.  The  Appellant  now  asserts  that  the  Judge's  application  of  the
    proportionality test is flawed.  Ms Singh submitted  that  the  Judge's
    failure to follow the five stage approach in Razgar, led her to refrain
    from carrying out a proper analysis of Article 8 ECHR. This in turn led
    to a failure to  give  proper  consideration  and  weight  to  what  is
    asserted on behalf of the Appellant, namely that Ms  Kauser  cannot  go
    (Ms Singh's emphasis) to Pakistan.

13. I find I disagree with Ms Singh's submissions. I find that the  grounds
    and the  grant  of  permission  both  fall  into  error.  The  line  of
    authorities established by MF (Nigeria),  Gulshan  and  Nagre  make  it
    clear that the circumstances of the majority of applicants for leave to
    remain will fall within the provisions of the complete code as  regards
    Article 8 ECHR now provided for in the Immigration Rules. Only in those
    cases in which  the  circumstances  are  particularly  compelling  and,
    crucially, "not sufficiently recognised by the  Rules"  (in  the  sense
    that the circumstances are so unusual as not to have  been  anticipated
    by the Rules), should it lead a Judicial  decision  maker  to  consider
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules. That  test  requires  the
    exercise of a judicial discretion; it does  not  require  a  full-scale
    application of Article 8 ECHR jurisprudence or a detailed assessment of
    proportionality. If a Judge were required to carryout such an analysis,
    then nothing would be achieved by the application of the  Gulshan  test
    at all and the very freewheeling Article  8  assessment  deprecated  in
    that case would become the norm.

14. I find, therefore, that the judge did not fall into error by refraining
    from carrying out a full scale assessment  of  proportionality;  it  is
    plain by reading the text  of  the  decision  that  she  exercised  her
    discretion not to consider Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules
    and did so judicially. There is no suggestion that she  had  regard  to
    irrelevant matters in exercising her discretion nor has she  failed  to
    take  into  account  all  relevant  facts.  A  plain  reading  of   the
    determination shows that.

15. She had proper regard for the fact that this Appellant could  not  meet
    the Immigration Rules. Significantly, the  Judge  was  aware  that  the
    Appellant, notwithstanding his precarious immigration status,  had  not
    left the UK when his leave expired, had chosen to start a  relationship
    in the UK and together with Ms Kauser decided to start a family.

16. The Judge took full account of the reasons why it was  said  Ms  Kauser
    could not accompany the Appellant to  Pakistan.  She  discounted  those
    reasons giving adequate reasons  why  she  did  so.  There  is  nothing
    perverse or irrational in her reasoning. Article 8 does not provide for
    family life to be pursued in a jurisdiction of choice.

17. In so far as the Judge's reasoning is concerned I can discern no  error
    of law. The grounds therefore do not have merit. The  only  part  where
    the Judge has perhaps erred is in the loose language she  has  employed
    at [16] where she says,

         "I apply section 117 of the Immigration  Act  2014  and  weigh  the
         public interest in maintaining  effective  Immigration  control  in
         protecting the public  purse  against  the  appellant's  desire  to
         remain in the United Kingdom  and  pursue  a  life  here  with  his
         partner."

18. That in my judgment was simply a matter of form rather than  substance.
    The Judge carried out a detailed assessment of the Appellant's case and
    I cannot envisage any Judge coming to a  different  conclusion  on  the
    facts of this appeal. Therefore any error in form is not material.

Decision

19. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  23rd  April  2015  dismissing  Mr
    Waheed's appeal stands.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signature     Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

