
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/00235/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 January 2019                        | On 8 March 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                JAMAL MAHMOOD
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 10 April  1992  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan. By a decision dated 24 July  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's application for further leave to  remain  as  a
    student. The appellant appealed to the first-tier tribunal which, in  a
    decision promulgated on 21  August  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing on 3 January 2019, the appellant did not  attend
    nor was he represented. I am satisfied that a  notice  of  hearing  was
    sent by first class post to the appellant at his last known address  in
    Ashton under Lyne on 20 November 2018. There is nothing on the Tribunal
    file to indicate that the notice has been returned by the  Post  Office
    or that the appellant otherwise has not been served with the notice. In
    the circumstances, I proceeded with  the  hearing  in  the  appellant's
    absence.

 3. The grant of appeal of permission is unhelpful. The judge has sought to
    go beyond the pleaded grounds to identify 'Robinson  obvious'  arguable
    errors in the judge's decision. I cannot see that  it  was  appropriate
    for the judge to do this. The judge granting permission appears to have
    considered the First-tier Tribunal decision to be lacking in rigour and
    the analysis to  be  arguably  bare.  What  the  permission  judge  has
    overlooked is that this appellant was bound to lose his application for
    further leave to remain under the Immigration Rules because he did  not
    possess a CAS which, in turn, caused him  to  be  unable  to  meet  the
    maintenance requirements of the  rules.  Any  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds would have to be made in the context  of  the  failure  of  the
    appellant to meet the basic requirements for a student visa.  In  light
    of the paucity of the evidence of any private or family  life  provided
    by the appellant, any Article 8 ECHR appeal was doomed to fail. In that
    context, any lack of rigour on the  part  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    could not be material to the outcome of the appeal.




Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

