

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: IA 00395-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   31.05.2013|
|on    31.05.2013                              |sent out:      04.06.2013    |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                 Ariya JOSE
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Harshaka Kannangara (counsel instructed by Legend)
For the respondent: Miss Alexandra Everett


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Rosalind Fletcher-Hill), sitting at Hatton Cross on  15
    February, to  a tier 4 (general) student migrant appeal by a citizen of
    India, born 6 February 1988.  On  8  October  2012  the  appellant  was
    refused  leave  to  remain  because  her  college  had  withdrawn   her
    Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  [CAS]  on   26   September.
    Permission to appeal  was  given  on  'common-law  fairness'   grounds,
    because no reason for withdrawal of the CAS had been given, and by  the
    date of the decision under appeal, when the appellant  first  heard  of
    it, it was too late for her to find out why.



 2. However, as the judge found at paragraph  40,  there  was  no  evidence
    before her as to why the sponsor withdrew the CAS, and no evidence that
    the appellant had sought to discover the reason. While it is  a  little
    disturbing to find a licensed sponsor withdrawing a CAS without  giving
    reasons (even, as Mr Kannangara pointed out, in the place  allowed  for
    that on the form, and especially when the appellant had paid  the  fees
    for the course, also recorded on it), there may  have  been  some  good
    reason for it in the present case. The burden  of  proof,  as  in  most
    cases of this kind, was on the appellant to show either that there  was
    no good reason for the CAS being withdrawn; or that she could get  none
    out of her college.

 3. The appellant's counsel  before  the  judge,  not  Mr  Kannangara,  had
    suggested that, since the CAS had been withdrawn  so  soon  before  the
    decision under appeal, it was for the Home Office to give the appellant
    60 days to get onto another  course.  This  could  only  be  argued  by
    analogy with the well known cases where it  was  the  Home  Office  who
    withdrew the college's sponsorship licence, a process by its nature out
    of the appellant's control, and one for which she would have been  most
    unlikely to bear any responsibility.

 4. However, that is not this case, and the analogy is  a  false  one.  The
    withdrawal of an individual CAS must have had something to do with  the
    dealings between the appellant and her college. If there  was  no  good
    reason for it, or no reason could be got,  then  that  would  certainly
    have raised a 'common-law fairness' argument for the appellant; but she
    needed to show that this was the case.

 5. Though permission seems to have been granted  under  a  misapprehension
    about this, evidence obtained after the date of the  decision  to  show
    unfairness would not have been made inadmissible by the prohibition  on
    fresh evidence on appeal contained in s. 85  (5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, because if the decision  under  appeal
    were shown to be unfair, then it would have been no valid  decision  at
    all: see Naved  (Student - fairness - notice of points) Pakistan [2012]
    UKUT 14 (IAC).

 6. It follows that the appellant and her solicitors were not  entitled  to
    rest her case on the lack of reasons given for the  withdrawal  of  her
    CAS, but needed to take active steps to show, either that there was  no
    good reason for it, or they could get none. As the judge  found,  there
    is no evidence at all of any such steps being taken. It is a  pity  for
    this appellant that those representing her should have chosen to advise
    her that her case should be conducted in this way; but they  must  bear
    the  responsibility  for   that.   Practitioners   should   note   that
    establishing  a  'common-law  fairness'  case  is  not  a   matter   of
    appellants' simply taking a stand on what the Home  Office  have  done,
    but actively co-operating to make  sure  that  their  applications  are
    properly considered on their merits.





Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)


