
[pic]
IAC-fH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00486/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Notice of Decision Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2016                  |On 29 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               KANTAM SODKAEW
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Bazini of Counsel, instructed by E2W (UK)
Ltd.

                                   NOTICE

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Tipping promulgated on  24  August  2015,  in
    which  he  allowed  Miss  Sodkaew's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant leave to remain and to remove her from  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. At the outset of the hearing Ms  Fijiwala  applied  for  permission  to
    withdraw the appeal pursuant to  rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  She submitted that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was  correct.   The  judge  had  found  that  Miss.
    Sodkaew and her Sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting  relationship,
    and had therefore found that the Sponsor was  Miss.  Sodkaew's  partner
    for the purposes of E-LTRP.1.2.  Therefore she met the requirements  of
    GEN.1.2, such that paragraph EX.1 did not apply.  The grounds of appeal
    submitted that the decision was wrong because the judge had  failed  to
    consider paragraph EX.1, but Ms Fijiwala accepted that the  application
    had been made in error.

 3. Mr. Bazini stated that he was grateful to Ms Fijiwala for  applying  to
    withdraw the application.  He referred to a letter from his instructing
    solicitors dated 18 January 2016 pointing out that the application  for
    permission to appeal was misconceived and  inviting  the  Secretary  of
    State  to  withdraw  the  appeal.   This  letter  stated  that  failing
    withdrawal, a costs order would be made.

 4. Before me Mr. Bazini made a costs application pursuant to  rule  10  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  He submitted  that
    the grounds of appeal presented by the  Secretary  of  State  had  been
    misconceived and unreasonable.  Miss. Sodkaew's costs should be awarded
    both for attendance at the hearing before me, and  also  for  the  work
    done subsequent to the Secretary of State's application.

 5. He referred me to paragraph 25 of Cancino (costs - First-tier  Tribunal
    - new powers) [2015] UKFTT 59.  Ms  Fijiwala  had  acted  correctly  in
    applying to withdraw the  appeal,  but  the  fact  that  she  had  only
    obtained the file on the day prior to the hearing did  not  excuse  the
    Secretary of State for failing to apply to withdraw the appeal earlier.

 6. Ms Fijiwala submitted that she was not in a position  to  deal  with  a
    costs application  at  the  hearing  before  me.   Accordingly  I  made
    directions for written submissions to be made in relation to the  costs
    application.

Notice

 7. The appeal is withdrawn pursuant to rule 17 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Directions

 8. The Secretary of State is to provide written submissions in response to
    the application for a costs order within 21 days of  the  date  of  the
    hearing.

 9. Miss. Sodkaew is to provide any response to those submissions within 14
    days of receiving them.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
