
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00135/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Prepared at Field House On the Papers         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 January 2014                             |On 22 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Baba Ibrahim Olu-Audu

                                                                  Respondent




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. For ease of reference, I shall throughout this determination  refer  to
    Mr Olu-Audu, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant", and  to
    the Secretary of State,  who  was  the  original  respondent,  as  "the
    Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant, who is a national of Nigeria, was born  on  30  September
    1975.  His appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  refusing
    his application to vary leave to remain in the UK as the partner  of  a
    person present and settled here  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Holt, both under the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  Article  8,
    following a hearing before her at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent, on  30
    April 2013.

 3. The Secretary of State appealed against this decision and on 3  October
    2013 I granted her permission to appeal under the  Rules,  but  refused
    her permission to appeal in respect of the substantive  decision  under
    Article 8, for reasons which I gave.

 4. At the same time, I gave notice of the Tribunal's Provisional Decision,
    which was that the Tribunal intended to re-make the decision,  allowing
    the claimant's appeal under Article 8.  I also made it clear,  for  the
    avoidance of doubt, that the Tribunal's view was that the  decision  to
    remove the claimant pursuant to Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  in
    accordance with existing jurisprudence.

 5. When giving Notice of the Tribunal's Provisional Decision,  I  informed
    the parties that I would consider any representations  as  to  why  the
    Tribunal should not give a formal determination in the terms set out in
    that notice, so long as these were filed with the Tribunal by no  later
    than seven days after the notice had been sent to the parties.

 6. The file has now been put before me again,  no  representations  having
    been received from either party in the meantime.

 7. Accordingly, I now formally make the decision which I had indicated  to
    the parties that I would make.

Decision

I  set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holt  as
containing a material error of law, and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's substantive  decision
refusing to vary his leave to remain is allowed, under Article 8.

For the avoidance of doubt, the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
remove the  claimant  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
Nationality Act 2006, was in any event not in accordance with the law.


Signed:                                 Date: 17 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


