
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/00830/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 October 2018                     |On 23 November 2018                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                              MR SAID AITJILAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ross  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to revoke his permanent residence card.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Morocco, born on  16  January  1967.   He
    claims to have entered the UK in March 2001 with a visit visa.   On  17
    November 2003 the appellant married a French national  and  was  issued
    with a residence card which expired on 14 April 2009.

3.   He first came to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities  on  22
    November 2004 for criminal  offences  for  which  he  was  subsequently
    convicted.  In March 2009, the appellant and  his  wife  separated  and
    started divorce proceedings.  On 6 April 2009, the appellant  submitted
    an application for a permanent residence card which was refused  on  18
    September 2009.  The appellant successfully  appealed  and  was  issued
    with a permanent residence card on 29 June 2010  valid  until  29  June
    2020.

4.   On 3 November 2011, the appellant was  convicted  at  Portsmouth  Crown
    Court of six counts of handling stolen goods, ten counts of  possessing
    etc false identity documents and two counts  of  attempting  to  remove
    criminal property from the UK.  He was sentenced to a period  of  three
    years and six months' imprisonment.

5.   On 29 March 2013, the appellant's custodial  sentence  ended.   He  was
    then detained in immigration detention and  served  with  a  notice  of
    decision to make a deportation order.   His appeal against the decision
    to deport him was dismissed by the FtT  on  16  August  2013.    On  25
    January 2016 the respondent decided to revoke the appellant's permanent
    residence card.  His appeal was allowed in a decision promulgated on 21
    April 2017.  Following the respondent's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    the appeal was remitted for a hearing de novo.

6.   The respondent relied  on  two  reasons  for  deciding  to  revoke  the
    appellant's  residence  card.   The  first  was  that  the  appellant's
    marriage to his French national wife, as  a  result  of  which  he  was
    granted a residence card  on  14  April  2009,  and  then  a  permanent
    residence card on 29 June 2010, was a marriage of  convenience  entered
    into for the purpose of obtaining  residence  in  the  UK.   The  facts
    relied on by the respondent in that that are that;


    (1)  the appellant married his EEA  national  spouse  on  17  September
         2003;


    (2)  the appellant has four children whose mother is  also  a  Moroccan
         national and who was in a relationship with an EEA national  around
         the same time as when the appellant was in  his  relationship  with
         his French wife;


    (3)  two of the appellant's children were born whilst the appellant was
         still married to his EEA national wife;


    (4)  the appellant's third and fourth children were born after  he  was
         divorced from his EEA national wife.


7.   The judge upheld the respondent's decision.  He found the  evidence  of
    the appellant  and  his  current  partner  in  relation  to  how  their
    relationship developed was confused, inconsistent and  unreliable.   He
    was satisfied from the evidence before him that Secretary of State  had
    proved that the appellant's marriage to his EEA  former  spouse  was  a
    marriage of convenience.  He was also satisfied that the  Secretary  of
    State had reasonable grounds for suspecting an  abuse  of  a  right  to
    reside and that it is proportionate to revoke the appellant's residence
    card for that reason.  The revocation of the residence card does not of
    itself, require the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

8.   Onward appeals by the appellant to the First-tier Tribunal and  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against this decision by Judge Ross were refused.

9.   The respondent's second reason for deciding to revoke  the  appellant's
    permanent residence card was  that  due  to  the  appellant's  criminal
    convictions, the decision to revoke his residence card is justified  on
    the grounds of public  policy  and  security.   The  judge  upheld  the
    respondent's decision. upholding the Secretary of State's decision.

10.  The judge stated at paragraph 30 that in relation  to  the  appellant's
    criminal offending, his starting point  is  the  decision  of  the  FtT
    promulgated on 16 August 2013.   That  appeal  which  was  against  the
    decision to deport the appellant proceeded on the accepted  basis  that
    the appellant had achieved a permanent right of residence  in  the  UK.
    Accordingly, the FtT in 2013 carefully considered  whether  there  were
    "serious grounds of public policy, public security  or  public  health"
    under Regulation 21(5) of the EEA Regulations 2006 which justified  the
    appellant's deportation.

11.  The judge made the following findings:

         "31. I note, as set out in paragraph 36 of  the  FtT  determination
             (quoting from the NOMISS probation report, that the  appellant
             "had committed  36  offences  on  seven  different  occasions,
             including twelve fraud, thirteen theft, two  relating  to  the
             administration of justice and ten miscellaneous offences.   He
             demonstrated an anti-social attitude towards  the  public  and
             the community with a clear escalation of  the  seriousness  of
             offences and although he claimed remorse in a letter he showed
             no remorse at the  time.   He  had  not  really  admitted  his
             involvement.  He had committed the offences to make money  and
             had said in  his  letter  that  he  had  debts  and  financial
             trouble.  The respondent  considered  that  there  may  be  an
             increased risk of reoffending from this quarter.  Besides this
             there was  an  established  pattern  of  repeated  acquisitive
             offences.   He had not previously been deterred".


         32.  At paragraph 37 of its determination, the FtT recorded,


                  "The appellant claims going to prison was a shock  to  his
                  system and he missed his family and his present  intention
                  is to turn a new leaf.  Supported  by  the  learned  Crown
                  Court  judge,  the  probation  officer  and  the   NOMISSI
                  offender manager we do not consider the appellant  can  be
                  taken at his word.  The  offender  manager  described  the
                  appellant as manipulative,  particularly  with  regard  to
                  immigration and identity.  He was married in  a  different
                  name and had been discovered with  a  number  of  aliases,
                  including his present name with a different date of birth.
                   The appellant is an intelligent  criminal  who  has  been
                  educated to a high standard.  He told the offender manager
                  that he had gained a degree in  agriculture  and  that  he
                  fluently speaks French, English, Arabic and  can  converse
                  in  Spanish  and  Italian.   Should  he  have  wished   to
                  undertake lawful employment  we  consider  that  he  could
                  easily have managed to do so; although  claiming  to  have
                  been a baker and building worker there is  no  documentary
                  evidence in support of it.  We have formed the  view  that
                  he is a professional criminal."


         33.  At paragraph 42 of its determination, FtT stated,


                  "Nevertheless, considering the question  of  whether  this
                  man should be tolerated in the UK  for  the  sake  of  his
                  children, we regret to  find  that  he  should  not.   The
                  children would be better off not brought  up  in  constant
                  contact with  such  a  grossly  dishonest  individual  who
                  plainly has no morals or scruples  and  who  is  ready  to
                  exploit false  identities,  false  passports,  false  bank
                  cards, trading in  Morocco  for  cash  to  sell  doubtless
                  illicit goods at huge profit in the  UK.   We  acknowledge
                  that emotional ties with young children will be  partially
                  broken but we consider that this is required for the  good
                  of society and to a lesser extent  for  the  good  of  the
                  children themselves.  If he keeps in touch  by  Skype  and
                  other electronic means the children will to  a  degree  be
                  insulated against his exploitive dishonesty.  We  consider
                  that if the appellant put his mind to (if it be true  that
                  he has a degree in agriculture and  speaks  many  European
                  languages) he would be able to get a job and would be able
                  to have the family to Morocco to visit him".


         34.  I have had regard to the authorities  of  SSHD  v  Straszewski
             [2015] EWCA Civ 1245 and MC (Essa principles recast)  Portugal
             [2011] UKUT 520 (IAC).  I am  reminded  in  the  judgement  of
             Strazewski, that it would be wrong to equate the  position  of
             an EEA national to that of any other  foreign  criminal  whose
             removal is required under section 32 of  the  UK  Borders  Act
             2007.  Because of the nature of this appeal, I have  to  treat
             the appellant as a person with the benefit of  the  protection
             of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations,  notwithstanding   that   his
             residency was obtained by abuse of rights.


         35.  In paragraph 12 of the judgement, I am also reminded that in a
             case where the removal of an EEA national  would  prima  facie
             interfere with the exercise of his Treaty rights,  it  is  for
             the member state to justify its action.  At  paragraph  14  of
             the judgement it is stated, "On  the  face  of  it,  therefore
             deterrence, in the sense of measures designed to deter  others
             from committing similar offences, has of  itself  no  part  to
             play  in  a  decision  to  remove  the  individual   offender.
             Similarly, it is difficult to see  how  a  desire  to  reflect
             public revulsion at the particular offence can  properly  have
             any part to  play,  save,  perhaps  in  exceptionally  serious
             cases.  As far as deterrence is concerned, the CJEU  has  held
             as much in Bonsignore v Oberstadtdirektor der Stadt Koln.


         36.  In paragraph 24 of  the  judgement,  "it  would  therefore  be
             unwise, in my view.  To attempt to lay  down  guidelines.   In
             the end, The Secretary  of  State  must  give  effect  to  the
             Regulations, which themselves must be interpreted against  the
             background of the right of  free  movement  and  the  need  to
             ensure that derogations from it are  construed  strictly.   In
             that context, it is worth noting that even in a case where  it
             is  considered  that  removal  is  prima  facie  justified  on
             imperative grounds of public security, the decision maker must
             consider, among other  things,  whether  the  offender  has  a
             propensity to re-offend in a similar way".


         37.  There is no doubt that the appellant has amassed an  appalling
             criminal record.  I have to be satisfied that the  appellant's
             conduct represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious
             threat to the  public.   The  appellant's  criminal  offending
             began in 2004, continuing up to 2011 when he was sentenced  to
             a total of 3 years 6  months  imprisonment.   The  appellant's
             appeal against the deportation decision was dismissed in 2013.
              It is true that the appellant has not re-offended  since  his
             release in 2013.  It is true that the appellant  has  not  re-
             offended since his release in 2013, however the appellant also
             had  a  similar  gap  in  offending  between  2006  and  2010.
             Further, it is not surprising that the  appellant  has  stayed
             out of trouble given that he was on  license  until  2014  and
             also because he knows that the Secretary of  State  wishes  to
             deport him.


         38.  I have carefully considered the Psychological and Social  work
             reports in  the  appellant's  bundle.   The  opinions  of  the
             Psychologist and Social Worker rely  largely  on  whether  the
             appellant has been truthful with them and presented an  honest
             account of his current attitudes.  I am  unable  to  give  any
             significant weight  to  the  Psychologists  opinion  that  the
             appellant has rehabilitated  himself,  given  the  conflicting
             probation assessments of him being a low  to  medium  risk  of
             reoffending  and  given   the   fundamental   dishonesty   and
             manipulative behaviour demonstrated by him.  I  find  that  if
             allowed to remain in the UK,  the  appellant  will  revert  to
             criminal offending as a means of making easy money as  he  has
             persistently done in the past.


         39.   In  all  of  the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             appellant's offending is sufficiently serious,  such  that  he
             represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
             affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.


         40.  The decision to revoke the appellant's residence card is also,
             in my judgement proportionate.  The immigration status of  the
             appellant's  current  Moroccan  national  partner  and   their
             children will no doubt have  to  be  investigated,  given  the
             reasons for the revocation of the appellant's residence  card.
             All of the  appellant's  children  were  born  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  Whilst they are said to be British Citizens, even if
             their citizenship status is in doubt, three  of  the  children
             have lived here for more than seven years.  I  also  find,  as
             did Judge Glossop, that the children's best interests  are  to
             be looked after by their mother.  I find that  the  children's
             best interests do not require their father to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom.  Furthermore, I have not  been  provided  with
             any evidence as to why the appellant's wife and children could
             not relocate to Morocco to be with the  appellant,  given  the
             close ties which the family have maintained there".

12.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal  on  grounds  1  and  2.
    The first ground argued that there was an  error  in  approach  to  the
    judge's analysis of the risk of re-offending.  It was submitted that at
    the date of the hearing before the judge it had been six years and nine
    months since the appellant's arrest on 26 June 2011 and since then  and
    since his release from prison  in  2013,  the  appellant  had  not  re-
    offended in any way.  In support of his  contention  that  he  did  not
    constitute a  present  risk  of  re-offending,  the  appellant  adduced
    evidence inter alia in the form of a psychological  report  from  Susan
    Pagella, a Consultant Psychologist.  It was  argued  that  the  judge's
    approach to Miss Pagella's report amounted to an  error  of  law.   The
    judge had stated that he was unable to attach any significant weight to
    Miss Pagella's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  of  low  risk  of
    reoffending as he has rehabilitated.  The judge gave three reasons  for
    this; firstly,  because  the  report  relied  largely  on  whether  the
    appellant had been truthful, secondly, because  there  are  conflicting
    probation assessments that is either of  low  or  medium  risk  of  re-
    offending and thirdly that he had demonstrated dishonest  behaviour  in
    the past.  The  grounds  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
    Pagella's  professional  assessment  of  the   appellant's   non-verbal
    communication, her application of an established psychological model to
    his case and the evidence (such as engagement whilst  in  prison)  that
    came from sources rather than the appellant.

13.  Ground 2 argued that the judge erred in approach  to  his  analysis  of
    proportionality at paragraph 40.  It was argued that the  judge  failed
    to take into account the findings of Pagella and Jones (social worker's
    report) which states that the appellant enjoys a loving,  positive  and
    mutually beneficial relationship with his children.  To dismiss  Jones'
    evidence as simply based on what she has been told by the appellant  is
    a clear error of law.

14.  Ms Akinbolu relied on the two grounds of appeal.   She  said  that  the
    decision to revoke the appellant's residence card under  Regulation  25
    must meet with the principles of proportionality;  the  judge  must  be
    satisfied that it is proportionate in all the circumstances  to  revoke
    it.  She said that was the nub of the two grounds.

15.  She said the challenge in respect of  the  first  ground  is  that  the
    judge refused to attach any weight to Pagella's conclusions because  he
    said it was reliant on  the  truth  of  what  the  appellant  said.  Ms
    Akinbolu said  that  the  expert  carefully  set  out  the  appellant's
    criminal offending, her own assessment of his demeaner,  his  behaviour
    in prison and since his release and various other factors and expressly
    concluded for herself the truthfulness of the evidence  as  to  how  it
    suits with the history of the appellant.  She  submitted  that  it  was
    unlawful to dismiss Pagella's conclusions.  Ms Akinbolu said the  judge
    relied on the history of the offences which was wrong because he had to
    look at what the present position is.

16.  As regards ground 2, Ms  Akinbolu  submitted  that  Miss  Jones  is  an
    independent social worker.  The judge  was  dismissive  of  her  report
    again because he said it was based exclusively on evidence provided  by
    the appellant.  She said this is not properly sustainable  because  the
    social  worker  pointed  to  observations  following  her  visits   and
    interview with the appellant, his partner, the children's  schools  and
    other factors.

17.  Ms Akinbolu submitted that  both  errors  were  material  because  they
    weighed into the proportionality assessment.  The impact  of  dismissal
    is  that  the  appellant  will  be  removed.   If   the   decision   is
    proportionate it is to be assessed on  current  risk  and  the  adverse
    impact it would have on the  family.   The  judge  failed  to  properly
    consider the accounts of the expert report.

18.  Ms Akinbolu asked that the decision by  the  judge  be  set  aside  and
    remitted for fresh consideration because the findings of fact as to his
    relationship with his family need to be remade.

19.  Ms Kiss  submitted  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  who  granted
    permission on the two grounds found that the finding that the  marriage
    was a marriage of convenience, was sustainable.  There is  no  arguable
    error on this point.  She said that the Reasons for Refusal Letter took
    a belt and braces approach to revocation as  did  the  judge.   As  the
    marriage was always a marriage of  convenience,  the  appellant  is  no
    longer an EEA national.  This is because he is no longer the spouse  of
    an EEA national under  Regulation  2  and  Regulation  23  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  If this was a marriage of convenience, it means that  the
    appellant has never been an EEA person.   Therefore  Regulation  21  is
    irrelevant but the judge considered it anyway.  (I agree).

20.  She submitted that the appellant's current partner  is  now  a  British
    national and so are the children.  Before Judge Ross she had  permanent
    residence because  of  the  marriage  to  an  EEA  national.   She  was
    successful in her appeal against revocation so the permanent  residence
    card was maintained.  So in respect of proportionality,  the  appellant
    has never been a genuine spouse of an EEA family member.  This needs to
    be taken into account in terms of proportionality.

21.  Ms Kiss submitted that Judge Ross took account of the findings made  by
    FtT Glossop, building up the case in the light of Devaseelan.  That  is
    the background of his criminal behaviour.  When Judge  Ross  looked  at
    it, he considered the update given by Miss Pagella.  Miss Pagella  said
    she had seen the appellant for two hours in 2013, two hours at home and
    one hour on the phone.  During the four  assessments  over  a  two-year
    period, Miss Pagella said the appellant presented as highly remorseful,
    empathic  and  psychologically  minded.   Miss  Pagella   listed   post
    sentencing indicators which she said bode well for  his  rehabilitation
    and reintegration into society, continuing to take full  responsibility
    for his partner and their four children.  Ms  Kiss  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 37 Judge Ross said the appellant may not have reoffended, but
    on the other hand the appellant had a similar gap in offending  between
    2006 and 2010.  Further, it is not surprising that  the  appellant  had
    stayed out of trouble, given that he was under licence until  2014  and
    also because he knows that the Secretary of State wishes to deport him.

22.  Ms Kiss submitted that Judge  Ross's  decision  does  not  disclose  an
    error of law because he took into account all the circumstances of  the
    appellant's case.

23.  In reply, Ms Akinbolu submitted  that  in  this  case  the  deportation
    order was made in 2012.  It was upheld in 2013.  He has  not  committed
    any further offences since 2013 and yet reliance has been placed on the
    2013 decision as opposed to the reports of two experts saying that  the
    appellant has reformed and he is at low risk of reoffending  and  is  a
    vital part of his children's lives.  Judge Ross  did  not  believe  him
    because he found the appellant to  be  untruthful  and  said  that  the
    experts had been manipulated in some way.  Therefore, we  cannot  place
    much weight on the judge's decision.


Findings

24.  With regard to the decision to revoke the appellant's  residence  card,
    I accept Ms Kiss' submission that as the appellant has  been  found  to
    have engaged in the  marriage  of  convenience,  this  meant  that  his
    marriage was always a sham.  This meant that he was no  longer  an  EEA
    national.  I conclude that on this evidence, the decision to revoke the
    appellant's residence card was one that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to make.  The appellant was not a spouse of an EEA national in
    accordance with Regulation 2 of the EEA Regulations. His partner  is  a
    British citizen and so are the children.

25.  I shall deal with ground 1.  This challenges  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 38. It is said that Miss Pagella concludes in her report that
    the appellant is of low risk of re-offending.  Miss  Pagella  sets  out
    her reasoning at length in the body of her report.  In  her  assessment
    of the genuineness of the appellant's remorse Miss Pagella set out  her
    methodology and made it clear that she did  not  take  the  appellant's
    expressions of remorse at  face  value.   She  carefully  observed  and
    considered  the  appellant's  body  language,  facial  expression,  eye
    contact and tone of voice in addition to the language that he  appeared
    to use spontaneously.

26.  Whilst I have considered the methodology used by  Miss  Pagella,  I  do
    find that this does not mean that judge erred in law in concluding that
    the psychological report from Miss Pagella relied  largely  on  whether
    the appellant had been  truthful  with  her  and  presented  an  honest
    account of his current attitudes.   I  preferred  Ms  Kiss'  submission
    which is recorded  at  paragraph  20  above.  I  find  that  the  judge
    considered the reports provided by Ms Pagella including her  update.  I
    find that the judge took into account  all  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's case in reaching his findings at paragraph 38. I find  that
    the judge's conclusion that  if  allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK,  the
    appellant will revert to criminal offending as a means of  making  easy
    money as he has persistently done in the past was open to the judge  on
    the evidence.

27.  The judge was in no doubt that the appellant has amassed  an  appalling
    criminal record.  The judge considered and accepted that the  appellant
    has not reoffended since his release in 2013.  However, the judge noted
    that the appellant also had a similar gap in offending between 2006 and
    2010.  It was open to the judge to find that it was not surprising that
    the appellant has stayed out of trouble given that he  was  on  licence
    until 2014 and also because he knows that the Secretary of State wishes
    to deport him.

28.  On all the evidence that was before him, I find that the judge did  not
    err in concluding  that  the  appellant's  offending  was  sufficiently
    serious such that he represented a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.

29.  I find that Miss Jones' report dated  14  December  2017  mainly  deals
    with the appellant's relationship with his partner and  four  children.
    She said she has  visited  the  home  on  numerous  occasions  and  has
    witnessed the love and care the appellant has for each of his children.
     She said were the appellant  to  be  permanently  separated  from  the
    family, it would have a devastating effect on both his partner and  the
    children.  The children had a secure attachment to their father and for
    him to be removed from their lives would have  implications  for  their
    ongoing emotional development.

30.  I ascertain from Miss Jones' report that the  appellant  has  a  loving
    and caring relationship with his partner and his  children.   I  accept
    that his partner and children are now British nationals.  Nevertheless,
    the judge said he had not been provided with any evidence as to why the
    appellant's partner and children could not relocate to  Morocco  to  be
    with the  appellant,  given  the  close  ties  which  the  family  have
    maintained there.  The judge found  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children are to be looked after by their  mother.   I  also  note  that
    there was evidence before FtT Judge Glossop that  the  children  or  at
    least the older children,  spoke  Arabic.   I  find  that  the  judge's
    conclusion that the respondent's decision  to  revoke  the  appellant's
    residence card was also proportionate was sustainable on the evidence.

31.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose an error of law.

32.  The judge's decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  16 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

