

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00054/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 January 2016                     |On 6 April 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR NATHANIEL WILLIAMS

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


For the Respondent:    Ms C Querton of Counsel instructed by Rashid &
Rashid Solicitors (Merton High St)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) challenges the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara dated 4 August 2015 allowing the  appeal
      of the respondent (hereafter the claimant) on Article 8  grounds.  The
      judge did not accept that  the  claimant  met  the  Immigration  Rules
      relating to private life but was satisfied he met the  relevant  rules
      set out in Appendix FM. The judge also  considered  the  claimant  was
      entitled in any event to succeed outside the Rules.


   2. The grounds allege that the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for
      the decision to allow the appeal by failing to give due weight to  the
      fact  that  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of   the
      Immigration Rules and had not weighed properly in the  balance  or  at
      all the claimant's adverse immigration history, the  financial  burden
      the claimant would place on the public purse and the fact that on  the
      judge's own finding  at  [41]  that  there  would  be  no  significant
      obstacles to the claimant's  re-integration  into  society  in  Ghana.
      Issue was also taken with  the  judge's  decision  to  take  the  oral
      evidence at its highest throughout the hearing.


   3. Taking the last ground first, I see no force in the SSHD's  contention
      that the judge had wrongly taken the claimant's oral evidence  at  its
      highest. It is clear from [30], read in conjunction with [12]-[20]  of
      the   judge's   decision   that   he   considered   whether    certain
      inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  undermined  the   claimant's   and
      partner's account and properly concluded that they did not, given that
      there was consistency on core  matters  relating  to  the  nature  and
      intensity of the family unit which was substantiated by documents that
      had been put before the judge.


   4. Nor do I consider that the SSHD's other grounds identify any  material
      legal error on the part of the judge.


   5. The thrust  of  the  grounds  is  to  argue  that  the  judge  wrongly
      approached the assessment of the claimant's case  outside  the  Rules,
      but that assessment was made in the alternative. Despite  the  judge's
      conclusion at [53] that the appeal was  being  allowed  on  Article  8
      grounds, it is clear that the primary reason he allowed it was because
      the claimant met the relevant requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.
      In this context the grounds have surprisingly little to say.  They  do
      not identify any specific rule in  respect  of  which  the  judge  was
      considered to have erred in law. That feature  greatly  weakens  their
      force.


   6.  In any event, I am satisfied that the  judge  was  entitled  to  find
      that: (i) the claimant's wife met  the  definition  of  partner  under
      GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM; (ii) that the claimant and his wife  are  both
      in the UK; (iii) that the claimant did  not  fall  for  refusal  under
      Section S-LTR; and (iv) that on the facts of this  case  the  claimant
      met the requirements of E-LTRP.1.1  and  E-LTRP.2.2-2.4,  as  well  as
      EX.1.


   7. The essential reason why the judge considered the  family  life  Rules
      were met (notwithstanding that the  claimant  himself  had  not  shown
      there would be very significant obstacles to his  re-integration  into
      society  in  Ghana),  was  because  he  was  satisfied  that  it   was
      unreasonable in all the circumstances to expect  the  British  citizen
      children to leave the United Kingdom because the eldest child was at a
      critical stage in her studies having started high school and  the  two
      elder children had formed friendships both  at  school  and  socially.
      Also relevant to the judge's assessment was the fact that his wife was
      a British citizen who had  been  employed  by  ATOS  as  a  disability
      analyst having previously worked for the NHS as  a  psychiatric  nurse
      but could not continue to work for  the  NHS  because  of  her  health
      conditions, and that the claimant was the biological parent of one  of
      the children.


   8. There is not complete clarity in the judge's treatment of whether  the
      claimant met the Rules governing the "partner route" under  which  the
      additional requirement at EX1.(b) is that the  applicant  show,  inter
      alia, that there are "...insurmountable obstacles to family life  with
      the partner continuing outside the UK". That said, it is  sufficiently
      clear that the judge found the fact that it would not be reasonable to
      expect the children to leave the UK, when  coupled  with  the  serious
      hardship his removal would pose for  his  British  citizen  wife,  did
      entail insurmountable obstacles. But even if the judge were considered
      unjustified in finding EX.1.(b) was satisfied, EX.1 is met if  EX.1(a)
      is met and I see no  proper  basis  for  interfering  in  the  judge's
      finding that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
      leave  the  UK.  That  finding  was  made  in  close  accordance  with
      established case law principles.


   9. It is notable that the grounds make much play of the  point  that  the
      judge did not engage with "the public interest in this case"  and  the
      fact that the claimant had remained in the  UK  after  his  leave  had
      expired; and they seek to support these points by reference to various
      reported cases dealing with the Rules and Article  8,  including  Dube
      (ss.117A-117D)   [2015]   UKUT   00090   and    Bossade    (ss.117A-D-
      interrelationship with Rules) [2015]  UKUT  00415(IAC).  However,  the
      Upper Tribunal made  clear  in  Bossade  that  the  Immigration  Rules
      represent the view of the SSHD as to where the balance  affecting  the
      public interest has been struck and that approach has been re-affirmed
      by the Court of Appeal in the recent case of Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department v JZ (Zambia) [2016] EWCA Civ 116 at[35]:


         "35. The correct approach for any decision-maker applying rules 398
         to 399A of the Immigration Rules is now well-established. The  task
         is not to carry out  a  freestanding  analysis  of  the  article  8
         factors. The Secretary  of  State  has  already  carried  out  that
         exercise in drafting rules 398 to 399A. Those rules form a complete
         code explaining how article 8 operates in  cases  where  a  foreign
         criminal is resisting deportation.  The  decision-maker  must  take
         account of the proposed deportee's Convention  rights  through  the
         lens of the Immigration Rules. The rules emphasise the high  public
         interest in deporting foreign criminals. In a case to  which  rules
         399 and 399A do not apply, very compelling reasons will be required
         if  they  are  to  constitute  "exceptional  circumstances"   which
         outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.  For   a   fuller
         exposition  of  these  now  well-established  principles,  see   MF
         (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
         Civ 1192; [2014] 1  WLR  544,  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department v AJ  (Angola)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1636,  LC  (China)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1310 and
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v Suckoo [2016] EWCA Civ
         38.


  10.  If the judge had sought to treat the  relevant  Rules  as  containing
      additional public interest considerations not stated therein, he would
      have been erroneously "double-counting" the public interest.


  11.  If the grounds had disclosed legal error in the judge's assessment of
      the claimant's ability to meet the requirements of  the  Rules,  there
      would then have been arguable force in the points raised, since it  is
      not apparent, for example, that the judge gave  due  consideration  to
      the fact that he had come to the UK in 2004 on a visit  visa  and  had
      stayed without lawful authority or that he had proper regard to  other
      considerations set out in ss.117B of the 2002  Act.  But,  to  repeat,
      there was no such legal error.


  12. For the above reasons I conclude that the appellant's grounds  do  not
      disclose a material error of law and accordingly the decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal on the basis that the claimant
      met the requirements of the rules set out in Appendix FM must stand.






                               Signed        [pic]
                                   Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
