



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Nos:
IA/00153/2016

                                         IA/00155/2016

                                         IA/00157/2016

                                         IA/00159/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House               |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On: 20 November 2017                |              On: 05 December 2017    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                           Ms Daisy Gakunga Ndirui
                               mr Amos Mwangi
                       master Daniel Gachiengu Mwangi
                         Master Samuel Ndirui Mwangi
                        (NO anonymity directions made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr A I Corban, Corban Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellants are nationals of Kenya, born on 20 April 1983, 25 March
      1977, 22 June 2008 and 11 August  2010  respectively.  The  first  and
      second appellants are the parents of the third  and  fourth,  both  of
      whom were born in the UK.

   2. They appeal with permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge,  promulgated  on  7  October  2016,  dismissing  their
      appeals against the  respondent's  decision  dated  18  December  2015
      refusing their human rights applications for leave to  remain  in  the
      UK.

   3. An application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
      initially refused. Following judicial review proceedings in  the  High
      Court, Mr Justice Mostyn quashed that refusal.  Consequent  upon  that
      decision the Vice-President of the Upper Tribunal  granted  permission
      to appeal on 12 September 2017.

   4. In quashing the decision to refuse permission to  appeal,  Mr  Justice
      Mostyn observed that it was strongly arguable that  mere  lip  service
      had been paid to the key consideration of the best  interests  of  the
      children. It could be said that to make an analogy  with  an  internal
      relocation to a Welsh speaking part of North Wales 'is absurd'.

   5. Mr Corban, who also represented the appellants before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, relied on his reasons for appealing.

   6. He submitted that the appellants' "first child" - the third  appellant
      - qualified for leave to remain pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of
      the Rules. He had been in the UK for at least seven  years  since  the
      date of his birth at the time of the hearing and the decision. In fact
      however, the third  appellant  was  born  on  22  June  2008  and  the
      application on human rights grounds was made on 23 March 2015.

   7. The requirement to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
      grounds of private life in the UK pursuant to paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv)
      are that at the date of application, the appellant is under 18 and has
      lived for at least seven years in the UK.

   8. At the date of application, however, the third appellant had not lived
      here for seven years.

   9. Nevertheless, he was a qualifying child pursuant to s.117B (6) of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

  10. Mr Corban submitted that the Judge has referred  to  "general  matters
      only" and did not undertake a properly informed evaluation of all  the
      material facts and considerations in assessing the  third  appellant's
      best interests.

  11. In the reasons for appealing dated 11 February 2017, it was  contended
      at paragraph 4 that the Judge did not mention paragraph 276ADE(iv) let
      alone address the requirements. The Judge accordingly did  not  follow
      the guidance from PD and Others (Article 8 - Conjoined Family  Claims)
      v Sri Lanka  [2016]  UKUT  108  (IAC).  A  predictive  and  evaluative
      assessment in relation to the child and the entire family was required
      within Article 8 and s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

  12. Mr Corban submitted that the Judge did not engage with the "evidential
      aspects regarding the child's best interests". The third appellant was
      eight years and three months at the date of  decision.  He  had  lived
      here since birth. There was no indication that the Judge gave "anxious
      scrutiny" to that child's best interests.

  13. He referred to his skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal in
      which he contended that on the basis of the third appellant's  welfare
      and circumstances the appeal must be allowed. He referred  to  various
      decisions from the Tribunal including EA (Article 8 -  best  interests
      of the child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 and MK (Best interests of child)
      India  [2011]  UKUT  00475.  An  overall   assessment   is   required.
      Consideration of the best interests of the child could not be  reduced
      to a mere 'yes or no' answer as to  whether  his  removal  and/or  the
      relevant parent was or was not in the child's best interests.

  14. In considering a child's education, regard must be had not just to the
      evidence relating to any short term disruption  of  current  schooling
      that will be caused by any removal but also to that  relating  to  the
      impact  on   a   child's   educational   development,   progress   and
      opportunities in the broader sense.

  15. Mr Corban referred  to  paragraph  [13]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision. The Judge had earlier noted that the children are not  at  a
      crucial stage of development and there is nowhere to  show  that  they
      should not be moved or that they could not cope with such a  move.  He
      stated that to put this into context, they could move  within  the  UK
      with the adults to  obtain  work.  This  would  involve  the  children
      changing schools, making new friends and adapting to a new area and to
      a different school regime. They could for  example  move  to  a  Welsh
      speaking part of North Wales and, child protection issues aside, there
      is no mechanism by which this could  be  prevented  by  the  children.
      Families with children move all  the  time  and  the  suggestion  that
      moving is to be avoided and a last resort cannot be maintained  as  an
      argument.

  16. He submitted with respect to the third appellant that ties outside the
      family are also important matters to be assessed as  part  of  private
      life. The conclusion that it was reasonable for the third appellant to
      be removed did not reflect the facts.

  17. On behalf of the respondent Ms Ahmad accepted that the wording at [15]
      where the Judge stated that the requirement of unreasonableness has to
      require something more than the life that would be  expected  was  not
      appropriate or correct.

  18. She referred to the decision in AM (S.117B) [2015] UKUT 260.  At  [39]
      the Upper Tribunal, presided over by the Vice President,  stated  that
      there was no reason to infer that any interruption to the education of
      the elder child upon return to Malawi would be  any  more  significant
      than that faced by any child  forced  to  move  from  one  country  to
      another by virtue of the careers of  their  parents.  Nor  should  the
      difficulties of a move  from  one  school  to  another  become  unduly
      exaggerated. It would be highly unusual for  a  child  in  the  UK  to
      complete the entirety  of  their  education  within  one  school.  The
      trauma, or excitement,  of  a  new  school,  new  classmates  and  new
      teachers is an integral part of growing up. In too  many  appeals  the
      First-tier Tribunal is presented with arguments whose basic premise is
      that to change a school is to submit a child to  a  cruel  and  unduly
      harsh experience. Indeed the eldest child  of  this  family  has  been
      required to move schools and move from one end of the UK to the other,
      as a result of the decision of her  parents.  The  evidence  does  not
      suggest she suffered any hardship or ill effect from so doing.

  19. Ms Ahmad also referred to MA (Pakistan) and  others  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
      705.  Lord Justice Elias stated at [22]  that  the  crucial  issue  in
      these  cases  is  how  the  Court  should  approach  the  question  of
      reasonableness. He was referring to s.117B(6) of  the  2002  Act.  The
      answer to the question as to what factors a Tribunal  is  entitled  to
      take into account when applying the reasonableness test  must  be  the
      same for paragraph 276ADE.

  20. She referred to [45] of MA  (Pakistan)  where  the  Court  noted  that
      s.117C(5) is in substance a free standing provision in the same way as
      s.117B(6) and even so the Court in MM (Uganda) held that wider  public
      interest considerations must be taken into account when  applying  the
      "unduly harsh" criterion. This must be equally so with respect to  the
      reasonableness  criterion   in   s.117B(6).   Accordingly   the   only
      significance of s.117B(6)  is  that  where  the  seven  year  rule  is
      satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave to
      remain being granted.

  21. Ms Ahmad referred to the contention that it would be  unreasonable  to
      expect the third appellant to leave the UK having regard to  the  fact
      that he had been here since birth; has no experience of  life  in  the
      home country; that he speaks only English and would have  to  learn  a
      new language in Kenya; and that the only culture he has  been  exposed
      to is in the UK. He would have to adapt to  a  new  culture  in  Kenya
      which will likely slow down his educational  progress.  His  education
      would be severely disrupted because of the differences in the  systems
      of education.

  22. She submitted however that the Judge did look at these matters at [9].
      He also set out the appellant's contentions relating to problems  that
      they would face in Kenya. This included the education system  and  the
      fact that the children knew nobody in Kenya and  it  would  be  a  new
      life. He also assessed the child's schooling in the UK at [12].

  23. He had regard to the first appellant's assertion that  she  had  spent
      all her adult life in the UK. He noted that she was 19 when  she  came
      and her husband was 25. They are now 33 and 39. Her  parents  were  in
      Kenya. Her mother had dementia and they felt it would be difficult  to
      adapt to a new life in Kenya. It would be like taking them  to  a  new
      environment and they would be starting again. Medically the appellants
      "were all okay" [11].

  24. In reply Mr Corban submitted that the Judge was  reading  a  different
      requirement into the test of reasonableness and the best wishes of the
      child. He did not approach the matter properly. Findings  should  have
      been made in respect of the facts relating to the children.

  25. He submitted that their findings of fact must be made when considering
      the best interests of the child under Article 8. It is only after such
      findings, that that s.117B (6) is applied. It is difficult to see what
      the Judge in this case considered. There has been no  engagement  with
      the circumstances relating to the best interests of the children.

      Assessment

  26. The First-tier Judge noted that the appellants had to  show  that  the
      requirements  of  the  Rules  are  made  out   on   the   balance   of
      probabilities. The relevant date for consideration of  the  facts  was
      the date of hearing.

  27. He referred to the evidence as well as submissions as set out  in  the
      record of proceedings which he said were referred to where relevant in
      his decision. In the record of proceedings  it  is  evident  that  the
      Judge referred to the evidence of the first appellant  which  she  had
      set out.

  28. The Judge noted at [4] that the grounds of appeal contended  that  the
      decision did not accord with paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules  and  was
      Wendesbury unreasonable. The consequences would  be  disproportionate.
      He referred to the changes to the rights of appeal as at the  date  of
      decision. Applications of this type are governed by  Appendix  FM  and
      paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. The best interests of the children  are
      a primary consideration under s.55 of the 2009 Act  which  are  to  be
      weighed in the balance with  other  relevant  factors  when  assessing
      proportionality. He referred to the provisions of s.117B of  the  2002
      Act [5].

  29. He set out  the  immigration  history  of  the  first  appellant  from
      paragraph [6]. She entered the UK as a student on 28 October 2002 with
      leave to remain until October 2006. Extensions were granted  until  30
      September 2010. Since then she made a number of  applications  between
      2010 and 2013. She was given an in country right of appeal in 2010 and
      2013 which were exercised.

  30. He referred to the appeal heard by Judge Astle where he dismissed  the
      appeals in a decision promulgated on 10 December 2013. He  noted  that
      following Devaseelam, the decision of Judge  Astele  is  the  starting
      point - [6-7].

  31. He noted the findings set out in Judge Astle's decision  at  [7].  The
      appellant did not qualify under paragraph 276ADE and in respect of the
      Article 8 claim the best interests of the children were to  remain  in
      the family unit and it would be proportionate to return them to Kenya.
      That decision was  not  challenged  successfully  and  the  appellants
      continued to remain illegally in the UK.

  32. He noted that although there  are  positive  findings  made  by  Judge
      Astle, it was not to their credit that they had  remained  in  the  UK
      after failing in their various appeals. Other  than  a  preference  to
      live in the UK rather than Kenya, there was no obvious reason why they
      have not complied with their obligation and declared intention in  the
      student application to return to Kenya [8].

  33. The Judge referred to Mr Corban's reliance on cases set  out  in  [10]
      including PD and others, supra, EV (Philippines) and MA (Pakistan). He
      noted that the position of the  child  is  not  to  be  considered  in
      isolation  from  their  parents'  immigration  history.   Their   best
      interests are, where possible, to be brought up  in  the  family  unit
      with their parents and clearly living here without his parents was not
      an option [10].

  34. He set out the first appellant's evidence relating  to  problems  they
      would face in Kenya. He noted her claim that she  had  spent  all  her
      adult life in Kenya and that the children  had  never  lived  anywhere
      else. Her parents were there but her mother had dementia. It would  be
      difficult to adapt to life there. The appellant was 19 when  she  came
      and her husband 25. She had accordingly been here for 14 years at  the
      date of the appeal.

  35. It was noted that in Kenya, teaching is in English. She did not  think
      that the education system was better in the UK and it was  a  question
      of lifestyle. The children knew nobody in Kenya and it would be a  new
      life. It would be like taking them to a new environment and they would
      be starting again. Medically, however 'they were all okay' [11].

  36. The Judge further noted that the children go to school where they  are
      making progress and have developed friendships. In that respect  there
      were documents relating to the children's education. Samuel  is  in  a
      receiving school at [                  ] and was four years old. There
      is a progress summary at pages 26-40.

  37. There is also an annual school  report  in  respect  of  Daniel  by  [
                         ] for 2012/13. He started school in September 2012.
      He has developed since he started. He is now more focused.  There  are
      reports both for Year 1 and Year 2. He achieved 100% school attendance
      between September 2015 and July 2016. He was  accordingly  in  Year  3
      during 2015 and 2016. He was reported to have made good progress (page
      53).

  38. The Judge referred to evidence of their education and life in  the  UK
      as set out in the bundle [12]. The evidence was not unusual. Nor  were
      they at a crucial stage of development. There was no evidence to  show
      that they should not be moved or that they could not cope with a  move
      [12].  I note that this finding has not been challenged. It has simply
      been contended that the Judge has  not  undertaken  a  predictive  and
      evaluative assessment in relation to the child and the entire family.

  39. It is in that context that the Judge noted that relocation does  occur
      even within a country and can entail dislocation and a need to  adapt.
      It is difficult to  see  how  that  can  be  an  objection  to  moving
      internationally, particularly when the family would  be  going  on  to
      where the adults grew up and where there are family members and it was
      the country of their nationality [14].

  40. At [15] the Judge considered that if the child only had to  show  that
      they were attending school and doing well, making friends and having a
      social  life  with  others,  as  would  be  expected,  the   test   of
      reasonableness would  add  nothing  and  any  and  every  child  would
      succeed. There needed to be something within the evidence showing that
      the child's circumstances are such that  the  dislocation  of  removal
      would be unreasonable. That had to be in the context of  moving  as  a
      family with the support of the parents [15].

  41. He noted at [17] that in this case the children might do better in the
      UK but that did not answer the question that this case  raises.  There
      was nothing to show that the circumstances of the children are out  of
      the ordinary. There was no evidence to show that with the  support  of
      their parents they would  not  be  able  to  cope  with  the  ordinary
      consequences of relocation or that relocation to Kenya  could  not  be
      achieved.

  42. The best interests of the children are to remain in the  family  unit.
      That could be achieved with the family going to Kenya and there is  no
      evidence to show that that cannot, or should not happen [17].

  43. He found that those conclusions meant that the family  cannot  succeed
      under  paragraph  276ADE.  There  was  nothing  in   the   appellant's
      circumstances that would  justify  leave  being  granted  outside  the
      Rules. The family can return to Kenya and use the education and skills
      obtained in the UK to re-establish themselves [19].

  44. I do not accept from this analysis that this Judge has given mere  lip
      service to the consideration of the interests of the children. Nor  is
      the analogy at [13] of the decision in any way "absurd."

  45. I accordingly find that the Judge has adopted a  correct  approach  to
      the issues raised in the appeal. He has properly considered  the  best
      interests of the children.

  46. I am satisfied that the Judge was  aware  of  the  law  which  he  was
      applying and properly concentrated on the issue as to whether it would
      be reasonable for a qualifying child to be removed.

  47. The relevant statutory provisions were referred to and  were  applied.
      It was open to the Judge to reach the conclusions that he did, and for
      the reasons given.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity directions are made.


      Signed                             Dated: 30 November 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

