
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA002112015;

                    IA002122015; IA002132015; IA002142015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Promulgated               |
|On 19 May 2017                     |On 5 June 2017                     |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                     DB
                                     PB
                                     KB
                                     KDB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Bremang instructed by Ravi Sethi Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. An order was previously made as this case relates to
   the rights and interests of children. The order will continue.
2. To avoid confusion, I will refer to the  parties  as  they  were  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal.
3. The Appellants are all nationals of Mauritius. The first  Appellant  (A1)
   born 4 October 1979. The second Appellant (A2) is  her  husband  born  26
   April 1974. The third Appellant (A3) is their child born 23 August  2003.
   The fourth Appellant (A4) is their child born 22 November 2012.
4. The Appellants appealed against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
   dated 11 December 2014 to refuse to grant an application for leave remain
   on the basis of their family and  private  life  in  the  UK.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies dismissed the appeal and  the  Appellants  appealed
   with permission to this Tribunal. In an error of law hearing on 18  March
   2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mc Ginty  set  aside  the  decision  and
   remitted the rehearing to the First tier tribunal where it was  re  heard
   before First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne on 6 July 2016. The Judge allowed
   the appeal although he appears to have allowed it under  Article  8  only
   making no findings under the Rules and given the  date  of  the  decision
   there was a right of appeal under the Rules,
5.  That decision was also appealed by the Respondent therefore in  relation
   to a decision under Article 8 only and in an error of law hearing  on  21
   February 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor found an error of law and set
   the decision aside as the Judge had  failed  to  consider  MA  (Pakistan)
   [2016] EWCA Civ 705  in his assessment of whether it  was  reasonable  to
   require A3 to leave the UK for the purpose of section117B6.
6. The matter was adjourned for rehearing and came before me.
The Law
 7. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the standard
    of proof is upon the balance of probability.
 8. Section 117A (2) of the 2002 Act provides  that  where  a  Tribunal  is
    required to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
    Acts would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  it
    must, in considering 'the public interest question', have regard in all
    cases to the considerations listed in section117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014). Section 117 (3) provides that  the  'public  interest  question'
    means the question of whether an interference with a person's right  to
    respect for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).
 9. The S117B considerations are as follows:

         "(1)     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a  qualifying  partner,that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

Section 117B6


  10. The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section 117D:

           "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
           who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
             seven years or more;"


11. I have taken into account the guidance given in R (on  the  application
    of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v UT (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ  705  in
    relation to the issue of reasonableness in section 117B 6 of  the  2002
    Act at paragraph 45 it states:

    "In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the conduct of  the
    applicant and any other matters relevant to the  public  interest  when
    applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5), so should it
    when  considering  the  question  of   reasonableness   under   section
    117B(6).....
    But the critical point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a  free-
    standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so  the
    court in MM (Uganda) held that  wider  public  interest  considerations
    must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh"  criterion.
    It seems to me  that  it  must  be  equally  so  with  respect  to  the
    reasonableness  criterion  in  section  117B(6).   It  would   not   be
    appropriate  to  distinguish  that  decision  simply  because  I   have
    reservations whether it is correct.   Accordingly,  in  line  with  the
    approach in that case, I will analyse the appeals on the basis that the
    Secretary of State's submission on this point is correct and  that  the
    only significance of section 117B(6) is that where the seven year  rule
    is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning in favour of  leave
    to remain being granted."


12. As to the relevance of the Respondents policy in relation to  Appendix
    FM and children which is relied on by the Appellants in this  case  at
    paragraph 46-47 it states:

    "46.Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact  that  a
    child has been here for seven years must be  given  significant  weight
    when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the  Secretary
    of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form  of  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent)
    and Private Life: 10  Year Routes"  in which  it  is  expressly  stated
    that once the seven years' residence requirement  is  satisfied,  there
    need to be "strong reasons" for refusing leave  (para.  11.2.4).  These
    instructions were not in force when the cases  now  subject  to  appeal
    were determined, but in my view, they merely confirm what  is  implicit
    in adopting a policy of this nature. After such a period  of  time  the
    child will have put down  roots  and  developed  social,  cultural  and
    educational links in the UK  such  that  it  is  likely  to  be  highly
    disruptive if the child is required to leave the UK. That may  be  less
    so when the children are very young because the focus  of  their  lives
    will be on their families, but the disruption becomes more  serious  as
    they get older.  Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong
    expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK
    with his parents as part of a family unit, and  that  must  rank  as  a
    primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


    47.Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness  test  where  the
    focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view follow that  leave
    must be granted whenever the child's best interests are  in  favour  of
    remaining. I reject Mr  Gill's  submission  that  the  best  interest's
    assessment  automatically  resolves  the  reasonableness  question.  If
    Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to dictate the outcome
    of the leave application, it would have said so."

Evidence
13. On the file I had the Respondents bundle. I had a copy  of  the  reason
    for refusal letter. The Appellant put in an  appeal  and  a  bundle  of
    documents.
Final Submissions
14. On behalf the Respondent Mr Mc Vitie made the following submissions:
          a) He drew my attention to the fact that this  was  old  decision
             and therefore I was  obliged  to  consider  both  whether  the
             Appellants could meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE and
             whether in the light of the elder child having lied in the  UK
             for 11/12 years it was reasonable to require him to leave.
          b) He suggested that while the length of  residence  may  in  the
             past have been determinative in the light of  MA  all  of  the
             circumstances could be taken into account.
          c) He identified those factors in the Appellants favour were that
             they had a positive immigration history and had never been  in
             the UK illegally.
          d) The older child was performing well at school.
          e) The younger child had issues in that  he  was  suffering  from
             selective mutism.
          f) The only factor  he  conceded  that  weighed  in  the  balance
             against them was immigration control.
15. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Bremang submitted:
          a) She relied on her skeleton argument.
          b) The adult Appellants were well educated,  both  spoke  English
             and were well assimilated.
          c) The youngest child had selective mutism and this had only come
             to light since he had been attending  nursery  in  2016  .  He
             needs a stress free stable life.
          d) The older child was at a critical stage of  his  education  in
             that he was starting his GCSE years.
Findings

16. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round before  reaching
    any findings.  I have done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
    compartmentalised my findings in some respects below, I must  emphasise
    the findings have only been made having taken account of  the  evidence
    as a whole.

17. The Judge's decision in respect of Article 8 only was put in issue  and
    that is the matter that I have had to determine. In any event it  makes
    no material difference given that the  central  question  is  the  same
    under paragraph 276ADE 1 (iv) and section 117B6 : is it  reasonable  to
    expect A3 to leave the UK taking into account the circumstances of  the
    whole family.


18. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27


Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


19. I am satisfied that the Appellants have a family life  in  the  UK  and
    they have a private life as the parents have lived and worked in the UK
    since their arrival in 2006 and as soon as  the  children  reached  the
    appropriate age they have been educated here.


If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


20. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


21. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for  the  Appellants  to  regulate  their
    conduct by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


22. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control. The
    state has the right to control the entry  of  non  nationals  into  its
    territory and Article 8 does not mean that  an  individual  can  choose
    where she wishes to enjoy their private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


23. In making the assessment of the best interests of the children  I  have
    also taken into account ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011]  UKSC  4  where  Lady
    Hale noted Article 3(1) of the UNCRC which states that "in all  actions
    concerning  children,  whether  undertaken  by  ...  courts   of   law,
    administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the best interests of
    the child shall be a primary consideration."

24. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

25. The starting point for children is that it is in their  best  interests
    to be brought up by both of their parents.


26. In relation to the two children in this case A3 came to the UK in  2006
    when he was 2 years old and has been here for 11 years and he is now 14
    years old. A4 was born in the UK and is 4 years  old.  The  unfortunate
    immigration history of this case with there being two  hearings  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and both decisions having been found to contain
    errors has lengthened the period of their stay.


27. In relation to the children's best interests I am satisfied that it  is
    overwhelmingly in both child's best interests to remain in the  UK  for
    the reasons I set out below.


28. I am satisfied in relation to A3 that he has spent the vast majority of
    his life here and has spent formative years here  having  moved  beyond
    the confines of his family into the wider world. While I accept  it  is
    possible to exaggerate the impact on a child of  a  change  of  school,
    particularly when they have well educated and  supportive  parents  who
    are familiar with the system in the country of origin,  this  child  is
    now 13 years old and is well embedded in the UK  education  system  and
    indeed in the culture of the UK.  I remind myself of what was  said  in
    Azimi-Moayed  and  others   (decisions   affecting   children;   onward
    appeals)[2013] UKUT 197(IAC) (Blake J) that  it  is  generally  in  the
    interests of children to have both stability and continuity  of  social
    and educational provision and the benefit of growing up in the cultural
    norms of the society to which they belong; and that  lengthy  residence
    in a country other than the state of origin can lead to development  of
    social cultural and educational ties that it would be inappropriate  to
    disrupt, in the absence of compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.  What
    amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and  present
    policies have identified seven years as a relevant period. In this case
    therefore A3 has gone well beyond the 7 year point identified in  Azimi
    Moyed. Mr Mc Vitie fairly acknowledged  that  A3  is  well  settled  in
    school and appears to be doing well and  there  is  material  from  the
    school and the unchallenged evidence from the parents to confirm  this.
    He is at an age where he has started his GCSE course and I accept  that
    this is an important stage in his education.


29. A4 is only 4 years old and therefore has not lived in  the  UK  for  as
    long as his brother. There are however a number of  significant  recent
    medical reports for him  at  page  299  onwards  of  the  supplementary
    bundle.  He has been assessed by the NHS as a Special Educational Needs
    Coordinator found that he  was  'showing  signs  of  a  severe  anxiety
    disorder with the possibility of the disorder being  Selective  Mutism'
    because although there were no concerns about his  language  skills  he
    was refusing to speak to anyone, adults or children,  at  his  nursery.
    The material provided by the NHS to his parents confirms that  this  is
    treatable but a reduction in anxiety and the fostering  of  a  positive
    environment is vital. I am therefore satisfied that  it  is  reasonably
    likely that  the  upheaval  of  returning  to  a  country  that  he  is
    unfamiliar with would have an adverse impact on his condition.


30. Taking the circumstances of both boys  into  account  and  particularly
    given A3s length of residence and A4s health issue I am satisfied  that
    it is strongly in their best interest to remain in the UK.


31. In relation to the adult Appellant's relationship with A3 who has  been
    in the UK  I accept that A3 is  a  qualifying  child  for  the  purpose
    secion117B6 and therefore I am required to  consider  whether,  in  the
    light of my finding that it is overwhelmingly in A3s best interests  to
    remain in the UK it is nevertheless reasonable to require him to  leave
    as the children's best interests are not determinative of the issue  if
    there are strong reasons nevertheless why the family should be removed.
    The assessment of the reasonableness of return must not  however  focus
    on the position of the children and this has  been  made  clear  in  MA
    referred to above and more recently in AM (Pakistan)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    180


32. I take into account that while the family  have  established  their
    life  in  the  UK  when  their  status  was  precarious  they  have
    nevertheless at all times had leave and  have  therefore  respected
    the UK system of immigration  control  and  this  was  very  fairly
    acknowledged and indeed highlighted  by  Mr  Mc  Vitie.  They  have
    clearly honoured the requirements of the leave they have been given
    previously and both have made a positive  contribution  to  the  UK
    economy with A1 working as an  accountant  and  A2  as  a  security
    officer.  They both speak English. These  factors  I  am  satisfied
    must reduce the weight that I might normally give to the  interests
    of  immigration  control  where,  for   example,   Appellants   are
    overstayers or indeed have never had any  form  of  leave  or  have
    entered as students and then never studied..


33. When considering where the balance lies therefore between the  best
    interests of the children on the one hand  where  I  have  set  out
    above that the best interests of the children are overwhelmingly to
    remain in the UK, and the  importance  of  maintaining  immigration
    control on the other, I am entitled to take into account  the  fact
    that they are not British Citizen children and are not entitled  as
    of right to benefit from the  education  system  and  other  public
    services of this country.


34. Having considered all of the evidence carefully and in  the  round,
    particularly the length of residence for the children,  the  health
    issues of A4 and the positive immigration history, I have  come  to
    the conclusion, on balance, that  it  is  not  reasonable  for  the
    purposes of section  117B6  to  require  A3  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.


35. Given my findings that this family should remain together  all  the
    appeals must succeed.


Decision


36. I allow the appeals under Article 8.


37. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008
    9as amended) the Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout
    these proceedings, unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs
    otherwise. An order for anonymity was made in  the  First-tier  and
    shall continue.

Signed                                                              Date
1.6.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

