
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
IA/00478/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 September 2015                |On 30 September 2015                 |
|                                    |                                     |
|                                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                          Mr MD NASHIR AHAMED KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Frankish on 7 July 2015 against the determination
           of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bradshaw  who  had  dismissed  the
           Appellant's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
           dated 16 December 2014 in  a  determination  promulgated  on  22
           April 2015.  The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, who  had
           applied for further leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
           Student Migrant, which was  refused  on  the  grounds  that  the
           Appellant had not submitted a current IELTS  certificate  to  B2
           level and  had  also  not  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
           245ZX(1) of the Immigration Rules in that the start date of  the
           proposed course was more than 28 days after the  expiry  of  the
           previous leave.  The reasons for refusal  letter  conveying  the
           decision to  refuse  to  vary  the  Appellant's  existing  leave
           incorporated a second decision to remove the Respondent  by  way
           of directions under section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
           Nationality Act 2006. The appeal  had  been  determined  on  the
           papers as the Appellant had requested.

      2.     Judge  Frankish  considered  it  arguable  that  because  Judge
           Bradshaw had been struggling  with  limited  information  and  a
           certificate of posting had now been provided, an arguable  error
           of law might have arisen.  There were other possible  issues  of
           law, such as the fact that  the  Appellant's  extant  leave  had
           continued under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.


      3.    When the  appeal  was  called  on  for  hearing,  there  was  no
           appearance  by  the  Appellant  nor  any  application   for   an
           adjournment in consequence.  Having satisfied itself that notice
           of the time, date and place of the hearing had been duly  served
           on the Appellant, and further  noting  that  the  Appellant  had
           requested that his initial appeal should be  determined  on  the
           papers, the tribunal decided  that  it  should  proceed  in  the
           Appellant's absence and that his  appeal  could  be  fairly  and
           justly determined in such absence.


      4.    Mr Bramble for the Appellant relied on the rule 24 notice  dated
           17 July 2015 which the Respondent had served indicating that the
           onwards appeal was opposed.  The Appellant now wished to rely on
           evidence which he had not placed before the First-tier  Tribunal
           judge.  In any event, making due allowance for the fact that the
           Appellant was unrepresented, there was no supporting evidence to
           show what documents the certificate of posting related to.


      5.     The  other  point  the  Appellant  had  raised  concerning   QI
           (Pakistan)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  614  had  merit,  in   that   the
           Appellant's in time application  for  further  leave  to  remain
           meant that his extant Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  leave
           continued by virtue of section 3C, an authority which the  judge
           had not considered.  However the  appeal  failed  in  any  event
           because of the Appellant's failure to prove how  he  lodged  the
           IELTS certificate on which he relied.   Thus  the  determination
           should stand.


      6.    The tribunal should  not  interfere  with  a  properly  reasoned
           determination of a First-tier Tribunal judge unless there  is  a
           clear and material error of law.  It was up to the Appellant  to
           submit  his  evidence  in  advance  and  accordance   with   the
           tribunal's directions and for him to ensure that any submissions
           of law were clearly set out.  The Appellant chose to proceed  on
           the papers only.  He is now attempting  to  reargue  his  appeal
           with fresh  and  inadmissible  evidence.   But,  as  Mr  Bramble
           pointed out, that fresh evidence  is  itself  inconclusive.  The
           judge gave proper and secure reasons for dismissing  the  appeal
           at [9] and [10] of his decision.  That finding  meant  that  the
           judge had no option but to dismiss the appeal.


      7.    The succinct terms in which the onwards grounds of  appeal  were
           drafted indicate that the Appellant has access to well  informed
           legal advice,  although  the  author  of  the  grounds  has  not
           identified  himself/herself.   As  Mr  Bramble   very   properly
           conceded, the judge's discussion of the  other  element  of  the
           appeal (see [13] of the decision) is mistaken in that QI (above)
           as decided in the Court of Appeal emphasises the  importance  of
           section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  when  construing  paragraph
           245ZX(1) of the Immigration Rules.  The  Appellant  should  have
           drawn the judge's attention to  relevant  authority,  given  his
           access to legal assistance.  But the judge's error of law cannot
           be seen as material in that respect, since the appeal was doomed
           because of the findings made at [9] and [10] of the decision.


      8.    The onwards appeal is accordingly dismissed.






      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
