
  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00126/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court , Birmingham           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 June 2014                                |On 4 July 2014               |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             MRS SHARON BOSSMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Awal, Legal Representative, from the Law
Clinic.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing on 22 October 2013. However, for  ease  of  reference,
    the Appellant and Respondent are hereafter referred  to  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore Mrs Bossman is  referred  to
    as the Appellant and the Secretary of  State  is  referred  to  as  the
    Respondent.


 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Ghana  whose  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to refuse to grant her a residence  card  as
    the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights was  allowed  by
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge R G Handley (the Judge). She claimed  that
    she and her EEA national Sponsor were married by proxy in Ghana and the
    Respondent did not accept that it was established on the basis  of  the
    documentary evidence that was provided by her that the  proxy  marriage
    was a valid marriage under Ghanaian Law because it did not comply  with
    the requirements  of  the  law.  The  items  of  evidence  provided  to
    establish that it complied with the legal requirements in Ghana were  a
    Marriage Certificate dated 20 May 2013, a statutory  declaration  dated
    10 May 2013 and a letter from the Ghanaian High Commission in London.


 3. The Respondent's position, in the reasons for refusal  letter  dated  4
    December 2013, was that although there  was  no  legal  requirement  to
    register a customary marriage, if it was registered  voluntarily  there
    must be compliance with the provisions of paragraph 3(1)  of  the  PNDC
    (Provisional National Defence Council) law 112, Customary Marriage  and
    Divorce (Registration) Law 1985, which required a statutory declaration
    to  be  provided,  such  statutory  declaration  to   supply   specific
    information as to the names of the parties, the place of  residence  at
    the  time  of  the  marriage,  and  confirmation  that  the  conditions
    essential to the validity  of  the  marriage  in  accordance  with  the
    applicable customary law have been complied with.


 4. Reliance was placed by the Respondent within the RL  on  NA  (Customary
    marriage and divorce -  evidence)  Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT  00009,  within
    which, at paragraph 11, the expert evidence of Mercy Akman  was  relied
    on as setting out the   criteria  which  must  be  met  under  Ghanaian
    customary law for a customary marriage to  be  considered  legal,  this
    being:


         "7.  ...  It is a type of marriage contracted under the  particular
             tradition and customary practices of a  group  of  people....A
             valid  customary  marriage  can  only  be  validly  contracted
             between two Ghanaian  citizens  and  both  parties  must  have
             capacity to  marry.   This  means  that  there  should  be  no
             violation of any rule of  tribal  relationship.   These  rules
             differ from tribe to tribe...


         8.    A  particular  characteristic  of  customary  marriage  which
             distinguishes it from the system of  marriage  in  Europe  and
             other places is that it is not just a union of "this man"  and
             "this woman".  It is the union of "the family of  this  woman"
             and "the family of  this  man".   Marriage  in  the  customary
             context  therefore  unites  families  and   not   merely   the
             individuals.


         9.   It involves payment of  a  bride  price  by  the  bridegroom's
             family to the bride's family.  If the appropriate bride  price
             is not paid, there is no valid marriage, even if parties  live
             as man and woman for many years.  The acceptance of drink from
             the man's family is an indication of the consent of the wife's
             family to the  marriage....It  is  potentially  polygamous  in
             nature; a man may  decide  to  marry  as  many  women  as  his
             strength and resources can accommodate.

         10.  There is not always a formal ceremony.  Even if there was, the
             couples do not have to be present at this ceremony for a valid
             marriage to take place, provided representatives  of  the  two
             families are present as witnesses to the meeting or event."

 5. The conditions essential to validity of a customary  marriage  are  the
    capacity to marry (that  is  that  the  parties  are  a  suitable  age,
    eligibility in terms of  the  parties  being  Ghanaian  nationals,  the
    status of the parties  (that  is  whether  they  have  been  previously
    married etc)). However, in contrast to paragraph 7 of the  evidence  of
    the expert in NA (Ghana), it is stated at p 4 of 10 of the RL that  the
    parties to the  marriage  must  be  Ghanaian  nationals  themselves  or
    demonstrate that one of their parents is a Ghanaian national.


 6. The Respondent decided that the documents supplied  did  not  establish
    that the Appellant's EEA Sponsor was of Ghanaian descent or  that  they
    had direct familial links to  Ghana,  that  the  statutory  declaration
    supplied did not confirm that a dowry had been paid and did  not  state
    the current condition or marital status of the parties as  required  by
    the customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration law) 1985, and that no
    birth  certificates   were   provided   to   establish   the   familial
    relationships between the Appellant and the  Sponsor  and  the  persons
    named in the statutory declaration as the father of the  Appellant  and
    the mother of the Sponsor.

 7. The Judge accepted that the statutory declaration provided "...does not
    meet all the necessary requirements of the  Ghanaian  law  but  it  was
    produced to the  Ghanaian  Authorities  as  a  necessary  step  to  the
    registration of a customary marriage. The Authorities in Ghana accepted
    it and issued a certificate to the effect that the  customary  marriage
    had been registered. This is also confirmed in a letter of 11  December
    2013 from the Ghana High Commission." He  also  found  that  there  was
    "little or no evidence to suggest that the Marriage Certificate  was  a
    false or fraudulent document." On the  basis  of  these  findings,  the
    Judge allowed the appeal.


 8. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal on the basis that Judge
    erred in law in failing to resolve material matters because he did  not
    engage with the issues raised in the RL, in which it  was  stated  that
    the Appellant had to prove that the customary marriage  was  registered
    in accordance with the provisions of the law in Ghana; that it was  not
    established that her EEA Sponsor was  of  Ghanaian  descent;  that  the
    signatures in the husband and wife field of  the  marriage  certificate
    did not match those in the passport  application  form;  and  that  the
    content  of  the  statutory  declaration  did  not  comply   with   the
    requirements of the law.


 9. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on the basis
    that it was arguable that adequate reasons had not been given  for  the
    Judge's finding that  the  Appellant's  marriage  to  the  Sponsor  was
    performed according to the customary laws and  was  to  be  treated  as
    valid in the UK. This was because his reasoning at paragraph 20 of  the
    determination did not adequately explain his  ultimate  conclusions  at
    paragraph 21 of the determination. Judge Landes also drew the attention
    of the parties to Kareem [2014] UKUT 24.


10. The Appellant submitted a Rule 24 response in which it is  stated  that
    the Judge did not err in law, that the  Respondent's  reliance  on  the
    case of NA (Ghana) was untenable because Mercy Akman,  the  expert  who
    gave evidence in that case as to whether  a  proxy  marriage  could  be
    entered into by non-Ghanaian nationals,  had  revised  her  opinion  in
    Alexander Amoako v SSHD promulgated by the Upper Tribunal  on  21  June
    2013, clarifying that customary marriages were available  between  non-
    Ghanaian citizens. It was further  submitted  that  this  position  was
    supported by McCabe v McCabe [1994] 1 FLR 410, in which  the  Court  of
    Appeal held that a customary marriage between a Ghanaian national and a
    non-Ghanaian national was valid.


11. For the purpose of  the  hearing  before  me,  I  had  the  documentary
    evidence which was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  well  as  an
    additional bundle from the Appellant, pp numbered A - J  and  1  -  161
    (AB2) although the only evidence referred to within that bundle for the
    purposes of deciding whether or not the Judge had materially  erred  in
    law  comprised  duplicates  of  the  documents  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Submissions on behalf of the Respondent


12. Mr Smart essentially relied on the grounds of application but clarified
    the Respondent's position on whether or not proxy marriages could  take
    place between non-Ghanaian nationals. He submitted that the RL did  not
    accurately reflect the position of the Respondent in one area. At  p  4
    of 10, it was stated that "...both parties  to  the  marriage  must  be
    either Ghanaian citizens themselves, or be  able  to  demonstrate  that
    their parents are Ghanaian citizens, in order for  the  marriage  under
    customary law to be considered legal." This was the position  taken  in
    Amoako but was not the position taken in NA (Ghana), which  was  relied
    on in the RL and reliance on NA (Ghana)  is  maintained.  He  submitted
    that the Country of Origin Information Service Report on Ghana dated 11
    May 2012 (COIS report) at paragraph 30 confirmed that the  Constitution
    of Ghana (1992), at part 8(1)) confirmed that "...a  citizen  of  Ghana
    shall cease forthwith to be a citizen of Ghana if, on attaining the age
    of twenty-one years, he, by  a  voluntary  act,  other  than  marriage,
    acquired or retains the citizenship of a country other than Ghana..."


13. Mr Smart submitted that the guidance relied on in Amoako  was  prepared
    by an officer within the policy department and the current instructions
    rely on NA (Ghana). The expert had changed her evidence in Amoako  from
    that which she gave in NA (Ghana) but that evidence is not accepted  by
    the Respondent; Amoako is not a starred decision and cannot  be  relied
    on in evidence.


14. He submitted that as the evidence adduced did not  establish  that  the
    Appellant  and  the  EEA  national  were  validly  married  under   the
    applicable laws in Ghana, the correct approach  was  that  set  out  in
    Kareem. It was for the Appellant to establish that her  proxy  marriage
    was accepted as lawful in the country of origin  of  her  EEA  national
    Sponsor,  that  is  establish  that  it  was  accepted  by  the   Dutch
    authorities, pursuant to headnote G of Kareem, the  detailed  reasoning
    for which was set out at paragraphs 41 - 67 of that determination.




Submissions on behalf of the Appellant


15. Mr Awal relied on his skeleton argument, submitting that he  relied  on
    the decision of the High Court in McCabe v McCabe [1994] 1 FLR 410,  in
    which a customary marriage was recognised between  a  Ghanaian  citizen
    and an Irish citizen and this conclusion differed from that in  Kareem;
    the latter only applied if it was found that the proxy marriage was not
    conducted in accordance with Ghanaian law. The Appellant's marriage  to
    her EEA Sponsor complied with all the requirements of the law  and  was
    endorsed by the Ghanaian High Commission. If it had not been valid,  it
    would not have been endorsed by the Ghanaian High Commission. Therefore
    Kareem did not apply and the grant of permission to appeal was  not  in
    accordance with the law. He submitted that it  was  stated  within  the
    statutory declaration that the customary marriage had been performed in
    accordance with the rites of customary marriages.


16. Mr Awal further submitted that Mercy  Akman,  who  had  given  evidence
    before the tribunal  in  NA  (Ghana),  had  changed  her  evidence  and
    confirmed that a valid proxy marriage could still be conducted  between
    a Ghanaian citizen and a non-Ghanaian citizen, and the  Appellant  came
    under  the  auspices  of  Amoako.  He  submitted  that   the   marriage
    certificate was signed by those standing in proxy for the Appellant and
    the Sponsor and law in Ghana enables the proxy to sign all documents on
    behalf of the parties to the marriage as provided by  section  3(2)  of
    the Customary Marriage and Divorce Act 1985.


17. In reply, Mr Smart stated that McCabe and McCabe did not apply  because
    no issue was before the  Court  as  to  whether  both  parties  had  to
    Ghanaian nationals for a proxy marriage to be valid; this issue was not
    raised, they were not required to, and did not, make a finding on  this
    point. This issue only became apparent in NA (Ghana).


18. This concluded the submissions. Both representatives agreed that  if  I
    found that the Judge had materially erred in law such that his decision
    must be set aside, I had sufficient material  before  me  on  which  to
    remake the decision.



Did the Judge materially error in law?

19. At the hearing before the Judge, neither party referred to or relied on
    Amoake. However, the extracts from the COIS report had  been  provided,
    and this apparent conflicts between the position in NA (Ghana) and  the
    COIS report, and the RL at p 5 of 10 were not resolved  by  the  Judge.
    The Judge also did not address the apparent conflict arising  from  the
    confirmation from the Ghana High Commission that the proxy marriage was
    validly registered, despite the failure of the Statutory Declaration to
    contain the information that the legal provisions require.


20. The Appellant's evidence was that although there is no need to register
    a proxy marriage, hers had in fact been registered voluntarily pursuant
    to the provisions of the PNDC (Provisional  National  Defence  Council)
    law 263, Ghana customary and  Divorce  (Registration)  (Amendment)  Law
    1991. This being the  case,  McCabe  v  McCabe  did  not  apply,  which
    considered the evidence  to  be  adduced  to  prove  that  a  customary
    marriage which was not registered had in fact taken place. Further,  in
    that case, the Court was not asked to consider  whether  the  customary
    marriage could validly be contracted between  a  Ghanaian  and  a  non-
    Ghanaian national and therefore it was not an issue considered  by  the
    Court and, as submitted by Mr Smart, the Court was not required to make
    a finding on it. I therefore find that McCabe v  McCabe  cannot  assist
    the Appellant.


21. The essential reasoning of the Judge  was  that  whilst  the  statutory
    declaration did not contain all the information that is required by the
    law in Ghana for the  purposes  of  the  voluntary  registration  of  a
    customary marriage in Ghana, it was accepted as valid by  the  Ghanaian
    authorities in Ghana because it was on the basis  of  this  declaration
    that the marriage was registered, and the documents  were  accepted  by
    the Ghana High Commission as being valid. However, in paragraph  14  of
    Kareem, it is stated:


             "Whilst considering the issue  of  evidence  of  marriage,  we
             remind ourselves that the proof of the law of another  country
             is by evidence, including proof of private  international  law
             of that other country.  Such evidence will not  only  have  to
             identify relevant legal provisions in the  other  country  but
             identify how they apply in practice.    A lack of evidence  of
             relevant foreign law will normally mean that  the  party  with
             the burden of proving it will fail. "

22. It is usual, when one is considering the genuineness of a document,  to
    provide a detailed  report  setting  out  the  features  of  a  genuine
    document and how it is that the documents presented compare  with  such
    documents. This evidence must be adduced to the Tribunal which  has  to
    determine the genuineness or otherwise of  the  document.  For  example
    when ID documents are disputed, it is necessary to obtain a report from
    an expert who has considerable experience for the purposes of detecting
    non-genuine documents and for the contents  of  such  documents  to  be
    provided to the Tribunal.


23. In the case of the Appellant, it was not  asserted  by  the  Respondent
    that the Appellant's statutory declaration was forged; merely  that  it
    was unreliable for the purposes of voluntary registration  of  a  proxy
    marriage because it did  not  contain  the  information  that  it  must
    contain pursuant to Ghanaian Law, this being that the  dowry  was  paid
    and the marriage status of the parties prior to  marriage.  This  issue
    was not addressed by the Judge; he only considered whether the marriage
    certificate was a 'false' or 'fraudulent' document. The letter from the
    Ghana High Commission does not address this issue; it does not seek  to
    establish  what  the  legal  requirements  are  as  to  the   statutory
    declaration to be submitted in support of the application to register a
    customary marriage; it is merely stated that "The competent authorities
    in Ghana have confirmed that the marriage was  properly  registered  in
    accordance with the Customary Marriage and Divorce  (Registration)  law
    1985." However, it is not stated within  the  letter  from  the  Deputy
    Director Legal  &  Consular  Bureau,  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  &
    Regional Integration, provided with the Statutory Declaration,  why  it
    is possible to ignore the mandatory requirements as to the issues which
    need to be addressed in a  statutory  declaration  before  a  customary
    marriage can be voluntarily registered. For the purposes  of  paragraph
    14 of Kareem, the letter from  the  Ghana  High  Commission  cannot  be
    regarded as an expert opinion confirming that the practice of  ignoring
    the statutory requirements for  the  voluntary  registration  of  proxy
    marriages is acceptable. The Judge therefore gave insufficient  reasons
    for his decision  that  the  marriage  certificate  and  the  statutory
    declaration, having been confirmed by the Ghana High  Commission,  were
    sufficient for him to find that  the  Appellant's  proxy  marriage  was
    valid for the purposes of Ghanaian  law.  I  therefore  set  aside  his
    decision.




  Remaking the decision


24. As to the remaking of the decision, I find as follows:


25. Mr Smart clarified the position of  the  Respondent  in  that  a  proxy
    marriage between a Ghanaian citizen and a non-Ghanaian citizen pursuant
    to NA (Ghana) was not valid. He provided both me and  Mr  Awal  with  a
    note of the position of the Respondent at the hearing but I mislaid  my
    copy and he provided me with a further copy of  the  note  on  request.
    This confirms the position he stated at the hearing.


26. Amoako is not a starred  decision  and  therefore  does  not  set  down
    principles of general application. The expert evidence of Ms Akman  was
    not before me and, in any event, it appeared that the Judge  in  Amoako
    would not have been minded to accept it had it not been for the  policy
    of the Respondent at the time to accept proxy marriages  between  those
    who were Ghanaian nationals by descent. That policy no  longer  applies
    as made clear by  Mr  Smart.  Therefore  NA  (Ghana)  applies  and  the
    marriage must be between Ghanaian nationals; this is confirmed  by  the
    extracts from the  COIS  report.  Mr  Smart's  evidence  that  the  EEA
    national was no longer a Ghanaian national was not  challenged  and  it
    follows therefore that there cannot be a valid proxy  marriage  between
    the Appellant and her EEA national partner.

27. What bearing does the letter dated 11 December 2013 from  the  Ghanaian
    High Commission have on the validity of the marriage? For  the  reasons
    set out in paragraph 23 above, I find that the contents of  the  letter
    are insufficient to confirm that there has been a valid proxy  marriage
    between the Appellant does not and her EEA national partner.


28. In view of this, the provisions of Kareem apply; there is doubt  as  to
    the validity of the marriage and it  is  therefore  necessary  for  the
    Appellant to show that the marriage is accepted as valid by  the  Dutch
    authorities and no such evidence was before me.


29. I find therefore that the Appellant has not established  that  she  was
    validly married by proxy to her EEA national partner  and  she  is  not
    entitled to a residence card as the family member of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights.


30.  The right to a residence card on the basis of a  durable  relationship
    and under Article 8 ECHR  was  not  raised  before  the  Judge  and  he
    therefore made no findings of fact on  it,  in  view  of  which,  these
    grounds were not raised before me.


Decision

31. The determination of Judge Handley contains material errors of  law.  I
    therefore set aside his decision. I remake the decision to dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal.


32. The appeal of the Respondent is allowed.


33. I note that an anonymity direction was not made and  on  the  facts  of
    this case, I see no reason why an order should be made pursuant to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.














Signed                                  Date

Manjinder Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore no fee award is made.










Signed                          Dated


M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
