
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Numbers:
IA/00154/2016

                                           IA/00156/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House             |            Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 24 September 2018             |            On 20 December 2018            |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                mr Mohamed Faleel Marikkar (First Appellant)
              mrs Sharmila Shareen Marikkar (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G O'Ceallaigh
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  Appellants,  nationals  of  Sri  Lanka   appealed   against   the
    Respondent's decision, dated 18 December 2015 (not 11  December  2015),
    to refuse an application for leave to remain made under the Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 ECHR on the basis of  family/private  life  in  the
    United  Kingdom.   Their  adverse  decisions  came  before   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R L Walker who on or about 27  November  2017  dismissed
    their appeals under the Rules and on human rights grounds.   Permission
    to appeal the decisions was given by Designated Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Macdonald on 27 April 2018.  The Upper  Tribunal  listed  this
    case in June 2018 but the late withdrawal of representation led to  the
    matter being adjourned.

2.   At the hearing on 24 September 2018 the issue was whether or not  there
    were material errors of law made by the Judge.  The first ground raised
    the issue that the  Judge  made  adverse  findings  against  the  First
    Appellant's credibility in connection with his claim.   It  seemed  the
    Appellants had been  poorly  served  by  the  representation  that  had
    previously been undertaken and in  the  result  matters  had  not  been
    addressed as they should have been.

3.   The Judge did not re-examine the issue of the claimed  convictions  and
    criminality of the First  Appellant  but  received  evidence  at  least
    supportive of the First Appellant's claim as to how the criminality had
    occurred.  However the Judge raised the issue that the First  Appellant
    had  been  convicted  of  offenses  involving   deception,   fraud   or
    dishonesty.  There was nothing to gainsay the fact that that must  have
    been  a  material  consideration  in  the  assessment  of   the   First
    Appellant's conduct and character.  It was said that the way  in  which
    the Judge expressed himself had not been put to the First Appellant and
    therefore there was procedural unfairness.

4.   Mr Tufan argued that the issue of  the  First  Appellant's  criminality
    cannot be gainsaid and whatever explanation the  First  Appellant  has,
    would like to give or how he would wish the offences to be assessed, it
    was really not for the Judge to go behind  the  convictions.   Even  if
    there was diminished fault on the Appellant's part for the convictions,
    nevertheless he had committed  the  offences.   There  was  nothing  to
    gainsay that fact and in the circumstances the adverse  criticisms  and
    the inferences the Judge drew really added nothing to the matter.

5.   On behalf of the First Appellant it is  said  that  the  Judge  made  a
    fundamental error of law and reliance was placed amongst  other  things
    on the case of HA v SSHD [2010] CSIH 28.  That case noted, in  relation
    to a similar point, the fact that a Judge had disputed  an  issue  over
    the genuineness of the membership card and ought to have  afforded  the
    First Appellant the opportunity  to  comment  on  the  falsity  of  the
    document and possibly its reliability, which was not given.

6.   The  present  case  was  quite  a  different  position  for  the  First
    Appellant because quite  simply  he  must  have  been  aware  that  his
    criminality was a material issue because he  raised  it  himself.   The
    First Appellant sought to  diminish  his  responsibility.   I  make  no
    criticism of that but the fact is there was the opportunity to  explain
    these circumstances away and  it  was  not  necessary  for  the  Judge,
    bearing in mind the First Appellant was represented, to put it back  to
    the First Appellant in some different way.  I bear in mind the case  of
    Mehmet Cokar [2002] a decision of the Court  of  Sessions  in  Scotland
    [D28-37]  which  addressed  that  issue,  namely  the  obligation  upon
    representatives to raise and deal with issues which on the face  of  it
    manifestly might arise: It is quite another matter  if  the  issue  was
    unsuspected and unconsidered and indeed  the  representatives  and  the
    First Appellant have been taken by surprise.  Accordingly it seemed  to
    me whilst it would  have  been  better  for  the  Judge  to  have  more
    specifically dealt with it, but he was  not  entering  the  arena.   In
    fairness the issue was at large  in  the  hearing  of  the  appeal  and
    evidently to a degree addressed come what may.  Accordingly I  find  no
    arguable error of law under first ground of appeal.

7.   The second ground was that the Judge erred in failing to make  findings
    as to the circumstances of the First Appellant's offence.  This was  to
    a degree tangential to the first ground.  The fact was  the  Judge  did
    address the First Appellant's criminal convictions and did address that
    evidence.  It seemed to me that it was not an obligation upon the Judge
    to deal with what  was  said  to  be  the  factual  matrix  behind  the
    offending either in respect of the first  offence  or  were  it  to  be
    argued  in  respect  of  the  second  offence.   Accordingly  whilst  I
    understand the point it did not seem to me the Judge has failed to give
    consideration to these matters.  When a shotgun approach is taken it is
    not beholden on the Judge to pick up every pellet of argument,  examine
    it and dismiss it or consider the arguments relating to  it.   In  this
    case I consider ground 2 added nothing to the matter.

8.   Ground 3 raises the issue of the family  life  between  the  Appellants
    and their adult children to the extent of  their  dependency  upon  the
    latter.

9.   The Judge's conclusion was that Article 8 rights were engaged  but  the
    level of interference  was  not  of  the  necessary  significance,  was
    perhaps a surprising one which other Judges  might  reach  a  different
    conclusion.  However the fact that others  may  differ  on  that  issue
    added nothing to it because it was for the Judge himself to reach  that
    view, which he did, on  the  totality  of  the  evidence.   It  is  not
    suggested that he  was  not  aware  of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellants and their children.

10.  Accordingly it did not  seem  to  me  that  another  Tribunal  properly
    addressing the evidence that was received  would  necessarily  reach  a
    different conclusion.  Therefore  to this extent such  error  as  there
    might have been is in any event not material.  I find nothing in ground
    3 to show any material error of significance even if one might complain
    that the Judge has not given weight to some of the considerations  that
    were urged on their behalf.

11.  Finally it said the Judge failed to consider  material  factors  as  to
    whether or not there were  no  very  significant  obstacles  for  their
    reintegration into Sri Lanka.  The argument at least  initially  looked
    attractive but it must be recalled that the very significant  obstacles
    considerations are directed  particularly  to  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules which it was  unarguable  that  the  First  Appellant
    undoubtedly failed in terms of the suitability requirements because  of
    the convictions.

12.   So  the  subsidiary  argument  was  essentially  met  by  saying   the
    criminality and the issues that have particularly health  obstacles  to
    their  integration  into  Sri   Lanka   also   formed   part   of   the
    proportionality exercise.  The complaint was made that  the  Judge  has
    not particularly addressed that issue.  I bear in mind of  course  that
    the Appellants are husband and wife for the Judge took  the  view  that
    the First Appellant, the husband, was  an  able  and  active  man  with
    skills and abilities.  The Judge did not accept the claims that somehow
    or other the First Appellant would not be able to find  employment  and
    support the Second Appellant and/or anyone else for that  matter  on  a
    return to Sri Lanka.  The Judge also had reservations about the  claims
    that the children of the Appellants made as to the extent to which they
    could provide or would provide support for their parents.

13.  It was arguable, and I agree with the Appellants in this respect,  that
    the Judge did appear to express himself very much by reference  to  the
    future event of the children as adults going their own way  and  making
    lives for themselves.  It seemed to me that of  itself  was  a  mistake
    because the Judge was  indeed  addressing  or  needed  to  address  the
    current position but ultimately even if he was  rather  misstating  the
    position in terms of the future position, the fact is  the  Judge  took
    the view that they, notwithstanding the health issues that were claimed
    could return to Sri  Lanka.   The  First  Appellant  had  suffered  two
    strokes and he and his wife had ill-health.   Nevertheless,  the  Judge
    took the view that they could make a life for themselves  back  in  Sri
    Lanka notwithstanding the lengthy time that they have been away.  Those
    were matters for him to make a judgment on.  I might not  have  reached
    the same conclusions but it seemed to me the fact that I might not does
    not demonstrate that there is a material error of law.

14.  Accordingly, I was satisfied that this ground, whilst  it  has  certain
    attractiveness, ultimately would not make a material difference to  the
    decision which the Judge had formed on the merits of the Article 8 ECHR
    claim overall.

15.  I find that the Original Tribunal made no material error of  law.   The
    Original Tribunal stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeals of the Appellants are dismissed.
ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was previously made nor is one required.



Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is being dismissed therefore no fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

P.S.  The delay in promulgation was the result of the case file  and  typing
    being miss-located.

