

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/00408/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 19 August 2014                      |On 10 September 2014      |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL

                                   Between


                          MR STEPHEN SOLA OGUNSANYA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Corben, Counsel
      (instructed by Martynsrose)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted on 6 June 2014 by
           First-tier Tribunal Judge PJG White against the dismissal of his
           appeal against the revocation of his and his dependant sons' EEA
           residence cards issued under regulation  7  of  the  Immigration
           (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended) ("the EEA
           Regulations")  by  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Obhi   in   a
           determination promulgated on 6 May 2014.   The  Appellant  is  a
           national of Nigeria, born on 5 March 1961.  He had  denied  that
           the marriage on which  he  relied  was  void.   The  appeal  was
           determined on the papers as the Appellant had requested.


      2.    Judge Obhi found that the Appellant had not shown  that  he  had
           satisfied the EEA Regulations.   The  Appellant  had  failed  to
           prove either a valid marriage to or a durable relationship  with
           a qualified EEA national.  The judge went on  to  consider  very
           briefly and to dismiss  the  Article  8  ECHR  claim  which  the
           Appellant had raised in his Notice of Appeal, but there were  no
           Removal Directions and no Section 120 Notice.  Hence the  First-
           tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to address Article 8 ECHR: see
           Lamichhane [2012] EWCA Civ 260.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           PJG White because he considered it arguable that the  judge  had
           misdirected himself by stating that the burden of proof  was  on
           the Appellant. Papajorgi (EEA spouse - marriage of  convenience)
           Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) was applicable.


      4.    Mr Corben for  the  Appellant  submitted  in  summary  that  the
           determination was flawed and could not  stand.   The  judge  had
           conflated the two stands of  the  Respondent's  decision,  i.e.,
           that the marriage was bigamous  and  invalid,  and  was  also  a
           marriage of convenience.  The  judge  had  stated,  incorrectly,
           that the burden of proof was on the Appellant.  The judge failed
           to  address  the  evidence  which  had  been  provided  by   the
           Appellant, which was more substantial than the judge had stated.
            There was, for example, a marriage certificate and a decree  of
           divorce for the previous marriage.   The  judge  had  failed  to
           give proper weight to that evidence.  His findings were not open
           to him.  He had merely echoed the assertions of the  Respondent.
           The determination should be set aside for the failure to provide
           adequate and clear reasons.


      5.    Mr Walker for the Respondent (the Secretary of State)  submitted
           that the determination contained no material error of law.   The
           witness statements provided had been vague and there was  little
           independent evidence  deserving  of  weight  as  the  judge  had
           correctly said. The judge had not been required to address every
           single point: see VHR  (unmeritorious  grounds)  Jamaica  [2014]
           UKUT 00367 (IAC). The judge's findings had been open to him.


      6.    In reply Mr Corben reiterated his submission as to  the  judge's
           treatment of the evidence produced.  The burden had been on  the
           Secretary of State and that burden had not been discharged.


      7.    At the close of submissions,  the  tribunal  indicated  that  it
           found that there was no material  error  of  law  in  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Obhi's determination. The tribunal  reserved  its
           decision which now follows.


      8.    It  must  be  noted,  in  the  first  place,  that  it  was  the
           Appellant's choice to  be  unrepresented  and  to  elect  for  a
           decision on the papers.   It  is  seldom  understood  that  this
           tends to make the judicial task more rather than less difficult,
           since there is no one to present and explain the appeal, nor  to
           deal with possible queries, as indeed the judge rightly observed
           at [17] of the determination.  The power to list an  appeal  for
           an oral hearing of the  tribunal's  own  motion  is  one  to  be
           exercised sparingly, particularly as the tribunal cannot  compel
           parties  to  appear  at  hearings.   Part  of  the   Appellant's
           complaint about the determination  is  the  consequence  of  his
           failure to request an oral hearing and to appear.   That  cannot
           amount to an error of law on the part of the judge.


      9.    The grounds of onwards appeal relied on  by  the  Appellant  are
           relevant:


            "9 (vi) The Respondent's basic case was not  so  much  that  the
           Appellant had entered into a marriage of convenience but  rather
           that the Appellant had attempted to marry whilst  he  was  still
           married to another woman..."


            That, in the tribunal's view, is  an  accurate  summary  of  the
           Respondent's case against the Appellant and  it  identifies  the
           basis  of  the  revocation.   The  determination   creates   the
           impression  that  the  judge  had  indeed  conflated  these  two
           distinct stands of the reasons  for  refusal  letter,  referring
           interchangeably between "invalid" and  "sham".   That  might  be
           characterised as an error of law.  But in the tribunal's view it
           was not a material error of law, because the determination shows
           that the judge examined all of the evidence placed  before  him,
           and reached a secure finding on the void marriage  issue,  which
           was the gravamen of the Respondent's decision.


      10.   It was asserted that the judge had given  himself  an  incorrect
           self direction as to the burden of  proof.   At  [9]  the  judge
           states "This is  an  immigration  decision,  and  therefore  the
           burden of proof is on the Appellant and the  standard  of  proof
           required is a balance of probabilities."  It was submitted  that
           the judge was mistaken to have  described  the  decision  as  an
           immigration decision, since it was made  under  the  Immigration
           (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (as  amended),  not
           under the Immigration Rules.  There is nothing  in  that  point,
           since  the  decision  to  revoke  dated  18  October  2013   was
           communicated correctly as  an  immigration  decision  under  the
           Immigration (Notices)  Regulations  2003.   The  judge  referred
           throughout his determination to the relevant EEA Regulations.


      11.   The self direction at [9] might possibly have been the result of
           the inadvertent use of an inappropriate  template,  but  it  was
           accurate as far as  it  went.   The  Respondent  had  identified
           evidence sufficient to challenge the validity  of  the  marriage
           relied on by the Appellant, thus  discharging  the  prima  facie
           burden on her.   It  was  then  for  the  Appellant  to  produce
           evidence to show that he was validly married.  In any event,  at
           [6] of the determination, it is implied that the initial  burden
           falls on the Respondent.


      12.   Of course, it would have been preferable for the judge  to  have
           provided a fuller and more  accurate  self  direction,  but  any
           error of law in  that  respect  was  not  material.   The  judge
           conducted a careful examination of the evidence produced by both
           sides. When analysed in detail by the judge as he did from  [16]
           to  [18],  the  Appellant's  evidence  fell  apart.   The  judge
           identified discrepancies and a number  of  other  unsatisfactory
           features of that evidence which  it  is  unnecessary  to  recite
           here. The weight the judge gave to the evidence produced in  the
           context of a "paper" hearing was a matter for him.  The  judge's
           findings   were   within   the   bounds   of   rationality   and
           reasonableness and were open to him on the  evidence  which  had
           been produced.


      13.   The attack  on  the  judge's  findings  amounted  in  sum  to  a
           disagreement which failed to identify a material error  of  law.
           For all of the reasons  given  above,  the  Appellant's  onwards
           appeal fails and the determination stands.




      DECISION


      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
























































































































































































































































































