
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/00218/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 February 2018                        |On 29 March 2018                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            mr Faisal Bin hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Nadeem, Solicitor of City Law Immigration Ltd
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Pakistan,  date  of  birth  27  May  1975,
    appealed against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes,
    dated 13 April 2017, who dismissed his appeal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision of 2 September 2015 to refuse an application based  on
    ten years' long residence made  on  12  January  2015.   Key  to  Judge
    Parkes' decision  were  two  earlier  decisions,  first  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hague at Stoke-on-Trent on 15 May 2014, and the decision
    of Designated Judge Taylor of 3 February 2015.  The decision  of  Judge
    Hague related to issues which included  the  Appellant  having  made  a
    false claim as to his employment and used false  documents  purportedly
    from HMRC and claimed an employer who was indeed  false.   For  reasons
    given by Judge Hague, adverse findings were made in connection with the
    Appellant's claim and he  made  adverse  comments  on  the  Appellant's
    credibility.

2.   The Appellant had then, as in country right of  appeal,  the  right  to
    challenge that adverse decision which needed  to  be  exercised  within
    fourteen days, unless time was extended.  No such appeal was made, as a
    fact, until an application was made, possibly at the end  of  2014,  in
    December, or in January 2015, to extend  time  and  for  permission  to
    appeal the decision of Judge Hague.  That appeal came before Designated
    Judge Taylor who, on 3 February 2015, dismissed  the  application,  but
    had extended time for the purposes of considering the application.  The
    view taken by Designated Judge Taylor in refusing the  application  for
    permission to appeal was  on  the  basis  that  Judge  Hague  had  been
    entitled to find on the evidence the Appellant had used  deception  and
    that the grounds put forward had no merit.  It appears, but no-one  has
    a copy of the 3 February 2015 decision and no-one knows what was  said,
    but that a renewed application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was made and refused.

3.   The history shows that on 12 January  2015  when  the  application  for
    long residence based on ten years in the UK was refused on 2  September
    2015,  an  appeal  was  heard  on  4  January  2016  and  dismissed  by
    Immigration Judge Parkes on 13 April 2017 on the basis,  amongst  other
    things,  that  the  Appellant  had  not,  for  the  purposes   of   his
    application, shown that he had the benefit of 3C leave  to  accrue  the
    necessary period.  Equally it is  clear  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    lawfully in the United Kingdom at the material time so as to be able to
    make the in country application on long residence grounds.   The  point
    was taken that the 3C leave which the Appellant had originally had, had
    come to an end when Judge Hague had resolved the matter in the decision
    promulgated on 15 May 2014 and no appeal had been lodged in  time,  nor
    had time been extended and permission given to appeal.  The  provisions
    of Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 provide as follows:-

         "This section applies if-
         (a)  a person who has limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for variation
             of the leave,
         (b)  the  application  for  variation  is  made  before  the  leave
             expires, and
         (c)  the leave expires without the application for variation having
             been decided".


4.   Under Section 3C(2) it states as follows:-

         "The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any  period
         when-


         (a)   the  application  for  variation  is  neither   decided   nor
             withdrawn,


         (b)  an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,  Asylum  and
             Immigration Act 2002 could be brought while the  Appellant  is
             in the United Kingdom against the decision on the  application
             for variation (ignoring any possibility of an  appeal  out  of
             time with permission) (my emphasis),


         (c)  an appeal under that section  against  that  decision  brought
             while the Appellant is  in  the  United  Kingdom,  is  pending
             (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act (NIAA)), or


         (d)  [relates to judicial review considerations]".


5.   Under Section 104 of the 2002 Act the definition of  a  pending  appeal
    is stated as an appeal is pending during the period beginning  when  it
    is instituted and the ending when it is finally  determined,  withdrawn
    or abandoned or when it lapses under Section 99.

6.   Under Section 104(2) an appeal  under  Section  82(1)  is  not  finally
    determined for the purposes of sub-section (1)(b) while:-

         "(a) an application for permission to appeal under  Section  11  or
             Section 13 of the Tribunal's Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
             could be made or is awaiting determination,


         (b)  permission under either of those Sections has been granted and
             the appeal is awaiting determination ..."


7.   Mr Nadeem points to the difference between Section 3C(2)(b) and (c)  in
    that he points to the absence of the words in sub-section  (c)  of  the
    words  "ignoring  any  possibility  of  an  appeal  out  of  time  with
    permission".  It seems to me that is not a good point.  The  difference
    between sub-section (b) and (c) is clear and it does not need the words
    to be repeated in sub-section (c) to give meaning to that  sub-section.
    Rather, it seemed to me the point is contained within Section 3C(2)(b):
    Those additional words are included to remove in the context of appeals
    under Section 82 that future possibility that  circumstances  might  at
    some time arise so as to prevent 3C leave continuing in a  vacuum  when
    no appeal has actually been made and therefore is not a pending  appeal
    in any event.

8.   I conclude that the relevant date was the date when time to appeal  the
    decision of Judge Hague expired without an appeal because then, bearing
    in mind when the notice of Judge Hague's decision was received  by  the
    applicant, the fourteen day time period ran.  Once that period was over
    there was no extension of time or permission to appeal granted.  In the
    circumstances time stopped then.  I find Judge Parkes made no  material
    error of law in his assessment of that matter.  Rather,  it  seemed  to
    me, he did a thorough exercise in looking at the case  and  looking  at
    the merits as well as concluding that he did not accept that there  had
    been any appeal in time against Judge Hague's decision.

9.     It  is  not  entirely  clear  whether  Judge  Parkes   accepted   the
    Appellant's explanation of how it came to pass that no appeal was  made
    and there was no evidence advanced from the former  representatives  to
    support the claim that they were responsible for the failure to appeal.
     It may or may not be right, but it makes no difference to the decision
    because, as a fact,  when  the  Appellant  finally  came  to  make  his
    application he was not in a position to do so within the terms  of  the
    Rules.  For reasons that  the  Judge  gave,  in  paragraph  17  of  the
    decision he concluded that there was  nothing  raised  which  indicated
    that an Article 8 claim could succeed and there was nothing to  suggest
    that removal was disproportionate.

10.  The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Parkes do not raise Article 8  ECHR  grounds.   There  is  no  argument
    advanced on those grounds  as  to  any  error  by  the  Judge  in  that
    decision.  It seemed to me that the reason for that is quite simply the
    claim stood or fell on what was believed  to  be  the  construction  of
    Section 3C by the Appellant's  representatives  with  which  I  do  not
    agree.  Accordingly it seemed to  me  the  Original  Tribunal  made  no
    demonstrable Robinson obvious error of law in  the  assessment  of  the
    Article 8 claim and so even though it was not  raised  in  the  grounds
    upon which permission was not given, it does not seem to  me  that  its
    omission demonstrates any measure of unfairness towards the  Appellant.
    For these reasons therefore, even if Article  8  had  been  raised,  no
    other  Tribunal  properly  addressing   the   material   evidence   and
    considerations, bearing in mind the length of time that  the  Appellant
    had been in the UK lawfully, could have reached a  favourable  decision
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

11.  I bear in mind that the Appellant for a significant period of time  had
    of course been a student in the United Kingdom,  but  that  status  had
    changed until it expired from being a student  to  Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Worker) and that of course was refused as long ago as June 2013 with an
    appeal lodged and finally determined by Judge Hague on 15 May 2014.

12.  In those circumstances it does not seem to me that  the  case  presents
    any demonstrable evidence of the kind of  circumstances  that  indicate
    that some claims can succeed outside of the Rules  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  I do not find the Original Tribunal made any  material  error
    of law and the appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity direction was made and none is required.

Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
