
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00684/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2017                   |On 2 February 2017                   |


                                   Before

                      DUPTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                            Mr yusuf giwa palasa
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma,
     Counsel instructed by Farani Javid Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of Nigeria, appeals from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Reid sitting at Taylor  House  on  28
    June 2016) dismissing his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to refuse to grant him leave to remain on the ground  that  he
    had accrued 20 years'  continuous  unlawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the date of application.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    make an anonymity direction, and I do not consider that  the  appellant
    requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was born in Nigeria on 5 March 1976.   He  says  that  he
    arrived in the UK on 31 January  1996.   In  2012  he  lost  an  appeal
    against a decision to refuse him indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
    grounds of fourteen years' continuous unlawful residence. On  28  March
    2013 he applied for indefinite leave to remain in the  UK  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The application was refused on 9 December 2013.

 3. There was a lengthy delay before the appellant's appeal eventually came
    before Judge Reid in the summer of 2016.  The delay is accounted for by
    proceedings for judicial review, followed by a successful error of  law
    challenge by the SSHD in respect of an earlier decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in the appellant's favour.  The appellant's  appeal  came
    before Judge Reid by way of a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    fresh hearing, with none of the findings of fact made by  the  previous
    First-tier Tribunal being preserved.

 4. By the time the appeal came before Judge Reid for a fresh hearing, over
    20 years had elapsed since the appellant's disputed date of entry  into
    the UK.  A statement of additional grounds of appeal was served  on  25
    May 2016.  The additional grounds  were  that,  as  the  appellant  had
    arrived on 31 January 1996, he had now accrued 20 years'  residence  in
    the UK so  that  Rule  276ADE(1)(iii)  now  applied.   The  appellant's
    solicitors invited the respondent to withdraw her decision in the light
    of the appellant's material change in circumstances. But this  did  not
    happen.

The Hearing Before and the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before Judge Reid, there was no appearance on behalf  of
    the SSHD.  The appellant was represented by Mr Balroop of Counsel.

 6. In his subsequent decision, the Judge held at paragraph [24] that a  BT
    bill in the appellant's name  dated  22  July  1996  was  the  earliest
    documentary evidence that the appellant was in the UK.  It  established
    that the appellant was in the UK at about that date,  but  it  did  not
    show when he had actually arrived in the UK.

 7. In paragraphs [25]-[27] the Judge discussed at some length the evidence
    bearing upon the question of when the appellant had actually arrived in
    the UK.  He reached the following conclusion at paragraph [28]  of  his
    decision:

         "I therefore find, taking into account the findings set out  above,
         that the appellant is unreliable as regards  when  he  says  things
         happened or what he says happened, which casts doubt on whether  he
         is to be believed when it comes to establishing the  start  of  his
         residence between the claimed arrival date of 31 January  1996  and
         21 July 1996, which is relevant  to  whether  he  had  acquired  20
         years' residence by the time of  this  hearing  on  28  June  2016,
         although I note it is a very close run thing.  Given the burden  of
         proof is on the appellant  to  establish  the  start  date  of  his
         residence in the UK, given he has ample time to do so  knowing  its
         importance, and given that he has not produced evidence from  other
         sources on this issue (see also 2012 decision para 24) I  therefore
         conclude that the appellant does not show that he  has  established
         20 years' residence in the UK  as  at  the  date  of  this  hearing
         because he has not established a start date before 21 July 1996."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 8. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    relying on two asserted errors.  Ground 1 was that there  was  a  clear
    conflict within the Judge's own deductions from the evidence.  Ground 2
    was that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in  not  recognising  that  the
    effective date of application for the assessment of Rule 276ADE(1)(iii)
    was when the appellant  "raised  compliance  with  this  Rule"  in  his
    section 120 notice.  This was when the application was varied, applying
    Qureshi (Tier 4 - effect of variation - App C) Pakistan 2011  UKUT  412
    and AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWA Civ 1076.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission

 9. On 3 November 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Caroline  Andrew  refused
    the appellant permission to appeal.  The case  of  Qureshi  was  clear:
    there was no restriction under section 3C(5) on the number of occasions
    an application for variation of the original application could be made,
    provided notice of  variation  was  given  prior  to  the  respondent's
    decision, as thereafter there would  be  no  application  pending.   So
    there was no arguable error of law in the decision.

The Reviewed Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. Mr Sharma settled the renewed application for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

11. Ground 1 was that the Judge had erred in law in his assessment  of  the
    relevant application date in paragraphs [28]-[30] of his decision.  The
    Rule  required  residence  to  have  been  accrued  at  the   date   of
    application.  But  this  particular  provision  was  incompatible  with
    primary legislation, which required the Tribunal  to  consider  matters
    appertaining at the date of the appeal in  human  rights  matters.   Mr
    Sharma relied on AS (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  1076  and
    sought to distinguish Qureshi on the facts.

12. Ground 2 was that the Judge had made  a  finding  that  was  internally
    inconsistent. The finding that the appellant  had  not  established  an
    entry date before 21 July 1996 was thereby flawed.  On balance  it  was
    more likely than not that the appellant had entered  the  UK  at  least
    before 28 June 1996, which was 20 years before the date of the hearing.

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant for Permission to Appeal

13. On 8 December 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal, "on the grounds as pleaded".




The Error of Law Hearing

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Sharma developed the arguments advanced by him in  the  renewed
    application for permission to appeal.  He accepted that the  Judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant had not arrived in  the  UK  on  31
    January 1996.  However the Judge ought to have asked  himself  whether,
    on balance, the appellant had arrived by 28 June 1996.   He  failed  to
    apply the balance of probabilities test.  The evidence  of  the  father
    had not been taken into account.

Discussion

15. Although Mr Sharma reversed the grounds in his renewed application  for
    permission to appeal, I find it convenient to deal with the grounds  in
    their original order.  For if the Judge  did  not  err  as  alleged  in
    Ground 1, Ground 2 becomes academic.

16. At paragraph [23] of his decision, the Judge accepted the oral evidence
    of the appellant's father that the appellant's  name  went  on  to  the
    utility bills after the appellant arrived in the UK as the future  plan
    was for the appellant to buy a property of his own.

17. At paragraph [25], the Judge found that the first bill, dated  22  July
    1996, was a quarterly bill, from which he inferred that  the  appellant
    had asked to go onto that BT account at some point  before  that  date.
    It was unlikely that he would  have  taken  this  step  immediately  on
    arrival in the UK, but there  was  no  equivalent  quarterly  bill  for
    earlier in the year.  So  he  found  that  the  July  bill  placed  the
    appellant in the UK on 21 July 1996, as this was likely to be the  last
    date on which he could have changed the bill-payer before that bill was
    issued.

18. At paragraph [26], the Judge held that  there  was  no  evidence  of  a
    claimed arrival date of 31 January 1996, and there was no new  evidence
    presented at the hearing to show  the  appellant's  alleged  two  years
    prior residence in Germany.  So the appellant's arrival date could  not
    be linked to a departure from Germany in January 1996.

19. At paragraph [27], the Judge referred to  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant's father regarding when the appellant had arrived in the  UK.
    He found that the appellant's father had not confirmed  as  correct  at
    the hearing, or in his  letter  of  support,  the  appellant's  claimed
    arrival date of 31 January 1996, nor was the father able to estimate "a
    month of arrival".

20. The Judge held that the appellant had given a different account at  the
    hearing as to the domestic situation when he arrived  in  the  UK.   He
    said his stepmother was still living at the property,  whereas  (it  is
    implied) the appellant's father said that she had  left  the  property.
    The appellant said he had had to move out from the  property  where  he
    was residing with his father and stepmother in 2002 because his  father
    was in the process of divorcing his wife.  The Judge found this  to  be
    inconsistent, because the appellant would have had no need to move  out
    from his father's house in 2002 due to his father's problems  with  his
    stepmother if she had already left the home in 1996.   The  Judge  held
    that, despite the passage of time, the appellant and his  father  would
    be likely to remember who they were  living  with  when  the  appellant
    arrived in the UK, yet they had given different accounts.

21. Accordingly, it is not true that the Judge reached  his  conclusion  in
    paragraph [28] without taking into account the evidence  given  by  the
    appellant's father.

22. The appellant's case was that he had arrived in the UK  on  31  January
    1996.  The appellant did not assert in  the  alternative  that  he  had
    arrived in June 1996.  Having found the appellant not  credible  as  to
    his claimed date of arrival, the  Judge  was  under  no  obligation  to
    speculate as to whether the appellant had arrived in  the  UK  at  some
    point between 31 January 1996 and 28  June  1996.   Given  his  adverse
    credibility findings, the  Judge  was  not  bound  to  infer  that  the
    appellant had probably arrived on or before 28 June  1996.   There  was
    nothing inherently implausible in the proposition  that  the  appellant
    had not arrived until early July or mid-July or 21  July  1996  at  the
    latest. All of these scenarios were consistent with the next  quarterly
    bill from BT being put into the appellant's name.

23. In short, I consider that the error of law challenge inherent in Ground
    1 is no more than an expression of disagreement with findings that were
    reasonably open to the Judge on  the  evidence  that  was  before  him.
    Accordingly, Ground 2 is academic, and I express no view on it.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



DUPTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON
