
IA 00779 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 August 2013                              |On 13 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAZAD KHOWAJA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not representated
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will refer  to  the
      original appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 11 May, 1985, as the
      appellant herein.

   2. The appellant was granted leave to enter on 8  September,  2010  as  a
      Tier 4 (General) student until 31 October, 2011. He was granted  leave
      to remain in the same capacity on 23 December,  2011  until  22  March
      2012. He applied for further leave to remain on 21 March,  2012  as  a
      Tier 1 (Post-study work) (General) Migrant.

   3. However this application was refused by the Secretary of State  on  21
      December, 2012 as the qualification relied on  by  the  appellant  was
      dated 6 July, 2012.  The  award  was  required  at  the  date  of  the
      application: the respondent relied on the case of NO (Post-Study Work-
      award needed by date of application) Nigeria [2009] UKAIT 00054.

   4. The Secretary of State also decided  to  remove  the  appellant  under
      section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

   5. The appellant appealed against the decision and his appeal came before
      a  First-tier  Judge  on  25  April,  2013  when  the  appellant   was
      represented by counsel.

   6. The judge applied Khatel and others (Nepal) [2013] UKUT 44  (IAC)  and
      allowed the appeal finding that the respondent's decision was  not  in
      accordance with the law and the appellant awaited a  lawful  decision.
      The judge also allowed the appeal against the removal directions.

   7. The respondent appealed against the decision of the judge in  relation
      to the application for leave to remain  under  the  immigration  rules
      noting that the judge was not entitled to take into  account  evidence
      submitted after the application. There was no challenge to the judge's
      decision to allow the appeal in respect of the removal directions.

   8. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-Tier Tribunal on 2 July,
      2013 noting that the decision of  the  tribunal  in  Khatel  had  been
      reversed by the Court of Appeal in Raju, Khatel and others v Secretary
      of State [2013] EWCA Civ 754.

   9. On 6  August,  2013  the  appellant's  representatives  wrote  to  the
      tribunal requesting the matter to be determined on the papers.

  10. Ms Horsley said she wished to withdraw the decision under  section  47
      and applied for permission to do so.

  11. It was clear that the appellant's degree  postdated  the  application.
      The degree had been awarded on 13 July,  2012.  The  decision  of  the
      Court of Appeal applied.

  12. I was invited to find that the decision of the judge was flawed  by  a
      material error of law and to remake the decision. The  judge  had  not
      dealt with article 8. However the  appellant  had  only  been  in  the
      United Kingdom since 8 December, 2010 and  Ms  Horsley  relied  on  MM
      (Zimbabwe) [2009] UK AIT 00037: a student in the United Kingdom  on  a
      temporary basis had no expectation of a right to remain  in  order  to
      further ties and relationships if the criteria  of  the  points  based
      system were not met.

  13. It is clear that the basis of the judge's decision has been  overtaken
      by the Court of Appeal decision in Raju.

  14. There has been no respondent's  notice  or  any  suggestion  that  the
      appeal should  be  allowed  on  other  grounds.  Nevertheless  I  have
      considered article 8. It may be that the appellant has built  up  some
      private life in the period of time that he has resided in  the  United
      Kingdom  as  a  student.  Whether  Article  8  is  engaged  in   those
      circumstances is a moot point particularly given the fact that I  have
      been provided with  no  evidence  of  any  particular  ties  that  the
      appellant might have formed during this period. I adopt  the  approach
      of the Tribunal in the case of  MM  However,  assuming  Article  8  is
      engaged, as set out in paragraphs 48ff. It appears that the  Secretary
      of State's decision under the immigration  rules  was  lawful  and  in
      pursuit of a  legitimate  aim.  In  relation  to  proportionality  the
      appellant has been in the United Kingdom on a  temporary  basis  as  a
      student and had no expectation of remaining in the UK  unless  he  was
      able to comply with the immigration rules. I have been given scant  if
      any material  to  indicate  that  removal  of  the  appellant  in  the
      particular circumstances of this case would be  other  than  just  and
      proportionate.

  15. For the reasons I have given I find that the decision  of  the  First-
      tier Judge was materially flawed in law. I remake the decision.

  16. I note the decision of the respondent to issue removal directions  has
      been withdrawn.

      The appeal under the immigration rules is dismissed.
      The appeal is dismissed under Article 8


Note re Fee Award:
The appeal before the judge was allowed in  part  in  respect  of  s  47,  a
decision which has now been withdrawn, and I do not find it  appropriate  to
disturb  the  order  made  by  the  First-tier  Judge  in   the   particular
circumstances of the case.



                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
                               9 August 2013





