
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00935/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26th April 2017                    |On 24th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     F G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Head of Lawrence Lupin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Kosovo born on [ ] 1980.  He  has  a
    considerable immigration history.  Suffice it  to  say  that  he  first
    entered the UK illegally on 28th September 1999 and applied for asylum.
     That application was unsuccessful but the Appellant remained in the UK
    without leave.  He married a British citizen  in  September  2002,  and
    they had a son, also a British citizen, born in May  2003.   In  August
    2003 the Appellant applied for leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse.   That
    application  was  unsuccessful,   but   the   Appellant   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 11th October 2009.   The  Appellant
    next applied for leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his  length  of
    residence in October 2009.  That application was also unsuccessful, but
    again the Appellant was granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  until
    25th February 2013.  The  Appellant  overstayed  that  leave,  but  the
    Appellant made a valid application for leave to remain on human  rights
    grounds on 4th April  2014.   That  application  was  refused  for  the
    reasons given in the Respondent's letter of  3rd  February  2016.   The
    Appellant appealed and his appeal was ultimately heard by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Hall (the  Judge)  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  1st
    September 2016.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given
    in his Decision dated 6th September 2016.  The Appellant  sought  leave
    to appeal that decision, and on 15th February 2017 such permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. On 1st September 2016 the Judge heard the appeal in the absence of  the
    Appellant or anyone on his behalf.  The Judge decided the appeal on the
    evidence  before  him  then  having  heard  a   submission   from   the
    Respondent's representative.  The Judge decided that the Appellant  did
    not qualify for  further  leave  to  remain  under  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM of HC 395.  The Judge found that paragraphs  S-LTR.1.5  and
    .1.6 and .1.7 applied.  This was because between May 2010  and  January
    2014  no  less  than  twelve  convictions  were  recorded  against  the
    Appellant for numerous offences; and the Appellant had  failed  without
    reasonable excuse to supply medical reports  relating  to  his  health.
    The Judge also  found  the  provisions  of  paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.4  not
    satisfied on the basis that the Appellant had not been in contact  with
    his son since May 2014.  Finally the Judge considered  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights outside the  Immigration  Rules  and  found  that
    although the Appellant did not have a family life in  the  UK,  he  did
    have a private life which would be interfered with by the  Respondent's
    decision, but that such interference was proportionate.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mrs Head argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in proceeding to hear the appeal in the absence of  the  Appellant.
    The Judge was aware that the Appellant himself had not been notified of
    the date of the hearing, and the Judge  had  relied  upon  the  earlier
    interlocutory decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chohan.  The
    fact of the matter was that the Appellant had notified  the  Respondent
    of a change of address, and had continued to sign on as required.   The
    Judge had not considered the interests of justice as he had not  caused
    enquiries to be made as to the Appellant's whereabouts.

 5. Mrs Head went on to submit that  as  regards  the  Judge's  substantive
    decision, he had  erred  in  law  by  not  following  the  decision  in
    Devaseelan.    There   was   before   the   Judge   previous   Tribunal
    Determinations favourable to the  Appellant.   The  Judge  should  have
    taken those findings as his starting point.

 6. Finally, Mrs Head submitted that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in  his
    consideration of proportionality by failing to take  into  account  the
    Respondent's delays in dealing with the  various  applications  of  the
    Appellant.

 7. In response, Mr Mills argued that there were no  such  errors  of  law.
    The Judge was not informed of any change of address of  the  Appellant,
    and there was no satisfactory explanation  before  the  Judge  for  the
    Appellant's absence.  The Tribunal was informed  that  the  Appellant's
    representatives had been unable to contact the Appellant since  January
    2016.  The Judge had no alternative but  to  hear  the  appeal  in  the
    absence of the Appellant.

 8. Mr Mills went on to argue that there was no  merit  in  the  Devaseelan
    point.  The Tribunal Determination of 2010 contained no findings as  to
    fact, and at the time of the 2005 Determination, the Appellant had been
    living with his wife  and  child.   That  situation  was  overtaken  by
    subsequent events.

 9. Finally, Mr Mills submitted that the factor of delay would have made no
    difference to the decision as to proportionality of the  Judge  as  the
    delay had been entirely the fault of the Appellant.

10. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The Judge was correct to  hear  the  appeal  in  the
    absence of the Appellant.  The only information before  the  Judge  was
    that nobody had been able to make contact with the  Appellant  for  the
    previous nine months.  The Judge made his decision in  accordance  with
    the provisions  of  Rule  28  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014,  and   the
    overriding objective given in Rule 2 thereof.  The Judge was  satisfied
    that reasonable steps had been taken to notify  the  Appellant  of  the
    hearing, and that it was  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  proceed,
    bearing in mind the duty to avoid delay as given in Rule 2(2)(e) of the
    Rules.

11. I agree with Mr Mills that the Devaseelan point has no  merit.   It  is
    true that the Judge did not refer to the  previous  Tribunal  findings,
    but the last such relevant findings had been made in 2005, and  by  the
    time of the hearing before the Judge the Appellant's circumstances  had
    fundamentally changed.

12. Finally, the Judge demonstrated that he had carried out  the  balancing
    exercise necessary for any assessment  of  proportionality  and  it  is
    apparent from what he wrote in paragraphs 53 to  65  inclusive  of  the
    Decision  that  any  issue  of  delay,  particularly  one  due  to  the
    Appellant's own behaviour, was irrelevant.

13. For these reasons, I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.





Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date   24th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


