
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00215/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2017                          |On 3 October 2017               |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                              Maosin Muhmammad
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mt T Mahmood, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
(Birmingham)
For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pooler promulgated 24.1.17,  allowing  on  human  rights
    grounds the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State, dated 17.12.15, to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    10.8.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 2.10.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found that there was  an  error  of
    law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

 5. The grounds are somewhat garbled and Mr McVeety agreed they made little
    grammatical sense. However, in granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge
    Woodcraft found it arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  treated  the
    best interests of the child as  determinative  of  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise, contrary to the ratio of MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705,

 6. In MA the Court of Appeal held that an assessment of the reasonableness
    of expecting a child to leave the UK has to take into account the wider
    public  interest  considerations,  including  in  this  case  the  poor
    immigration history and behaviour of the appellant. The way  that  [19]
    of the decision is worded, strongly suggests that  the  judge  did  not
    take  the  adverse  public  interest  factors  into  account   in   the
    proportionality assessment.

 7. In this case, it was not contended that the child should leave the  UK,
    but the issue was whether the effect of the appellant's removal on  the
    child was proportionate in light of the adverse  factors  to  be  taken
    into account. At [19] the judge  concluded  (was  persuaded)  that  the
    public interest does not require the appellant's removal, "because  the
    requirements of sub-section (6) are met."

 8. It may be that the outcome of the appeal would have been the same,  but
    it is arguable that  properly  directed  the  appeal  would  have  been
    dismissed  on  a  fair  and  full  proportionality  assessment  of  the
    significant public interest factors, balanced against the rights of the
    appellant and the child. The judge failed to apply the current case law
    and clearly regarded 117B(6) as determinative of the appeal.

Remittal

 9. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts or conclusions  are
    unclear on a crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, the  error(s)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal vitiate all other  findings  of  fact  and  the
    conclusions from those facts  so  that  there  has  not  been  a  valid
    determination of the issues in the appeal.

10. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of
    the error has been to deprive the parties of a fair  hearing  and  that
    the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary
    for the decision in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having
    regard to the overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly
    and justly, including with the avoidance of delay, I find  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusion & Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Consequential Directions

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Stoke  or
    Nottingham;

13. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

14. The ELH is 2 hours;

15. An interpreter in Urdu will be required

16. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Pooler and Judge Woodcraft;



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated




