
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00003/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th November 2014                         |On 3rd December 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         TOCHUKWU EJIKE DOMINIC MMUO
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Krushner of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Background to this Application

 1. The respondent, who was the appellant in earlier proceedings before the
    Tribunal is a citizen of Nigeria and  is  the  spouse  of  the  sponsor
    Paulina Bladycz a citizen of Poland.

 2. On 10th December 2013 the appellant, the Secretary of State, refused to
    issue a residence card as confirmation of a right  of  residence  under
    European Community Law as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.   The  respondent  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by FTTJ  Mr  A  J  Parker  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 19th August 2014 the respondent  succeeded
    in his appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the following grounds:

         "Introduction

             1.   The determination allows the appeal against the Secretary
                  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  residence  card  as   a
                  confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as
                  the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

             2.   It is considered that the Immigration Judge has erred  in
                  the consideration of the case in the following ways:

         Ground one: Material misdirection of law

             3.   At [15] the Judge finds that the sponsor  is  on  a  zero
                  hours contract and considers that this  is  sufficient  to
                  establish her as a 'worker' for the purposes  of  the  EEA
                  regulations.

             4.   At [18] the Judge finds that the  sponsor  is  exercising
                  treaty rights at the date of the Hearing (01.08.2014).

             5.   By her own admission, the sponsor has  not  worked  since
                  June 2014 [10].

             6.   It is submitted that whilst the sponsor may have  a  zero
                  hours contract, she was not in remunerative employment  at
                  the date of the Hearing, and has not been since June 2014.

             7.   In Boodhoo and  another  (EEA  Regs:  relevant  evidence)
                  [2013] UKUT 00346 (IAC) the UTT found  that  the  relevant
                  date for an in country  appeal  in  respect  of  the  2006
                  regulations is the date of hearing.

             8.   The sponsor has not shown she is working at the  date  of
                  the Hearing and does not therefore meet  the  requirements
                  of Regulation 6.

             9.   Consequently the appellant cannot qualify for a residence
                  card.

             10.   For  the  above  reasons,  it  is  submitted  that   the
                  Immigration Judge has erred in his findings.

             11.  Permission to appeal is respectfully sought.

              12. An oral hearing is requested."

 4. Following receipt of the application for permission to appeal  on  29th
    September 2014 FTTJ Grimmett made an order in the following terms:

         "REASONS FOR DECISION (including any decision on extending time)

             1.   The Respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal,  in  time,
                  against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parker
                  promulgated on 19th August 2014 to allow  the  Appellant's
                  appeal against the Respondent's decision on 10th  December
                  2013 to refuse to issue a residence card as the spouse  of
                  an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

             2.   The Respondent asserts that the Judge erred in concluding
                  that the Appellant's wife was exercising treaty rights  as
                  she was not working at the date of decision.  It  is  said
                  that she was on a zero hours contract, although it is  not
                  clear that such a contract was produced,  which  does  not
                  show she was been in remunerative employment.

             3.   It is arguable that the Judge erred as it does not appear
                  that the Appellant's wife was in paid employment in the UK
                  between the end of June 2014 and the date of the hearing.

             4.   All grounds are arguable."

 5. Thus the matter came before me to determine whether the decision of the
    FTTJ contains an error of law.

Submissions

 6. Ms Isherwood relied on the grounds provided.  It was  accepted  at  the
    hearing of the appeal by the sponsor  that  she  was  not  working  and
    therefore she was not exercising treaty rights.  At  the  time  of  the
    hearing of  the  appeal  she  was  not  exercising  treaty  rights  and
    therefore the respondent could not succeed in his appeal.

 7. Ms Isherwood relied on the case of Begum (EEA  -  worker  -  jobseeker)
    Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00275  (IAC)  and  relied  upon  the  headnote  at
    paragraph (1) which is in the following terms:

         "(1) When deciding whether an EEA national  is  a  worker  for  the
             purposes of the EEA Regulations, regard must  be  had  to  the
             fact that the term has a meaning in EU law, that  it  must  be
             interpreted broadly and that it is not conditioned by the type
             of employment or the amount of income derived.  But  a  person
             who does not  pursue  effective  and  genuine  activities,  or
             pursues activities on such a small scale as to be regarded  as
             purely marginal and ancillary or which have no economic  value
             to an employer, is not a worker.  In this context, regard must
             be given to the nature of the employment relationship and  the
             rights and duties of the person concerned to  decide  if  work
             activities are effective and genuine."

 8. Mr Krushner for the respondent opposed the  application  and  submitted
    that if the sponsor had produced her contract of employment (it was not
    produced before the First-tier Tribunal Judge)  she  could  still  have
    taken the holiday to Poland and still be a worker.  Four weeks  out  of
    work does not determine that she is not a worker.  The  fact  that  she
    takes holiday and might not be paid does not mean she has stopped being
    on the agent's books and there was evidence she was on the books of the
    agency and that she worked in 2013 for at least eight weeks (there were
    two payslips for 2014 and there was an  original  letter  updating  the
    letter of 2013 confirming employment over that period).

 9. Mr Krushner submitted the judge did not accept everything uncritically,
    he had sight of bank statements and the sponsor was paid  in  cash  but
    cash activity was shown  in  her  bank  account.   The  judge  accepted
    evidence about Victory College and Victory Care Services and was showed
    a linked in entry which shows that the Director of both companies is  a
    real person and linked to those companies in  that  entry.   The  judge
    looked at the evidence in the round which is what he was entitled to do
    and gave full reasons for his findings.   He  acknowledges  there  were
    mistakes on the payslips as to whether she was paid in cash or by  BACS
    and acknowledges though there were some inconsistencies in the evidence
    but was satisfied they were honest  witnesses  and  accepted  what  the
    sponsor had to say about her work dates and when  she  had  leave  from
    work.  The fact she is called a student  on  her  marriage  certificate
    does not mean she was not a worker.  Mr Krushner relied on the case  of
    Deborah Lawrie-Blum v Land Baden-Wuerttemberg [1986] EUECJ R-66/85 (3rd
    July 1986).  Whether she is a worker is something that can  be  decided
    on a practical common sense  level.   Of  course  if  the  sponsor  had
    performed badly for the agency they would strike her off the books  but
    this was not the case.  The judge acted properly and there  is  nothing
    approaching a mistake of law in the decision.  The  fact  that  someone
    does not have a written contract of employment and cannot be  found  to
    be a worker is plain wrong.  Indeed even  at  Appendix  FM-SE  what  is
    required by the Secretary of State when a person is to  show  they  are
    working includes a contract to be  produced  if  it  is  available.   A
    written contract is not always a mandatory matter.

10. The judge did accept the  oral  testimony  and  gave  reasons  for  his
    findings and on that basis there is no error of law

11. Finally a zero hours contract can be  the  basis  of  an  EEA  worker's
    contract.  Anyone on a zero hours contract will not be paid whilst  not
    at work for example on holiday for a few weeks.

12. In reply Ms Isherwood stated that the zero hours contract was  not  the
    basis of the challenge.  If at the time of the hearing the sponsor  was
    a worker she could have put in the August payslip but they had not done
    so and the EEA national in evidence accepted she had not  worked  since
    June.  The hearing was at the beginning of August.  On  any  basis  she
    was  not  exercising  treaty  rights  at  the  date  of   the   hearing
    consequently the judge erred in law in allowing the appeal.

13. Mr Krushner wished to reply to the  points  about  the  August  payslip
    stating that it was not known at the date of the hearing if the  August
    payslip was due at the time of the hearing.

Decision

14. I have read the Record of Proceedings. The FtTJ was not assisted by the
    failure of the parties to draw his attention to  the  well  established
    caselaw of Begum. He was mindful  that he should make findings based on
    the date of the hearing before him following  Boodhoo and another  (EEA
    Regs: Relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT 00346.

15. Having taken into account the evidence of the sponsor before the  FtTJ,
    I have concluded, following Begum that there was insufficient  evidence
    before the  FtTJ for him to find that the sponsor was exercising treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom at the date  of  the  hearing  before  the
    FtTJ. The arguments about the zero hours contract and its  significance
    are immaterial to the issue  before the FtTJ   which  was  whether  the
    sponsor was a qualified person. The nature of employment  to  establish
    treaty rights is properly described  by  the  Tribunal  in  Begum.  The
    evidence before  the  FtTJ  arguably  established  that  the  sponsor's
    exercise of treaty rights  had  been  minimal  and  that  she  had  not
    exercised treaty rights since June 2014.

16. In failing to apply his mind to guidance of the Tribunal  in  Begum,  I
    find that the judge erred in law and his decision must be set aside  to
    be remade at a rehearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.  No  findings
    are preserved.

Decision

The FtTJ erred in law.
I set aside the decision.
The matter will be remitted for a rehearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
on a date to be fixed.

Directions

Any further evidence to be filed and served no later  than  14  days  before
the date fixed for rehearing.


Signed
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grant









