
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00400/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 March 2018                           |On 5 April 2018                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              MR ISTIAK HOSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision sent on 12 May 2017  Judge  Mitchell  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appellant's appeal.  At  the  hearing  the
    appellant did not attend nor did anyone on his behalf.  The judge noted
    that upon the court administration contacting his solicitors they  were
    told the representatives had requested on 13 March 2017 for the case to
    be heard on the papers.  The judge noted that "[e]nquiries of the court
    administration showed  that  no  such  notice  had  been  received.   I
    therefore considered that the matter should proceed as listed by way of
    an oral hearing as originally requested".

2.    The  challenge  brought  against  the  judge's  decision  is  that  by
    proceeding to deal  with  the  case  at  a  hearing,  the  judge  acted
    unfairly.  There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant for
    the error of law hearing before me and no  explanation  for  that.   In
    such circumstances I considered it just to proceed in  the  absence  of
    one of the parties.

3.   From the file, it does  in  fact  appear  that  there  is  a  facsimile
    transmission  of  13th  March  2017  from  the  appellant's  solicitors
    requesting that the appeal be considered on the papers and that  either
    it had not reached the judge's file or it was overlooked.

4.   Nevertheless, I see no error in the judge proceeding as  he  did.   The
    appellant had paid a fee for an oral hearing.  There had  already  been
    an adjournment.  The fact that the hearing went ahead even  though  the
    appellant's solicitors had sent a request that it be dealt with on  the
    papers in no way disadvantaged the appellant.  By electing  against  an
    oral hearing the appellant was denying himself the opportunity to  give
    evidence in support of his appeal  and  to  make  oral  submissions  in
    person or though his solicitors. He cannot therefore complain  that  at
    the hearing the judge received submissions from one party only.   There
    was no procedural unfairness.

5.    Further,  this  was  an  appeal  in  which  prior   to   the   judge's
    deliberations the appellant had not seen fit (either in  the  facsimile
    transmission or otherwise) to provide any documents to the FtT, despite
    being legally represented throughout the whole of the proceedings.  His
    appeal grounds were cursory to say the least.  As the judge noted quite
    correctly, the burden of proof lay on the appellant to  show  upon  the
    balance  of  probabilities  that  he  met  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules or that the decision appealed  against  breached  his
    human rights.  The lack  of  evidence,  coupled  with  the  appellant's
    choice not to attend an oral hearing and seek a decision on the  papers
    instead, meant that he singularly failed to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.

6.   For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT did  not  materially  err
    in law and the judge's decision must stand.

7.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 3 April 2018
             [pic]
Dr H H Storey   Judge of the Upper Tribunal
