
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00115/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2018                           |On 5 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  MAJID ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji of Counsel instructed by DV Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  This  appeal  has  a  long  history.    It   has   been   dealt   with
    unsatisfactorily previously.  Most recently it  was  dealt  with  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge at Birmingham who in a  decision  promulgated
    on 12 December 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision
    of the Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain on human  rights
    grounds and refusing him leave under the Immigration Rules.

 2. This is an appeal that is so old it is to be decided  under  the  Rules
    and not solely on human rights grounds.

 3. Given  the  very  reasonable,  appropriate  and  professional  approach
    adopted by Mr Mills at the hearing before me it  is  not  going  to  be
    necessary to say too much but I do want to give  a  proper  explanation
    for my decision which is to allow the appeal.

 4. The short point is that the  First-tier  Tribunal,  although  directing
    itself correctly about its scope  and  powers,  completely  misdirected
    itself about the proper application of EX.1 to Appendix FM.  The First-
    tier Tribunal decided that they were not relevant  considerations  and,
    as Mr Mills conceded immediately, that was the wrong approach.  It is a
    case  where  proper  application  of  EX.1  has   to   be   considered.
    Furthermore, the proper application leads to the appeal being allowed.

 5. The short point is that the appellant  is  in  a  relationship  with  a
    British citizen.  In order to succeed he has to  show  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles in the way of  them  continuing  their  family
    life in his  country  of  nationality.  The  difficulty  comes  not  in
    establishing themselves in  the  country  but  in  leaving  behind  the
    appellant's partner's  children  from  an  earlier  relationship.   The
    children are in regular contact with their  father  and  there  are  no
    realistic prospects of them either being abandoned by their  mother  or
    continuing their full relationship with  their  father  from  overseas.
    Nobody suggests for a moment that either of those two routes are at all
    sensible and certainly it is not the Secretary  of  State's  case  that
    that is what ought to happen.

 6. Given those irresistible findings I agree with Mr Mills that the appeal
    can be only decided one way, which is to allow it.

 7. On this occasion Mr Jafferji's submissions (which no doubt  would  have
    been very eloquent) were not necessary and I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal for error of law and I  substitute  a  decision
    allowing the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.  I  set  aside  its  decision  and  I
substitute a decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 January 2019                |


