
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ/FH-CK-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00182/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2016                           |On 19 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [K W]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Barnfield, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department and  the  Respondent  is  the  Claimant.   The  Claimant,  a
    national of Thailand, date of birth  [?]  1979,  appealed  against  the
    Secretary of State's decisions, dated 22 December 2014, to refuse leave
    to enter and to curtail existing leave to enter, dated 20 May 2013, and
    to make removal directions.

2.   The grounds of appeal against that decision in the most  general  terms
    alleged that the Secretary  of  State's  decisions  were  unlawful  and
    incompatible with European Convention rights.  In addition the Claimant
    claimed  that  the  decision  to  curtail   leave   was   unreasonable,
    irrational, evidently unlawful and also that her  previous  visits  had
    been lawful and that she had a good immigration history.

3.   The matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Loughridge  (the
    Judge) who on 13 July  2015  allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

4.   The judge did not address any of the immigration decisions at  all  but
    solely considered Article 8 ECHR on the basis  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not done so and that there had been no proper  assessment  of
    the best interests of her three children, under the age of 8  years  of
    age, who were British nationals, living  in  the  United  Kingdom  with
    their father [Mr W].  I infer that the judge assumed that there were no
    issues raised in relation to the Immigration Rules because at paragraph
    3 of the decision [D] he abbreviated the grounds solely  to  Article  8
    ECHR.

5.   In the circumstances the judge looked at Section 55 of the  BCIA  2009,
    which it was evident the Secretary of State had not considered  at  any
    material time, and went on to decide that if the Claimant were  removed
    to Thailand that would be a significant interference in family life and
    one which was disproportionate.

6.   Whilst it is plain that an  out-of-country  application  for  leave  to
    enter may not have valid appeal rights, it was clear that there  was  a
    potential for appeal against curtailment  and  removal  directions.   I
    raised these matters with the parties who agreed  that  the  issues  of
    curtailment and removal  directions  were  appealable  decisions.   The
    Secretary of State's grounds essentially challenged the fact  that  the
    judge had only considered Article 8  ECHR:    That  was  the  heart  of
    challenges to both grounds of appeal.

7.   The Secretary of State's grounds also relied upon the judge  erring  in
    law in making a  speculative  assessment  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Claimant could  make  an  application  for  a  visa  as  a  spouse  and
    speculating on the outcome of claims  in  relation  to  the  Claimant's
    husband's earnings and whether the requirements of the Rules  could  be
    met.

8.   I find that the Original Tribunal erred  in  law  in  approach  to  the
    appeal  grounds  not   being   dealt   with.    Plainly   the   various
    considerations which should have been raised were not dealt with.   The
    fact of the matter was the judge may be right about the  considerations
    in assessing Article 8 in the context of Sections 117A-117D but it does
    require a proper context and a need to address the other grounds  which
    fell to be considered first.

9.   In these circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Original  Tribunal
    decision cannot stand and the matter will have to be entirely remade in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In addition it would be appropriate  for  the
    Secretary of State to provide a further decision on the  issue  of  the
    children's  best  interests  in  terms  of  their  removal  as  British
    nationals.

DIRECTIONS

List for the First-tier Tribunal, two hours.

Any further documents relied upon in connection  with  any  Article  8  ECHR
claim to be served not later  than  ten  working  days  before  the  further
hearing date.

Thai interpreter required.

Relist for hearing at Newport Hearing Centre before  any  judge  other  than
Judge Loughridge.

Given the age of the children an anonymity direction is made.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 2 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey.

 P.S. I regret that promulgation being delayed due to the file  being  miss-
    located.


