
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00345/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th January 2015                           |On 3rd February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Ms Latoya Stainrod
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS
The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 11th February 1986 and on
    26th October 2013 her solicitors  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of Article  8  and  at  the  respondent's
    discretion outside the Rules.

 3. The appellant had entered the UK on 23rd August 2001 with a visit  visa
    valid until 13th September 2001.  Since that date she had no  leave  to
    remain.  She was currently living with  her  cousin  and  her  cousin's
    child.

 4. The respondent found that she was  not  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a British person, that she did not have a partner and
    did not have a child and therefore could not fulfil the requirements of
    Appendix FM.  In relation to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules
    she had lived in the UK for twelve years since she was 15 but this  was
    less than the period required of  twenty  years.   She  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that she had no social, cultural or family ties in Jamaica.

 5.  On  25th  June  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross  allowed   the
    appellant's appeal.  At paragraph 11 he found that the appellant was 28
    years old and that she had lived in the UK for thirteen years  but  did
    not meet the requirements of the Rules  and  the  remaining  issue  was
    whether there were any remaining ties with Jamaica. At paragraph 12 the
    judge set out his findings.

 6. An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State, who observed that the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  pursuant  to
    Immigration Rule 276ADE(vi).

 7. The judge found that the appellant had no friends in Jamaica and  given
    the length of time she resided in the  UK  had  no  cultural  links  to
    Jamaica.  The judge heard  no  evidence  in  relation  to  friends  the
    appellant had had in Jamaica and it was submitted that the finding  was
    unsustainable insofar as an analysis of  no  ties  to  her  country  of
    origin was concerned.

 8. There was no consideration of the appellant's social and cultural  ties
    to Jamaica in the light of the fact that she spent  thirteen  years  of
    her life in that country.

 9. The judge had undertaken a cursory analysis of the  appellant's  social
    and cultural ties to Jamaica and had not given a  sufficiently  rounded
    assessment in the light of Ogundimu (Article 8  -  new  rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC).

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cheales
    on the basis that the judge had not given enough  weight  to  the  fact
    that the appellant had lived in Jamaica for  thirteen  years  and  must
    retain some social and cultural ties there.

11. The question is whether returning the appellant to  Jamaica  after  the
    length of time she has resided in the UK would be "unjustifiably harsh"
    as described in Ogundimu.

12. Submissions were made by Mr Nath such that the case law of Ogundimu had
    not been referred to and an assessment of the ties and  the  individual
    circumstances of  the  appellant  had  not  been  taken  into  account.
    Although the judge recorded at paragraph 10 that  there  were  no  ties
    there was no evidence in relation to the family members.  The judge had
    not given any reasons for finding that there was  a  lack  of  cultural
    links.   There  were  issues  raised  at  paragraphs  10  and  11.   In
    particular in relation to paragraph 10 there was no evidence that there
    were no family ties.  The judge had not  given  reasons  for  this  and
    there was no analysis of the other links in paragraph  12.   The  point
    that Mr Nath submitted was that there was a failure to demonstrate  the
    appellant's case.  I asked Mr Nath how it was possible to demonstrate a
    negative and he responded that there was little by way of evidence  put
    forward by the appellant and he cited sections from Ogundimu and  noted
    that in other cases the Red Cross had undertaken tracing on  behalf  of
    the Home Office.  The appellant had not taken steps to  track  down  or
    shown that she had taken steps to track down her parents.

13. The application for permission to appeal stated that the judge heard no
    evidence in relation to friends the appellant has or had in Jamaica and
    it was submitted that the judge's conclusions in relation  to  cultural
    links  were  unsustainable.   There  was  no   consideration   of   the
    appellant's social and cultural ties in the light of the fact that  she
    spent thirteen years of her life living in that country.

Conclusions

14. The requirement set out at paragraph 276ADE(vi)  that  applied  to  the
    appellant was that she had to show that she "is aged 18 years or above,
    has lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
    any period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including social, cultural
    or family) with the country to which he would have to go if required to
    leave the U.K."

15. The judge recorded at paragraph 4 that the appellant  came  to  the  UK
    when she was 15 years old in 2001 and was brought here by a cousin  who
    subsequently obtained indefinite leave to remain.  The  appellant  gave
    evidence that she had no relatives in Jamaica and that all her  cousins
    lived in the UK and that all the people that she was close to lived  in
    the UK.  The judge  recorded  that  she  was  cross-examined  and  that
    further that she had started living with her cousin  Cherie  Cox,  (who
    had been given leave to remain) when she was very young. The  appellant
    stopped  going  to  school  when  she  was  13.   Further  she  had  no
    qualifications.

16. At paragraph 6 the judge also heard from Antoinette  Hemans,  a  friend
    who was cross-examined and who confirmed that the appellant  could  not
    remember "much about Jamaica and has nobody there.  She said  that  the
    daughter of the appellant's cousin who is called Kayla spent a  lot  of
    time with the appellant".

17. This witness was also cross-examined and stated that she personally was
    not sure whether the appellant "has a family in Jamaica and  has  never
    met any".  The judge clearly considered the evidence  recorded  in  the
    determination and as I pointed out to Mr Nath it is difficult  for  the
    appellant to prove a negative.  Nonetheless the judge took  account  of
    and accepted the fact that the appellant did not know  the  whereabouts
    of her parents in Jamaica bearing in mind she was  brought  up  from  a
    very young age by her cousin who brought her to the UK when she was 15.
     It did not escape the judge that the appellant was brought here  as  a
    minor and he accepted the fact that she did  not  know  of  any  family
    members in Jamaica.

18. The judge clearly was questioning the appellant's  account  and  stated
    that it would not be plausible "if it were not for the  fact  that  the
    appellant has told me that she was brought up by her cousin from a very
    young age and she therefore does not know her  parents".   Clearly  the
    judge had noted that the appellant had left school at the  age  of  13,
    which in turn would have an impact on the  appellant's  cultural  ties,
    and he accepted the fact that Miss Hemans, the witness who  was  cross-
    examined, "also confirmed that she does not appear to know  anybody  in
    Jamaica and has not been there".

19. As a conclusion the judge accepted that the appellant did not  know  of
    any of her family in Jamaica and did not have contacts there.

20. Although cross-examined it was not put to the appellant in  the  Record
    of Proceedings by the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  that  she  was
    required to make enquiries of family in Jamaica  and  bearing  in  mind
    that she has little by way of formal education as recorded by the judge
    perhaps this is not surprising.

21. Nonetheless the judge considered that since the appellant had lived  in
    the UK for thirteen years and came here when she was only  15  that  it
    was correct to say that she had completely lost touch with her roots in
    Jamaica, "she does not know any family there, has no friends there  and
    so far as her cultural life is concerned she has lived in  the  UK  for
    such a long time" that he accepted that she had no  cultural  links  to
    Jamaica.

22. I accept that the judge made no specific reference to Ogundimu but also
    note that the judge made an assessment on the evidence given to him  by
    the appellant, both documentary evidence and the oral evidence  of  the
    facts that were presented to him, and in the absence of contrary  facts
    presented to him by the  Home  Office  I  find  that  he  did  make  an
    objective analysis of those facts.

23. I note that Ogundimu was related to an appellant who was being  removed
    following criminal convictions albeit that he came at  a  much  younger
    age than the appellant.

24. Although not specifically stated the judge clearly considered a rounded
    assessment for the relevant circumstances and the facts put to him  and
    I am not persuaded that he limited himself only to social, cultural and
    family circumstances.  He was satisfied that the appellant had no  ties
    with Jamaica and in effect would be estranged to the country in the way
    of life bearing in mind that she had come to the UK  at  such  a  young
    age.  Even though the witness, who it appears was not a relative of the
    appellant's, may have stated that she had some  ties  in  Jamaica  this
    does not necessarily mean that those are the  ties  of  the  appellant.
    Indeed in Ogundimu it is stated:

         "Unsurprisingly, given the  length  of  the  appellant's  residence
         here, all of his ties are with the  United  Kingdom.   Consequently
         the appellant has so little connection with Nigeria so as  to  mean
         that the consequences for him in establishing private life there at
         the age of 28, after 22 years' residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,
         would be 'unjustifiably harsh'."

25. As stated in Ogundimu at paragraph 125, each case does turn on its  own
    facts, circumstances relevant to the assessment of whether a person has
    ties to the country to which  they  would  have  to  go  if  they  were
    required to leave but are not limited to:

         "the length of time a person has spent in the country to  which  he
         would have to go if he were required to leave the  United  Kingdom,
         the age that the person left that country, the exposure that person
         has had to the cultural norms of that country, whether that  person
         speaks the language of the country, the extent of  the  family  and
         friends that person has  in  the  country  to  which  he  is  being
         deported or removed and  the  quality  of  the  relationships  that
         person has with those friends and family members."

26. The judge made a brief but overall assessment of the familial ties  and
    cultural links with Jamaica.  It was  not  a  question  of  considering
    whether dormant ties could be revived.  In essence  the  appellant  was
    found to have no links with Jamaica and by definition  the  quality  of
    links would not exist.  As such the judge allowed the  appeal.   Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC) confirmed

         'Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the
        conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
        those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
        makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge'.

27. Although the reasons given are relatively brief in view of the evidence
    presented I am not persuaded that there is an error  of  law  which  is
    material and therefore the decision of First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Ross
    shall stand.



Signed        Date 31st January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

