








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00154/2014
                                                               IA/00155/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23 September 2014                         |On:22 October 2014           |
|Prepared: 10 October 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                     Miss Jhamelia Sherica Anne Jackson
                           Jhamani Lavonna Jackson
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                 Respondents
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms J Norman, counsel (instructed by Immigration
                    Advice Service  (Hounslow)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      secretary of state and the respondents as "the claimants."


   2. The claimants are nationals of Jamaica, born on 3rd May 1988 and  12th
      July 1993 respectively. They are sisters.  Their  applications  for  a
      variation of leave to remain were refused by the secretary of state on
      29th November 2013  as  she  was  not  satisfied  that  they  met  the
      requirements "of the Article 8 rules".


   3. In a determination promulgated  on  22nd  July  2013,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge allowed their appeals both under the Immigration  Rules
      and on human rights grounds.


   4. On 12th August 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge R  A  Cox  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. He noted that  their  appeals
      were against the secretary of state's decision to refuse to vary leave
      to remain on family and private life grounds, and to remove them under
      s.47 of the 2006 Act.


   5. In granting permission to appeal, he found that the grounds  disclosed
      an arguable material error of law.  The  grounds  contended  that  the
      Judge misdirected himself in respect of paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
      rule and/or failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
      claimants had no ties to Jamaica.


   6. Further, the Judge had undertaken a cursory Article 8 assessment,  had
      not considered the Gulshan criteria and had not given adequate reasons
      for finding that removal would be disproportionate.


   7. Judge Cox stated that although  he  could  understand  the  sentiments
      expressed by the Judge at [19], he  "feared"  that  the  grounds  were
      "certainly arguable" as there was a lack  of  structure,  clarity  and
      adequacy of reasoning in the determination.


     The background to the appeal


   8. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the claimants and  their
      parents provided statements which they adopted in  evidence.  Although
      the claimants were no longer minors, they were not living  independent
      lives as they lived with them. They depended  on  their  parents  "for
      everything." [10]


   9. They had returned to Jamaica only once in nine years, for two weeks in
      2010 and only had an 85 year old  grandmother  who  was  not  able  to
      assist them in any way.


  10. They were actively involved in their local church. The elder is  on  a
      teaching support placement at a primary school and hopes to  pursue  a
      career  as  a  teacher.  The  younger  hopes  to  study  Economics  at
      university.


  11. They left Jamaica "long time ago" and have several friends here. There
      is also a community with whom they have a  close  relationship.  Their
      father is working in the UK and they can be supported without any need
      for public funds. They are a close family and rely  on  their  parents
      for emotional guidance and support. They have two paternal uncles  and
      aunts here as well as cousins and other family members.


  12. The second claimant confirmed that they still had two grandmothers  in
      Jamaica and also her aunt, but they have  not  spoken  recently  [11].
      They had not discussed what their parents would  do  if  they  had  to
      return. The parents confirmed that when they came to the UK, they gave
      their house to the grandmother.


  13. The mother said that she had been back three times.  She  had  however
      been away from Jamaica now for 12 years and there was nothing for them
      there now, whereas here she has a job.


  14. "The father" confirmed that "his daughter" had lived in the UK  longer
      than he had, as he only came in 2007, but  were  they  to  return,  he
      would not go with them as he would need to be  able  to  support  them
      financially. However, if he were to remain  in  the  UK  it  would  be
      difficult for him to offer much meaningful support of any other kind.


  15. The Judge had regard to paragraph 276ADE of the rules. He also  stated
      that the standard in relation to human rights is whether  there  is  a
      real risk of a breach arising [13-14].


  16. He referred to the amendment to the Immigration Rules where a detailed
      list of factors had to be taken  into  account  when  determining  the
      issue of proportionality under Article 8.  The  UKBA  maintained  that
      these factors are those already identified within current statute  law
      and case law, and that it  will  only  be  in  "genuinely  exceptional
      circumstances" that the refusal of leave and removal from the UK would
      breach Article 8 [15].


  17. The Judge considered Article 8 outside the rules. He referred  to  the
      Razgar steps.  He found that the decisions in respect of the claimants
      and their parents produced a "rather odd situation" [19].  The  mother
      chose as an adult to visit the UK  and  was  permitted  to  remain  to
      study. She had no legitimate expectation of being  allowed  to  remain
      permanently but was permitted to do so. When she was granted ILR,  she
      had spent the greater part of her life in Jamaica.


  18. The claimants were minors when their mother decided to bring  them  to
      the UK. Now they were aged 26 and 21  and  the  younger  daughter  has
      spent almost half her life here and the two of them have returned only
      once, for a fortnight. Their father has been here for less than  seven
      of his 52 years but has been given leave as a spouse. [19]


  19. He stated that had the claimants by now made their way in the world as
      independent adults here or in Jamaica, the situation  referred  to  at
      paragraph 19 would not appear quite so strange. However, the  position
      is that they are still living with their parents and both are  engaged
      in studies and are undertaking voluntary work in the  community  which
      is highly valued.


  20. Those closest to them chose  to  come  to  the  UK  having  spent  the
      majority of their lives in Jamaica, and have been allowed  to  remain,
      whilst they cannot be regarded as having decided to come here and have
      spent a large part of their formative years here, have been denied the
      opportunity to remain.


  21. The Judge referred to their father's employment, stating that there is
      nothing to suggest that the claimants have ever been reliant on public
      funds. He had a basic salary of �11,715  per  annum.  It  would  "seem
      unlikely" that there is a public interest in removing them on  'public
      funds grounds' [20]. They have always been here lawfully  and  are  of
      good character. There is no strong case "on other grounds" [20].


  22. The parents are well established here. They have leave to remain which
      "will be pretty meaningless" if they feel obliged to leave the  UK  to
      continue their family life as it now is and to give the claimants  the
      full level of support that they are presently able to provide [20].


  23. The Judge found that while the claimants may still  have  grandmothers
      and an aunt to whom they can turn for some help in Jamaica,  they  are
      not family members  with  whom  they  have  ever  lived.  Further,  if
      required to return to Jamaica, it would appear likely  that  they  may
      face real difficulty trying to persuade an entry clearance officer  to
      grant them a visit visa to visit  their  parents  in  the  UK,  having
      regard to the difficulties of their  current  applications  to  remain
      here. This will be likely to be present for some years to come [20].


  24.  In  the  circumstances,  the  Judge  found  on  the  facts  that  the
      circumstances of the claimants are very unusual and the  situation  is
      one which he concluded could and should have resulted in  a  grant  of
      leave on the basis that they have to all  intents  and  purposes  lost
      significant ties in Jamaica and the circumstances are exceptional  and
      compassionate [21]. The case of the younger claimant  is  particularly
      strong as she left Jamaica just one  week  after  her  12th  birthday.
      Allowing her to remain  with  her  parents  would  "only  add  to  the
      strength of the case" for allowing her elder sister to remain.


  25. The Judge then stated that "whether or not I am right in law  to  find
      as I have in respect of the facts on Article 8  inside  the  rules,  I
      find that there is a strong arguable case  for  allowing  the  appeals
      outside the rules on Article 8 grounds."  [21]


  26. The claimants are young, single adult women who have always lived with
      one of their parents. They are  not  yet  independent,  nor  are  they
      likely to be in the near future given their plans for  further  study.
      They have lived in the UK now for nine years, returning only once  for
      a short visit. Their life, activities, friends  and  immediate  family
      are in the UK. They are of good character in terms  of  both  criminal
      law and their immigration history, and are serving their community  by
      their voluntary work and their example as Role Models [21].


  27. He found that it was accordingly difficult to see what useful  purpose
      would be served by uprooting them from the life they have been allowed
      to develop here by the secretary of state following  the  decision  of
      their parents to bring them here. It  would  be  disproportionate  and
      unreasonable to expect them now to leave the UK.


  28. Accordingly, the decisions of the  secretary  of  state  were  not  in
      accordance with the law and the applicable immigration rules.


  29. Mr Jarvis on behalf of the secretary of state relied on  two  grounds,
      contending that the Judge had made material errors in law. With regard
      to the immigration rules, although not explicitly  stated,  the  Judge
      has "seemingly allowed the appeal pursuant  to  Rule  276ADE(vi).  The
      Judge had noted that the appellants have grandmothers and an aunt  who
      reside in Jamaica.


  30. He has however not considered how these familial relationships  amount
      to no ties to Jamaica for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(vi). Nor has
      the Judge considered the applicable guidance in the case  of  Ogundimu
      (Article 8 - New Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC). In the light  of
      their relatives who still reside in Jamaica, they have sufficient ties
      so as not to engage the rule.


  31. The second ground relates to Article 8. The Judge  had  undertaken  "a
      cursory Article 8 assessment" amounting to a single paragraph [21]. He
      has not considered their respective  positions  against  the  criteria
      outlined in Gulshan. In addition, he has given inadequate reasons  why
      the "proportionality" should be exercised in favour of the claimants.


  32. Mr Jarvis submitted that the Judge accepted at paragraph 20  that  the
      claimants may still have grandmothers and an aunt  to  whom  they  can
      turn for some help in Jamaica, albeit that they are not family members
      with whom they have ever lived.


  33. The Judge failed to have regard to the decision in Ogundimu, supra. In
      particular, there was no regard given to paragraph 124 and 125.  There
      the Tribunal  noted  that  the  phrase  "no  ties  (including  social,
      cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to  go  if
      required to leave the UK" is not exclusive to paragraph  399A  of  the
      rules, but is also used in paragraph 276ADE  in  the  context  of  the
      requirement to be met by an applicant for leave  to  remain  based  on
      private life in the UK when such a person has lived here for less than
      20 years.


  34. From paragraphs 123 onwards, the Tribunal referred to the natural  and
      ordinary meaning of the word "ties". That imports a concept  involving
      something more than merely remote and abstract links to the country of
      proposed deportation or removal. It involves there being  a  continued
      connection to life in that country; something that ties a claimant  to
      her country of origin.


  35. The Tribunal recognised that the text in the  rules  "is  an  exacting
      one" [124]. Consideration of whether a person has "no ties" to such  a
      country must  involve  "a  rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant
      circumstances and is not  to  be  limited  to  "social,  cultural  and
      family" circumstances. In Ogundimu itself, the Tribunal found that  he
      was a stranger to Nigeria. His father may have had ties, but those are
      not ties of the appellant himself, or any ties that  could  result  in
      support to the appellant in the event of his return to Nigeria.  After
      22 years' residence in the UK, it would be "unjustifiably  harsh"  for
      the appellant, then aged 28, to return.


  36. At paragraph 125, the various circumstances relevant to the assessment
      of such a person's ties to the country to which he would  be  required
      to go must include but are not limited to: the length of time  he  has
      spent in the country to which he would be returned; the  age  that  he
      left that country; the exposure he has had to the  cultural  norms  of
      that country; whether that person speaks the language of the  country;
      the extent of the family and friends that person has in the country to
      which he is being removed; and the quality of the relationships he has
      with those friends and family members.


  37. Mr Jarvis thus submitted that the  Judge  did  not  adopt  the  proper
      approach referred to in Ogundimu in  assessing  the  paragraph  276ADE
      conclusions. A holistic consideration had not been  undertaken.  There
      was in any event a finding that the claimants had grandmothers and  an
      aunt to whom they could turn for some help in Jamaica. The  nature  of
      the relationships was not properly assessed. They speak the  language.
      The fact that one of the claimants left when  aged  12  meant  that  a
      substantial part of her early life had been lived in Jamaica.


  38. The finding at paragraph 21 that they had  lost  significant  ties  in
      Jamaica was factually incorrect. A  proper  assessment  had  not  been
      carried out as required. The Tribunal has acknowledged that  the  rule
      is "an exacting one."


  39. With regard to the findings in respect of Article 8, the Judge appears
      to be engaging with Gulshan in stating that there is a strong arguable
      case for allowing the appeals outside the rules on Article  8  grounds
      [21]. However, the assessment of  proportionality  is  "unlawful."  At
      paragraph 21, the Judge was considering the Article  8  claim  on  the
      basis that he might not have been correct  in  law  to  find  for  the
      claimants "on Article 8 inside the rules" [21].


  40. The Judge had however failed to recognise or take  into  account  that
      the appellants had not succeeded under the rules.


  41. Mr Jarvis referred to and relied on  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal in Huleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  558.  At  paragraph  47,
      Lord Justice Beatson stated that the passages from  the  judgments  in
      the cases of Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  and  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1192 appear to give the rules greater weight than as merely a
      starting point for the consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an
      interference  with  Article  8  rights.  Even  if  it  is  correct  to
      characterise the relevance of the rules as only a starting point,  the
      single reference in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  "apparent
      harshness" did not in his judgment suffice.


  42. Lord Justice Beatson stated that  he  did  not  consider  that  it  is
      necessary to use the term "exceptional" or  "compelling"  to  describe
      the circumstances, and it will suffice if that can be said to  be  the
      substance of the Tribunal's decision. Here,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      gave no explanation of  why  this  is  so,  or  identified  particular
      features  of  Mr  Huleemudeen's  case  which   justified   considering
      proportionality outside the rules.


  43. Mr Jarvis submitted that the Judge here has engaged in "an old Article
      8 assessment" using the Gulshan terminology.


  44. In Huleemudeen, it was accepted that, at least in the Court of Appeal,
      in the light of the authorities, it is necessary to  find  "compelling
      circumstances" for going outside the rules.


  45. In the claimants' appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the
      Judge stated at paragraph 21 that it was difficult to see what  useful
      purpose would be served by uprooting them from the UK. He referred  to
      their lack  of  previous  convictions  and  good  character.   In  the
      circumstances he found that their removal  would  be  disproportionate
      and unreasonable.


  46. Mr Jarvis submitted that that was  'an  unlawful  approach'  following
      Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC).  At  paragraph  27,
      the Tribunal there stated that the only  significance  of  not  having
      criminal convictions and not having  relied  on  public  funds  is  to
      preclude the respondent  from  pointing  to  any  public  interest  in
      respect  of  the  appellants'  removal,  over  and  above  the   basic
      importance of maintaining a firm and coherent  system  of  immigration
      control.


  47. It is evident from paragraph 21 that the Judge "over emphasised" their
      private life. Accordingly, he took into account irrelevant matters  at
      paragraph 21.


  48. The claimants had had no expectation of being allowed to remain in the
      UK so as to allow them to succeed outside the rules where  they  would
      not have been able to do so under the rules.


  49. He submitted that this was one of those cases where it would be wholly
      justified for the case to be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal
      to consider the applicable issues properly.


  50. On behalf of the claimants, Ms  Norman  (who  did  not  represent  the
      claimants before the First-tier Tribunal) contended that the secretary
      of state's grounds amounted to an attempt to appeal  a  decision  with
      which she does not agree.


  51. She submitted that the ground relating to paragraph 276ADE  relied  on
      seeks to require the Tribunal to look at the findings in a vacuum.  It
      was necessary to look at the totality of the  evidence.  There  is  no
      reason to suggest that the Judge did not have the  proper  application
      of the rules in mind. She referred  to  paragraphs  12-17,  where  the
      appropriate rules are identified, including paragraph 276ADE.


  52. With regard to Article 8, he referred to the need to  have  regard  to
      Article 8 outside the rules  in  genuinely  exceptional  circumstances
      only [15]. He went on to direct himself appropriately with  regard  to
      Article 8 and paragraph 16 and 17. He then made findings in accordance
      with the approach he identified.


  53. She submitted that he has made a comprehensive  and  concise  finding.
      The Judge has "to all intents and purposes" given effect to  Ogundimu,
      supra. He has properly applied paragraph 4 of the headnote.


  54. He was entitled to arrive at the  findings  that  he  did.  He  found,
      despite the fact that there were two grandmothers available, that  the
      claimants have lived here for a long time.


  55. She therefore submitted that there had been a  proper  assessment  for
      the purposes of paragraph 276ADE of the rules.


  56. Ms Norman accepted that it was  evident  from  the  skeleton  argument
      produced to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  that  there  had  been  no
      reference at all to the decision in Ogundimu.  The  skeleton  in  fact
      concentrated on Article 8, contending that the claimants have provided
      evidence regarding their circumstances which amount to exceptional and
      compassionate circumstances in order to be granted leave  outside  the
      rules  on  a  discretionary   basis   (paragraph   23).   There   were
      insurmountable obstacles for them and their parents  to  enjoy  family
      life outside the UK [24].


  57. The skeleton referred to the UKBA  policy  guidance  and  it  was  not
      necessary for the Judge to have cited it. He "took the correct path in
      any event" even though not citing or having regard to Ogundimu.


  58. Whilst it is correct that he  "did  not  show  all  the  workings"  he
      ultimately came to the correct decision.  They  had  lost  significant
      ties.


  59. With regard to the second ground of appeal,  she  submitted  that  the
      Judge had accepted that they met the rules. He  did  correctly  direct
      himself at paragraph 17 with  regard  to  the  fifth  question  to  be
      answered in Razgar, namely the issue of proportionality.  Accordingly,
      he did have this at the forefront of his mind at the time.


  60. He found at paragraph 21 that the circumstances  are  exceptional  and
      compassionate and has looked at whether this is  a  case  outside  the
      rules. He has given a "concise list of reasons" as to  proportionality
      in favour of the claimants.


  61. She submitted that although the claimants were not entitled to succeed
      simply on the basis that they had no  convictions  and  were  of  good
      character, that could constitute a factor to be taken into account  in
      considering the interest and policy  of  the  secretary  of  state.  A
      disproportionate weight was not given.


  62. In reply, Mr Jarvis submitted that it had  not  been  shown  that  the
      Judge has properly engaged with Ogundimu. There is  a  proper  process
      which has to be adhered to, having regard to whether or not there  are
      relevant ties for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE.


  63. There was some support for the claimants in Jamaica, as found  by  the
      Judge. These were not merely remote or abstract links.


  64. Insofar as the Article 8 in the alternative ground  is  concerned,  Mr
      Jarvis again submitted that although the language of Gulshan may  have
      been used,  all  the  Judge  did  was  to  highlight  matters  on  the
      claimants' side. In particular,  he  has  not  treated  the  rules  as
      anything more than a starting point. Nor were the matters referred  to
      in Nasim considered with regard  to  the  public  interest.  This  was
      completely left out of  paragraph  21.  The  public  interest  is  not
      weakened for the reasons set out at paragraph 21. The  Judge  had  not
      been entitled to treat the Article  8  assessment  as  simply  a  free
      standing assessment.


     Assessment


  65.  It  is  evident  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowed  the
      claimants' appeals  under  the  Immigration  Rules.  He  set  out  the
      relevant rules,  namely  paragraph  276ADE  at  paragraph  13  of  the
      determination.


  66. It appears from paragraph 21 that the Judge found that  they  had  met
      the provisions of paragraph 276ADE under the rules, where he refers to
      "the facts on Article 8 inside the rules." However, on the basis  that
      that may not be correct, he considered the appeals on  an  alternative
      basis, namely on Article 8 grounds.


  67. Insofar as the implicit findings under paragraph 276ADE are concerned,
      it is unfortunate that the Judge was not referred to the  decision  of
      the Tribunal in Ogundimu. I have had regard to the  skeleton  argument
      produced on behalf of the claimants, which is  essentially  restricted
      to a consideration under Article 8.


  68. There was no analysis or reference to paragraph 276ADE. Nor was  there
      any reference to the proper approach to paragraph 276ADE as set out in
      Ogundimu, which was a decision promulgated in 2013.


  69. Accordingly, I find that the Judge has  not  conducted  the  necessary
      rounded assessment required as to all the relevant circumstances.  The
      Tribunal there recognised that the text under the applicable rules  is
      an  exacting  one.  The  factors  and  circumstances  which  must   be
      considered  in  the  rounded  assessment  are  clearly  identified  at
      paragraph 125.


  70. The Judge has found  at  paragraph  20  that  the  claimants  do  have
      grandmothers and an aunt to whom  they  can  turn  for  some  help  in
      Jamaica, albeit that they are not family members with whom  they  have
      ever lived. The claimants are adults.


  71. In thwe absence of such assessment, the Judge  has  not  shown  proper
      reasons as to why, to all intents and purposes, the claimants had lost
      significant ties in Jamaica, rendering their circumstances exceptional
      and compassionate.


  72. There is, as noted by Judge Cox in  granting  permission,  a  lack  of
      structure, clarity and adequacy of reasoning in the determination.


  73. Insofar as the Article  8  assessment  is  concerned,  the  Judge  has
      apparently had regard to the approach in Gulshan at paragraph 21.


  74. However, for the reasons  referred  to  in  detail  arising  from  the
      submissions of Mr Jarvis, the approach with regard to  proportionality
      has been  for  the  most  part  a   consideration  of  the  claimants'
      interests with a lack of proper attention and reasoning with regard to
      the secretary of state's proper interests.


  75. Further, the reference to their good character;  the  fact  that  they
      have not committed offences and have not relied  on  public  funds  is
      simply to preclude the secretary of state from pointing to any  public
      interest in respect  of  their  removal,  over  and  above  the  basic
      importance of maintaining a firm and coherent  system  of  immigration
      control. However, as a general matter that public interest factor can,
      in an appropriate case, result in the removal being  proportionate  in
      the circumstances.


  76. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error on a point of law.


  77. I accordingly set aside the determination. There will  have  to  be  a
      fresh decision made.


  78. Mr Jarvis has submitted (without any opposition from Ms  Norman)  that
      this is an appropriate case for remitting to the  First-tier  Tribunal
      for a fresh decision to be made as there will have to be a complete re-
      hearing needing substantial fact-finding to take place.


  79. I find, having regard to the Senior President's guidelines with regard
      to the remitting of cases, that it is appropriate for the appeal to be
      remitted. There will be  substantial fact finding required  where  the
      parties will need to address the proper approach with  regard  to  the
      immigration rules as set out in Ogundimu, supra.


     Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Judge involved the making of an error on
    a point of law and is set aside.


    The claimants' appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  (Hatton
    Cross) for a fresh decision to be made before another Judge.


    The necessary administrative arrangements will need to be made.







                               Signed                 Date10/10/2014










                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


