
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA000122015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 May 2016                                 |On 26 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Md Yousuf Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell allowing the  appeal  of
    the appellant against a decision made by the respondent on 21  December
    2014 to cancel his leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant.

2.   The respondent's reasons for her decision are that  the  appellant  had
    made false representations when he was granted leave on 15 October 2013
    and there had been a change of circumstances since he was granted leave
    and his leave has been cancelled.  The appellant had submitted a  TOEIC
    certificate from the Educational Testing Service (the "ETS").  ETS  has
    a record of his speaking test and  used  voice  verification  software,
    which is able to detect if a single person is  taking  multiple  tests.
    ETS had undertaken a check  of  his  test  and  there  was  significant
    evidence to conclude that his certificate  was  fraudulently  obtained.
    ETS had cancelled his test.

3.   The judge had before her the respondent's interview with the  appellant
    and the generic  witness  statements  of  Rebecca  Collings  and  Peter
    Millington.  There was an additional statement from Michael  Sartorius.



4.   The judge advised both parties that she was aware of the case of R  (On
    the application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC) which is a judicial
    review decision based on the issue of a right of appeal in an ETS case.



5.   The appellant gave evidence before the judge.  When it was put  to  him
    that the Home Office says he used deception to get the ETS, he said  he
    took the exams on 30 April 2013 and 1  May  2013  and  passed  it.   He
    completed his MBA in marketing on 21 February 2015 and  got  merit  and
    wants to do a PhD, but because of this decision he cannot do it.

6.   In cross-examination it was put to him that the  marks  he  scored  for
    the MBA were low or below average.  The appellant replied that  he  got
    good in the dissertation.  He confirmed the dissertation  was  written.
    In Bangladesh he got good grades in his Bachelor degree in Physics.  He
    said his pronunciation was poor because he spoke too fast.

7.   The judge found that the appellant's standard  of  spoken  English  was
    not  perfect  and  at  times  he  had  difficulties  understanding  the
    questions and his answers were not clearly understood.  He  spoke  with
    quite a heavy accent.  However she accepted that it was likely that  he
    was nervous.  She also found that it appears from  his  Association  of
    Chartered Certified Accounts (ACCA) results in June 2013  that  he  had
    failed some papers, but did not find that this was unusual  as  it  was
    common knowledge that these exams were particularly difficult.  So  she
    did not find that this was indicative of the fact  that  the  appellant
    used deception to pass the ETS tests in April/May 2015.

8.   The judge found however that in November 2014 the appellant passed  and
    was awarded an MBA in marketing  with  merit  from  the  University  of
    Sunderland.  Therefore his level of English must have  been  sufficient
    and proficient enough to study and pass the course  for  which  he  was
    granted leave  to  remain.   She  accepted  that  he  was  awarded  his
    certificate in November 2014, which was about eighteen months after the
    ETS tests, but still gave some indication of his level of English.

9.   The judge considered the series of witness statements from Home  Office
    officers who have generally assessed  the  process  at  ETS  and  their
    testing facilities regarding voice recognition.

10.  The judge held as follows:

         "21. However I find force in the submissions of Mr Azadi that it is
             for the respondent to prove her case that THIS  appellant  has
             used deception.  Mr Azadi's submissions  partly  focused  upon
             the duty of the respondent to ensure  that  her  licences  are
             granted to organisations which can provide  reliable  results.
             The evidence produced by the respondent in  the  form  of  the
             three witness statement are all generic which she states prove
             to  a  high  standard  of  proof  that  THIS  appellant   used
             deception.  These witness statements show that the testing  is
             not 100%  accurate  and  are  relying  upon  the  standard  of
             probabilities.  The respondent allowed ETS to check  the  test
             and personnel carrying out the test  are  not  experienced  as
             they are lay people.  Further no-one from ETS has  provided  a
             witness statement  for  this  appellant.   In  this  case  the
             respondent has stated that ETS have cancelled the  appellant's
             test.


         22.  I am also guided by the decision of the  Upper  Tier  Tribunal
             which was a Judicial Review case, but  the  President  made  a
             valuable  observation  R  (on  the  application  of  Gazi)   v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (ETS  -  judicial
             review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC) who carefully examined the
             generic witness statements provided by the respondent in  that
             case and each and every other case.  He was of the  view  that
             each case needed to be  examined  in  the  light  of  all  the
             evidence.


         23.  I have examined the appellant's case in the light of the three
             witness statements provided by the respondent and the evidence
             provided by the appellant.  I do not find that the  respondent
             has proved to the required standard that THIS  appellant  used
             deception."

11.  Mr Biggs sought permission to rely on the unreported  decision  of  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir promulgated on 5  April
    2016.  He relied on the Practice Directions  for  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    paragraph 11 - "Citation of unreported determinations".   He  submitted
    that SM and Qadir considered at length the oral  evidence  of  the  two
    Home Office witnesses, whose statements were considered by  the  judge.
    Furthermore this appellant's case was adjourned on  23  March  2016  to
    await the decision in SM and Qadir.

12.  Mr Jarvis objected to the reliance on SM and Qadir citing R (Iran)  and
    arguing that the judge could not be  criticised  for  not  taking  into
    account evidence that was not before her.

13.  Whilst I accepted Mr Jarvis's argument, I granted Mr. Biggs  permission
    to rely on SM and Qadir for the reasons given by him.

14.  Mr Jarvis submitted in respect of the judge's findings at paragraph  23
    that there was specific evidence in respect of this appellant following
    which his past test was declared invalid.  The basis for that  is  that
    after the software analysis and the additional human analysis there was
    evidence to indicate that a proxy was used in the context of that test.
     He submitted that the judge acted unlawfully by  misunderstanding  the
    nature of the Secretary of State's evidence.

15.  He submitted that in SM and Qadir the Secretary of State made  out  the
    original claim that there had been deception.  Once  the  Secretary  of
    State made out her case that deception had taken place,  the  appellant
    could put in evidence surrounding the test, his education in the UK  or
    in any other country to rebut the allegation of deception.   Mr  Jarvis
    submitted that SM and Qadir is of no immediate  relevance.   The  judge
    erred at 23(d) in that she should have, with the benefit of Gazi, found
    that the first part had been made out by the Secretary of  State.   The
    second part is whether the appellant's circumstances during, before and
    after indicated that deception had not been  deployed.   The  appellant
    says he has passed the MBA.  The judge does not analyse whether this is
    enough to rebut the Secretary of State's decision.

16.  Mr. Jarvis added that there was a further challenge in respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules 245ZX which was referred to in the refusal letter and
    which was not dealt with by the judge.

17.  Mr Biggs submitted that the only issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was whether deception was used by the appellant.  He referred  to  page
    11 of the appellant's bundle  below.   The  respondent  said  that  the
    deception amounted to a change  of  circumstances.   The  Secretary  of
    State has to demonstrate  on  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  used
    deception by cheating.

18.  Referring  to  paragraph  57  of  SM,  Mr.  Biggs  submitted  that  the
    President found that the evidential burden is first on the  respondent.
    The evidential burden then shifts to the appellant if the Secretary  of
    State  provides  some  evidence  to  raise  deception.   The  president
    accepted that the legal burden on the Secretary of State does not shift
    (paragraph 58).  The legal burden always remains on  the  Secretary  of
    State.  When  the  evidential  burden  shifts  to  the  appellant,  the
    appellant would have to give oral evidence which he did,  supported  by
    his MBA certificate, which in this case was evidence of academic  study
    taught in English.  This provided evidence that there  was  no  obvious
    motive to cheat.

19.  Mr Biggs submitted that the judge  acted  in  accordance  with  settled
    principle.  The judge gave  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  She was entitled to conclude that he had an MBA and  on  the
    facts before her, the Secretary of State had not proved her  case.   He
    submitted that the  respondent's  arguments  were  mere  disagreements.
    Furthermore  there  was  no  clear  evidence  by  ETS  as  to  why  the
    appellant's test  was  invalidated.   He  submitted  that  the  judge's
    analysis was right and that analysis was supported by the  decision  in
    SM and Qadir.

20.  I was not persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  in
    her decision.  I accept that the judge did not, as  in  SM  and  Qadir,
    find that the Secretary of State had  satisfied  the  first  hurdle  by
    establishing the allegation of deception. This error is  not  material.
    The  evidential  burden  shifted  to  the  appellant   to   rebut   the
    respondent's allegation of deception.  I find that  this  is  what  the
    judge's decision was  all  about.   The  judge  examined  the  evidence
    provided by the appellant and made positive  findings  in  his  favour.
    She  found  force  in  the  submissions   made   by   the   appellant's
    representative.  She was satisfied that the MBA, although  taken  about
    eighteen months after the ETS test, might give some indication  of  his
    level of English.  I find that it can be ascertained from  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant had satisfied the evidential burden on  him
    to the required standard of proof.

21.  SM held that the legal burden remains on the respondent,  it  does  not
    shift.  Hence the judge's finding that the respondent has not proved to
    the required standard  that  this  appellant  had  used  deception  was
    sustainable in the light of her findings.

22.  Consequently I find that the judge's  decision  does  not  disclose  an
    error of law.  The judge's decision shall stand.








Signed                                  Date:  25 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

