
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00052/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 HINA SHAHID
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Jafferji of Counsel instructed by Royal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Pakistan, born on 17 August 1983.  On 18 July  2012  she  entered  with
    leave as a visitor expiring on 4 December 2012.

 2. On 21 October 2006 she married Shahzada Shahid Saeed in  Pakistan.   He
    is a British citizen.  They have two children both born in Pakistan  in
    2007 and 2010 who are  both  British  citizens.   She  lives  with  her
    husband and her children in the Midlands.

 3. On 29 September 2014 the Applicant applied for a  Derivative  Residence
    Card as the primary carer of British citizens resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom by way of reference  to  Reg.  15A  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 as amended (the 2006 Regs.).

The Home Office Decision

 4. On 15 December 2014 the Appellant (the SSHD)  refused  the  application
    for a Derivative Residence Card and by a letter  of  15  December  2014
    gave her reasons.  This letter was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and was only produced at the hearing before me upon my request.

 5. The Applicant was not directly entitled to a right of  residence  under
    the Citizens' Directive (2004/38/EC) because she was not a  citizen  of
    another Member State and her husband was a British citizen and had  not
    exercised the right of freedom of movement within the European Union.

 6. The Respondent went on to consider whether the Appellant could claim  a
    Derivative right under Reg.15A which had been added to the  2006  Regs.
    In the light of the judgment of the Court of Justice  of  the  European
    Union in Zambrano (C-34/09).

 7. The Applicant had claimed that she had primary responsibility  for  her
    two children and so should be  regarded  as  a  "primary  carer"  under
    Regs.15A(7).  This states:-

         "(7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if

             (a)  P is a direct  relative  or  a  legal  guardian  of  that
                  person; and

             (b)  P-

                  (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                      person's care; or

                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for  that  person's
                      care with one other  person  who  is  not  an  exempt
                      person.

         (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person
             by virtue of paragraph (7)(b)(ii) the criteria  in  paragraphs
             (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall  be  considered  on  the
             basis that both P and the person with whom care responsibility
             is shared would be required to leave the United Kingdom.

         (7B) Paragraph (7A) does not apply if the  person  with  whom  care
             responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to reside
             in the United Kingdom as a result of this regulation prior  to
             P assuming equal care responsibility.

         (8)  P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a person's
             care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis  of  a
             financial contribution towards that person's care."

 8. The Respondent noted the Applicant's husband and father of her children
    was a British citizen and so for the purposes of the 2006 Regs. was "an
    exempt person" by reason of Reg.2(1) of the 2006 Regs.'  definition  of
    an "EEA national".

 9. The Respondent found that there was no evidence the Applicant's husband
    was not in a position to care for their children if she was  forced  to
    leave the United Kingdom or to show that the children will be unable to
    remain within the European Union if she had to leave.   The  Respondent
    considered the Applicant shared responsibility for  her  children  with
    her husband, their father and since he was not being required to  leave
    the United Kingdom did not meet the requirements of Regs.15A(7A).

10. The Respondent referred to the provisions of paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and Appendix FM.  If the  Applicant  wished  to  seek
    leave by way of reference to the  State's  obligation  to  respect  her
    private and  family  life  protected  by  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention then she needed to make a  separate  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

11. The Respondent acknowledged her duties under Section 55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  noted  she  had  not  made  a
    decision  to  remove  the  Applicant  from  the  United   Kingdom   and
    accordingly the position of her children was unaffected by the decision
    to refuse a Derivative Residence Card.

12. By a letter dated 25 February 2015 received by the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 3 March 2015 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under  Reg.26  of
    the 2006 Regs. and Section  82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The grounds are  lengthy.   Reference  was
    made to the judgment in Zambrano.  The Applicant stated she was  wholly
    and solely responsible for the day-to-day care of her children and that
    their father, her husband:-

         "... is a very good father and contributes wherever he can ...   My
         husband is self-employed.  As he leaves for work by  the  time  the
         children have arrived  from  school  and  is  mostly  away  on  the
         weekends.  At times he is away for longer periods of time ...   The
         children only turn to the father when they want toys or want to  go
         out as majority of children of that age do."

13. The grounds refer to paragraph 41 of the determination  in  MA  and  SM
    (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC).   They
    go on to assert that if the Applicant's husband were to care for  their
    children on his own then it would affect  his  ability  to  work  which
    would violate his right to work given by the Citizens' Directive.   The
    grounds go on to refer to Article 8 of the European Convention and  the
    judgment in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.





The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

14. In the notice of appeal the  Appellant  had  requested  her  appeal  be
    decided without a hearing on the basis of the papers  in  the  Tribunal
    file.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malone dealt with the appeal on
    the papers and by a decision promulgated on 11 May 2015 he  noted  that
    the SSHD had not filed any bundle and in particular no reasons for  the
    decision under appeal.  He considered whether  the  Applicant  met  the
    requirements of Regs. 15A(4A) and 15A(7) and allowed the appeal.

15. On 31 July 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pirotta  granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  Judge  had  arguably
    erred in concluding the  Applicant  met  the  requirements  of  Reg.15A
    because she was not the sole carer of her children, that  their  father
    was a United Kingdom citizen and he could not compel the United Kingdom
    to admit his wife because of his disinclination to  care  for  his  own
    children or choices about his work schedules.  She noted there  was  no
    evidence before the Judge that the children would be compelled to leave
    the United Kingdom.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

16. On 23 October 2015 the  Applicant  instructed  Royal  Solicitors.   She
    attended the hearing with her two children.

Submissions for the SSHD

17. Ms Sreeraman relied  on  the  grounds  contained  in  the  Respondent's
    application for permission to appeal.  These assert that the  Applicant
    is  not  exclusively  caring  for  her  children   and   that   sharing
    responsibility for a child involves a number of factors  not  just  who
    looks after a child for most of the time. Consideration had to be given
    to who provided financially for the children. The  Applicant's  husband
    provided financially for his children and so shared responsibility  for
    them.  Consequently, the Applicant did not fall  within  the  scope  of
    Reg.15A(7)(b)(i).   Her  husband  was  an  exempt  person  and  so  the
    Applicant could not satisfy the requirements of Reg. 15A(7)(B)(ii)  and
    consequently did not satisfy the criteria of  Reg.15A(4A)(a).   If  the
    Applicant left the United Kingdom her children's  father  would  remain
    living with them in the United Kingdom.  That he might  be  disinclined
    or reluctant to care for his children was not reason enough to  satisfy
    the significant requirements of the 2006 Regs.

18. The permission application set out substantial parts of paragraph 41 of
    the decision in MA and SM.  It went  on  to  assert  that  the  working
    arrangements of the Applicant's husband were voluntary  and  the  Judge
    had not expressly found that he would not care for his children if  the
    Applicant left or that the children would be  compelled  to  leave  the
    European Union.  For these reasons the Judge had arguably erred in law.

19. The Judge had found at paragraph 17 of his decision that the  Applicant
    together with her husband and  their  children  formed  a  family  unit
    living together and the Applicant and her husband  as  parents  of  the
    children shared responsibility for  their  care.   That  the  Applicant
    spent more time with her children than her husband did because  he  was
    earning a living did not make her  their  "primary  carer"  within  the
    meaning of Reg.15A(7).  She referred to paragraph 56 of the decision in
    MA and SM which states:-

         "There is no suggestion that the sponsor is not capable of  looking
         after JM and FM. He has tailored his  working  hours  thus  far  to
         ensure that they fit in with the need to care for JM, and  we  have
         no doubt he would also ensure that FM was similarly cared for.  The
         mere fact that the sponsor cannot be as economically active  as  he
         would wish, because of his care responsibilities to JM and  FM,  is
         not sufficient to support a conclusion that  JM  and  FM  would  be
         denied the genuine enjoyment of their EU  citizenship  rights,  nor
         would this be the case even if the sponsor were  required  to  stop
         working altogether. The right of residence is a right to reside  in
         the territory of the EU. It  is  not  a  right  to  any  particular
         quality of life or to any particular standard of living (see Dereci
         at paragraph 68, and Harrison at paragraph 67)."

    The children's father  would  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
    Applicant left.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set aside
    and the appeal dismissed.

20. Ms Sreeraman went on to  make  the  point  that  since  there  were  no
    directions  for  removal  of  the  Applicant  then  in  the  light   of
    Amrityemour and others (EEA appeals; human rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466
    (IAC) the Applicant was not in a position to bring  a  challenge  under
    the Human Rights Act 1998.

Submissions for the Applicant

21. Mr Jafferji submitted the permission application grounds amounted to no
    more than a disagreement with the Judge and did not disclose any  error
    of law.  The Judge had made a clear finding at paragraph  12  that  the
    Applicant's husband had no part in bringing  up  their  children.   His
    time was fully taken up by his work.  The  fact  her  husband  provided
    financial support did not vitiate  the  Applicant's  claim  to  be  the
    children's "primary carer" and qualify under Reg.15A(7).

22. He referred to Reg. 15A(8) which provides that:-

         'P will not be regarded as having  responsibility  for  a  person's
         care for the purpose of paragraph  (7)  on  the  sole  basis  of  a
         financial contribution towards that person's care.'

    Mr Jafferji's argument was that the father could  not  be  regarded  as
    sharing responsibility with the Applicant for  their  children  because
    his financial contribution could not be the sole basis for  considering
    an individual as a  "primary  carer"  either  individually  or  sharing
    equally for the purpose  of  Reg.  15A(7).   The  Judge  had  found  at
    paragraph 17 the Applicant's  husband's  contribution  was  to  provide
    financially for his family. The Applicant's claim was he contributed no
    more.

23. He continued that if the Applicant did not remain in the United Kingdom
    her children could no longer reside here  because  there  would  be  no
    adequate care for them. Their father's arrangements meant he would  not
    be able to care adequately for them.  It was open to the Judge to  find
    this and to conclude at paragraph 17 of his decision the children would
    have to leave the United Kingdom.  This  was  a  finding  open  to  the
    Judge.

24. In response Ms Sreeraman pointed out that Reg.15A(8) was concerned with
    the Applicant. Her husband was a British citizen and so  classified  as
    an  "exempt  person"  under  Reg.15A(4)(6)(c).  She  referred   me   to
    paragraphs 41(ii) and 56 of MA and SM.

Applicant's Closing Remarks

25. Having spoken to Mr Jafferji, the Applicant informed me at the close of
    the hearing she is now expecting her third child  and  the  uncertainty
    over her appeal coupled with her pregnancy was causing her  "a  lot  of
    tension".

26. Ms Sreeraman then produced a copy of the decision in Ayinde and Thinjom
    (Carers - Reg. 15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT  560  (IAC).   She  drew  my
    attention to paragraph 5 of the decision quoting  a  passage  from  the
    Respondent's guidance entitled "Derivative Right of  Residence  -  Ruiz
    Zambrano Cases" of 12 December 2012:-

         "27. Examples of when it may be appropriate to issue  a  Derivative
             Residence Card to a primary carer would be where:

                  there are no other direct relatives or legal guardians  to
                  care for the British citizen; or

                  there is another direct relative or legal guardian in  the
                  UK to care for the British citizen but there  are  reasons
                  why this carer is not suitable; or

                  in the case of an adult  British  citizen,  there  are  no
                  alternative care provisions available in the UK."

    Mr Jafferji confirmed he was familiar with this decision  and  did  not
    seek to make any submission on it.

27. I stated I would reserve my decision on the error  of  law  matter  and
    enquired the parties' views whether, if I found there was an  error  of
    law, I might proceed to a  substantive  disposal  of  the  appeal.   Mr
    Jafferji said his instructing solicitors had been instructed only a day
    or two before the hearing.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision had been
    made without a hearing and  in  all  the  circumstances  he  asked  for
    indulgence that if there was an error  of  law  the  appeal  should  be
    considered afresh.

Consideration

28. The Judge was handicapped by the  absence  of  a  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter to which he referred in his decision.  There is no indication in
    the decision notice which was before the Judge that there was a Reasons
    for Refusal Letter in existence. Given the request for  a  decision  on
    the basis of the papers in the file and  the  Respondent's  consent  to
    that the Judge was entitled to proceed. He was aware from  the  Refusal
    Decision that the refusal had been based on the Applicant's failure  to
    meet the requirements of Regs. 15A(4A) and 15A(7) of the 2006 Regs.

29. In MA and SM promulgated after the decision in this  appeal  the  Upper
    Tribunal adopted the reasoning of Hickinbottom J in Jamil Sanneh v  (1)
    Secretary of State for Work and Pensions and (2) The Commissioners  for
    Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin) that:

             i)   All nationals of all member states are EU citizens. It is
                  for each member state to determine how nationality of that
                  state may be acquired, but, once  it  is  acquired  by  an
                  individual, that individual has the  right  to  enjoy  the
                  substance of the rights that attach to the  status  of  EU
                  citizen, including the right to reside in the territory of
                  the EU. That applies equally to  minors,  irrespective  of
                  the nationality of  their  parents,  and  irrespective  of
                  whether one or both parents have EU citizenship.

             ii)  An EU citizen must have the freedom to enjoy the right to
                  reside in the EU, genuinely and in practice. For a  minor,
                  that freedom  may  be  jeopardised  if,  although  legally
                  entitled to reside in the EU, he is compelled to leave  EU
                  territory because an ascendant relative upon  whom  he  is
                  dependent is compelled to  leave.  That  relative  may  be
                  compelled to leave by dint of direct state action (e.g. he
                  is the subject of an order for removal) or  by  virtue  of
                  being driven to leave and reside in a  non-EU  country  by
                  force of economic necessity (e.g. by  having  insufficient
                  resources to provide for his  EU  child(ren)  because  the
                  state refuses him a work permit).  The  rights  of  an  EU
                  child will not be infringed if  he  is  not  compelled  to
                  leave. Therefore, even where a non-EU  ascendant  relative
                  is compelled to leave EU territory, the article 20  rights
                  of an EU child will not be infringed if there  is  another
                  ascendant relative who has the right of residence  in  the
                  EU, and who can and will in practice care for the child.

             iii) It is for the national courts to determine, as a question
                  of fact on the evidence before it, whether an  EU  citizen
                  would be compelled to leave the  EU  to  follow  a  non-EU
                  national upon whom he is dependent.

             iv)  Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles 20
                  and 21 of the TFEU. In particular,  EU  law  will  not  be
                  engaged where the EU citizen is not compelled to leave the
                  EU, even if the quality or standard  of  life  of  the  EU
                  citizen is diminished as a result of the  non-EU  national
                  upon whom he is dependent  is  (for  example)  removed  or
                  prevented from working; although  (a)  diminution  in  the
                  quality of life might engage EU law if (and only if) it is
                  sufficient in practice to compel the a relevant  ascendant
                  relative, and hence the EU dependent  citizen,  to  leave,
                  and (b) such actions as removal or prevention of work  may
                  result in an interference with some other right,  such  as
                  the right to respect for family life under  article  8  of
                  the European Convention on Human Rights.

             v)   Although such article 8 rights are similar  in  scope  to
                  the EU rights conferred by article 7  of  the  Charter  of
                  Fundamental Rights of the European Union,  the  provisions
                  of the Charter are addressed to member  states  only  when
                  they are implementing EU law. If EU law  is  not  engaged,
                  then the domestic courts have to undertake the examination
                  of the right to family life under article 8; but  that  is
                  an entirely distinct area of protection.

             vi)  The overriding of the general national right to refuse  a
                  non-EU national a right of residence, by reference to  the
                  effective enjoyment of the right to reside of a  dependent
                  EU citizen, is described in both Dereci (paragraph 67) and
                  Harrison (paragraph  66)  as  "exceptional",  meaning  (as
                  explained in the latter), as a principle, it will  not  be
                  regularly engaged.

30. With this in mind I find the Judge erred in law  by  giving  inadequate
    reasoning to support his conclusion that the Applicant was the "primary
    carer" of her children for the purposes of Reg.15A of  the  2006  Regs.
    The First-tier Tribunal's decision therefore cannot stand  and  is  set
    aside.

31. I have considered Mr Jafferji's submission on the appropriateness of  a
    hearing afresh and am persuaded that in the circumstances of this  case
    it would be proper to direct a hearing afresh;  although  there  is  no
    reason why the findings of fact should be set aside since they were not
    challenged and as this is an in-country appeal, at  any  re-hearing  it
    will be open to the Applicant to seek to  have  post-decision  evidence
    admitted under Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act.

Anonymity

32. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal, I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  It is set aside on the basis  referred  to  in  para.31  and  the
    appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 05. xi. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
