
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00420/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 October 2014                             |On 30 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr ali imran malik

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Heybroek, Counsel instructed by Lincoln
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan and his date  of  birth  is  17
    March 1983. I shall refer to him as the appellant as he was before  the
    FtT (First-tier Tribunal). On 3 May 2013 he  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under  the
    Points Bases System. His application was refused on 29  November  2013.
    The appellant's wife, Mrs Sumera Ali, was an appellant before  the  FtT
    having applied for leave to remain as her  husband's  partner  and  her
    application was also refused.

2.       The appellant and his wife appealed and the appellant's appeal  was
    allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monro in a  decision  of  4
    August 2014 that was promulgated on 5 August 2014 (following a  hearing
    on 22 July 2014).  The  Judge  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  under
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. Ms Haybroek,  who  represented
    the appellants before the FtT, withdrew the appellant's  wife's  appeal
    on her behalf at the hearing before Judge Monroe.

3.       The Secretary of State appealed against the  decision  of  the  FtT
    and permission to appeal was granted by Judge Heynes on 21 August 2014.

4.       There is merit in the grounds seeking leave to  appeal.  The  Judge
    allowed the appeal without adequately engaging with the requirements of
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules. There was no  proper  analysis
    made of continuous residence and the  Judge  went  onto  to  allow  the
    appeal under the rules without giving  adequate  reasons.  There  is  a
    discretionary basis under the rules which had not been exercised by the
    Secretary of State. The Judge made a material error of  law.  This  was
    conceded by Ms Heybroek. I set aside the decision of the Judge to allow
    the appeal of the appellant under the Rules.

5.     At the hearing before me Mr Wilding confirmed that the appellant  had
    been granted ILR since  his  appeal  had  been  allowed.   Ms  Heybroek
    requested time to  confirm  the  appellant's  wife's  position  as  she
    believed that her application was still pending. She did  not  want  to
    withdraw the appellant's appeal before the appellant's  wife  had  been
    granted leave. She asked for  seven  days  to  apply  to  withdraw  the
    appeal.  The UT Tribunal received a letter on 10  October  2014  asking
    for Mrs Ali's appeal to be withdrawn. However,  Mrs  Ali's  appeal  has
    already been withdrawn before the First-tier Tribunal which should have
    issued a notice of withdrawal pursuant to  Rule  17  (2)  of  the  2005
    Procedure Rules.

6.        In relation to the appellant's appeal it falls to  be  treated  as
    abandoned in accordance with  section  104  (4A)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 23 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

