
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00212/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral determination given following hearing|On 10 July 2019                  |
|On 18 June 2019                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                 Malika [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Farhat, Solicitor of Gulbenkian Andonian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal was before me on 5 March 2019 when I found that  there  had
    been an error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  such
    that the appeal would have to be reheard.  I gave directions  that  the
    appeal would be then relisted before me on Tuesday 16  April  2019  and
    set out my reasons for so doing.  Much of what I wrote in that decision
    WILL of necessity be repeated below.

 2. I heard evidence at the hearing on 16 April 2019 but owing to  lack  of
    court time that hearing had to be adjourned until  today  when  it  was
    resumed.

 3. The appellant is a national of Morocco who has been in this country now
    since about 2002.  Having been born in July 1985 she was  a  minor  for
    the first period of her stay.  She had entered illegally  (albeit  that
    at that time she was a minor and was doing what her family had  advised
    her to do) in order to join her family but she remained in this country
    after becoming of age and remained without leave.   She  has  not  been
    convicted of any criminal offences and other than having been  in  this
    country unlawfully it is not suggested she has committed any.

 4. In 2008 the appellant sought a residence card as the spouse of  an  EEA
    national but this was refused in February 2010 because  the  respondent
    believed that the EEA national whom the appellant had  married  had  in
    fact been married to someone else.  The respondent's records (or so  it
    was believed) indicated that  the  spouse  or  alleged  spouse  of  the
    appellant had previously sought  to  support  an  application  made  by
    another lady said to be his wife,  using  another  name  and  for  this
    reason  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application.    The
    respondent informed the appellant that this decision had been  made  on
    the basis that her  marriage  was  bigamous  because  her  husband  was
    married to someone else and had never been divorced.

 5. This unsurprisingly led to tensions within the relationship between the
    appellant and her former "husband" and although that gentleman  assured
    the appellant that the respondent's information was false  and  he  had
    never been  married  before,  the  appellant  was  understandably  very
    confused by all of this.  She formed the view (and I shall refer  below
    to the evidence given before this Tribunal today) that the Home  Office
    could not be wrong in  this  matter  and  that  it  followed  that  her
    "husband" must have been lying to her all along.  As a result  of  this
    the appellant separated  from  her  previous  husband  and  obtained  a
    divorce from him.  That divorce was finalised in or about June 2011.

 6. It should be noted that since that date until  the  hearing  today  the
    respondent maintained the position that the  first  marriage  had  been
    invalid because the "husband" had not been free or had not  established
    that he was free to marry.

 7. The appellant did not  leave  the  UK  following  the  refusal  of  her
    application for a residence card and she says  that  she  was  (in  the
    circumstances possibly  understandably)  depressed  and  anxious  as  a
    result of discovering that the man whom she claims to  have  loved  had
    deceived her in the  way  that  at  that  time  she  believed  was  the
    position.

 8. Subsequently the appellant after no doubt some years of  misery  met  a
    British national of Algerian descent, who is now a naturalised  British
    citizen and she married him in October 2016.

 9. The applicant in November 2014, prior  to  her  marriage  had  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the basis of this relationship which
    application was refused.  The appellant appealed against  this  refusal
    and her appeal was dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is  not
    necessary for the purposes of this decision to set  out  the  basis  of
    this appeal because having been given permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal against this decision by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer,  the
    appellant's appeal was eventually heard in the Upper Tribunal by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kekic who found that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained an error of law and the appeal was remitted back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Kekic it had been argued both that the appellant should be  allowed  to
    remain on the basis that  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Chikwamba applied but also because by  that  stage  the  appellant  was
    seeking to argue that as a matter of fact her first  marriage  had  not
    been a bigamous one and that the respondent had  made  a  mistake.   If
    this was right, it was argued, then the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    importance  of  maintaining  effective  immigration  control  would  be
    reduced because of this factor.  So  the  argument  which  fell  to  be
    considered in the course of the Article 8 application which was now  to
    be reheard was put on the basis that but for this mistake the appellant
    would or should have been granted a residence card in 2008 under the EU
    Regulations and that accordingly she was now suffering as a  result  of
    the mistake made by the respondent which at the  very  least  ought  to
    reduce the weight to be given to the public interest in  excluding  her
    now from the UK.   It  was  argued  that  this  was  almost  a  classic
    Chikwamba situation in that because the appellant was almost certain to
    be granted permission to return it would not in these circumstances  be
    proportionate to remove her.

10. I noted in my earlier decision in which I found an error of law in  the
    subsequent  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  it  was  the
    respondent's position as stated before the Tribunal at that hearing  by
    Ms Cunha, that the appellant would probably be  granted  permission  to
    return but that for this reason it would be proportionate to remove her
    because the weight which was to be given  to  the  public  interest  of
    maintaining effective immigration control  under  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted by Section 14
    of the Immigration Act 2014) was sufficiently  large  as  to  make  her
    removal proportionate, notwithstanding that ultimately there  might  be
    no apparent reason to prevent her re-entry.  Further reference will  be
    made to this below.  At that hearing the respondent indicated that  the
    Tribunal would need to have regard to the guidance given by  the  Court
    of Appeal in Hyatt.

11. The rehearing which had been directed took place in front of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC sitting at Hatton Cross on 21  December
    2018.  That  was  apparently  a  very  lengthy  hearing  in  which  the
    appellant's  case  that  the  respondent  had  made  a   really   quite
    devastating error with regard to the position of the appellant's  first
    husband was advanced in detail.  It is not necessary for  the  purposes
    of this decision to do more than note that for the reasons which I  set
    out at length in my earlier decision I considered  with  Judge  Geraint
    Jones QC's decision  dismissing  the  appeal  contain  significant  and
    material errors such that it was not sustainable and would have  to  be
    set aside.  I then as noted directed that the appeal be reheard  before
    me and as I have also noted that rehearing commenced on 16  April  this
    year and has been concluded today.  I also recorded  in  that  decision
    that it had been accepted very fairly by Ms  Cunha  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that Judge Geraint Jones QC's decision was not sustainable.

The Hearing

12. At the outset of the resumed hearing Ms  Cunha  informed  the  Tribunal
    that she had made her own enquiries and had ensured that the respondent
    considered properly the evidence which had been given at  the  previous
    hearing on 16 April by a  French  gentleman  whom  the  respondent  had
    believed or at any way stated was an alias of  the  appellant's  former
    husband.  It was on this basis that the respondent  had  believed  that
    the marriage was a bigamous  one  following  which  the  appellant  had
    divorced him.  It was because of extensive  enquiries  which  had  been
    made by the appellant's current  solicitors  in  conjunction  with  the
    appellant herself that the evidence of this French gentleman  had  been
    obtained from which it appeared (and this might have been a matter that
    this Tribunal would have had to determine) that in fact the  respondent
    had been wrong in concluding that the marriage had been a bigamous  one
    and had in fact made a ghastly  mistake  with  appalling  repercussions
    both for the appellant's former husband  and  also  for  the  appellant
    herself who for some years had lived with the belief that she had  been
    wholly deceived by a man whom as she now says  she  married  for  love.
    Fortunately, it was  not  necessary  for  this  Tribunal  to  make  any
    findings because the respondent having investigated further as a result
    of Ms Cunha's intervention now accepts that the decision made in  2010,
    refusing the application  then  for  a  residence  card  had  not  been
    justified.   Ms  Cunha  set  out  the  respondent's  current   position
    regarding this decision as follows:

         "The respondent's position is that we now accept we made a  mistake
         by concluding that the applicant's previous  husband  had  used  an
         alias [under which he had been married to another person] and  that
         therefore his marriage to the appellant was a bigamous marriage.

         We accept that it was not, and as a result of that we  also  accept
         that the application for residence [made in  2008]  was  wrongfully
         refused."

13. Although Ms Cunha made further submissions with regard to the effect of
    this mistake, she very fairly and very properly  advised  the  Tribunal
    that the refusal in 2010 could not be justified.

14. I then heard the evidence from the appellant who relied on her previous
    statements and was cross-examined and I also had before me the evidence
    of her current husband, the English national  whose  evidence  was  not
    challenged.  The current position is that the respondent  accepts  that
    the appellant's present relationship with her husband is a genuine one,
    that the financial requirements set out within the Rules are  satisfied
    and there is currently no reason of which the respondent is  aware  why
    if she returned to Morocco to make an application for  entry  clearance
    from there that application should be  refused.   It  was  however  the
    respondent's position, which Ms Cunha was obliged to argue on behalf of
    the respondent  that  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control is  sufficiently  large  that  notwithstanding  the
    previous error the proper course would be for the appellant  to  return
    to Morocco and make her application from there.  She had been  resident
    in this country unlawfully for some considerable period  and  therefore
    it would be appropriate for her to make her application on the basis of
    her present relationship in the usual way from abroad.

15. On behalf of the appellant, Mr  Farhat  submitted  that  there  were  a
    number of factors why the Tribunal should  consider  this  case  to  be
    exceptional.  The error was compounded by the respondent's position  in
    maintaining that error for many years; she had been in this country now
    for some seventeen years, all of her adult life and half of  her  life,
    and although that was not on its  own  sufficient  to  entitle  her  to
    remain, nonetheless it  was  a  factor  which  had  to  be  taken  into
    consideration when considering whether it was proportionate  to  remove
    her; further, there was no reason  why  she  would  not  ultimately  be
    entitled to come back to this country and to insist on her now  leaving
    to apply to come back would heap further  misery  on  a  lady  who  had
    already suffered enough  at  the  hands  of  the  authorities  in  this
    country.

Discussion

16. I must state at  the  outset  that  having  heard  the  appellant  give
    evidence and the answers which she gave when she was cross-examined,  I
    am entirely satisfied and accept  that  she  was  as  she  has  claimed
    devastated when she discovered (or so  she  believed)  that  her  first
    marriage had been a bigamous one.  It would appear  that  her  previous
    husband had been working in this country and so  she  would  have  been
    entitled under European  law  and  under  the  EEA  Regulations,  to  a
    residence card then.  Rather more importantly she would  have  expected
    to continue living as the wife of a man she loved  and  in  a  marriage
    which to all intents and purposes appeared to be an entirely happy  one
    and would have continued her life in this country  from  that  time  on
    perfectly lawfully.  While as it is accepted on her  behalf  that  does
    not give her what can technically be called a "legitimate  expectation"
    to remain, nonetheless when one looks now at the proportionality  of  a
    decision to remove her this is  a  factor  which  must  be  taken  into
    account.

17. The sad fact is that because of this reprehensible error made on behalf
    of the respondent this appellant's first marriage which  but  for  this
    error might very well have continued to this day was  ruined  and  this
    appellant as I find has suffered considerable heartache because of what
    she believed for a number of years to have  been  her  husband's  cruel
    deception of her.  Now, of course, she also doubtless suffers the guilt
    of not having believed him as strongly as she should which is something
    that she will have to live with for the rest of her life.

18. Happily, her current relationship is a strong  one.   Her  husband  has
    attended with her throughout  these  hearings  and  has  been  entirely
    supportive and this Tribunal has no reason to doubt that this also is a
    genuine  relationship  which  has  survived  despite  the  considerable
    immigration difficulties which this appellant has been  under  now  for
    very many years.  What the respondent is effectively seeking to  do  is
    to say that notwithstanding that the authorities regret having  wrecked
    the appellant's first marriage (as is now implicitly accepted and as  I
    find) it is still in the public interest now to  make  her  go  through
    further hoops (thereby causing disruption to her existing relationship)
    so that it can be shown to the public that immigration control is taken
    seriously.

19. In the judgment of this Tribunal in the circumstances of this case this
    is an entirely disproportionate  approach.   It  is  accepted  by  this
    Tribunal that the general position  would  be  and  ought  to  be  that
    persons who stay in this country unlawfully will not  be  permitted  to
    remain merely because in  the  meantime  they  have  formed  a  genuine
    relationship with a partner.  It is clear from Sections 117B(4) and (5)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as inserted by the
    Immigration Act 2014)  that only little weight can be given to  such  a
    relationship in such circumstances.  However, one must  in  every  case
    look at the particular circumstances of the individual case.   In  this
    case the circumstances are  in  the  judgment  of  this  Tribunal  very
    compelling indeed such that  it  would  be  entirely  inappropriate  to
    ignore the effect on the appellant and her life of  the  appalling  and
    reprehensible error made previously by the respondent.   But  for  that
    error and the effect it has had on the appellant it may  very  well  be
    that it would have been appropriate to require the appellant to  return
    to Morocco in order to make her application from outside the UK but her
    life has already been disrupted (needlessly and wrongfully) because  of
    the respondent's dreadful mistake and it would be quite  wrong  now  to
    insist on further disruption to this appellant's family life which  she
    has managed to re-establish after a considerable period  of  heartache,
    merely in order to enable the respondent to demonstrate that the  Rules
    are and are intended to be inflexible.

20. It follows that this Tribunal is entirely satisfied  that  this  appeal
    should be allowed under Article 8 outside the Rules and will so order.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC is set  aside  as
containing material errors of law and the following decision is subsisted:

The appellant's appeal is allowed under Article 8, outside the Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


     [pic]



Upper Tribunal Judge Craig      Date: 30 June 2019

