
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00135/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2013                               |On 22nd July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              Alwin Mutyambizi
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr J Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Zimbabwe born on 15th January  1982.
    He has a lengthy immigration history.  The Appellant first  arrived  in
    the UK on 25th September 2001 when he was given leave  to  enter  as  a
    visitor for a period of two months.  He was subsequently given leave to
    remain as a student until 31st August 2004.   He  applied  for  further
    leave to remain in that capacity but that application  was  refused  on
    8th October 2004.  The Appellant's appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed on 15th March 2006.  However the Appellant did not leave  the
    UK and remained illegally.

 2. On 27th July 2007  the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  sixteen  months'
    imprisonment for an offence of  robbery.   As  a  consequence  on  24th
    October 2007 a decision was made to make a  deportation  order  against
    him.  The Appellant's appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed  on
    16th January 2008, and on 12th November 2008 the deportation order  was
    made.

 3.  Thereafter  various  representations  were  made  on  behalf  of   the
    Appellant.  Eventually and in  June  2009  the  Appellant  applied  for
    asylum.  That application was refused on 22nd October 2009 and  at  the
    same time a decision was made  to  refuse  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order.  There was then confusion as to whether the Appellant  had  ever
    been served with  the  deportation  order  and  as  a  consequence  the
    deportation order was re-served upon the  Appellant  on  12th  November
    2008 at which time the Respondent made a fresh decision  to  refuse  to
    revoke the deportation order.  The Appellant appealed.

 4. The Appellant's appeal was heard  by  a  Panel  chaired  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sommerville (the Panel) sitting at  Birmingham  on  29th
    January 2010.  The Panel decided to dismiss the appeal for the  reasons
    set out in its Determination dated 22nd February 2010.   The  Appellant
    sought leave to appeal that  decision  and  on  15th  March  2010  such
    permission was granted.  The appeal first came before me on 4th  August
    2011.  According to a Minute I subsequently  wrote  I  found  that  the
    Panel had erred on a point of law.   The  Panel  had  failed  to  apply
    properly the decision in RN (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2008] UKAIT  00083
    when considering the risk on return; and had failed to give  sufficient
    reasons  for  not  believing  significant  parts  of  the   Appellant's
    evidence.  I set aside the decision of the Panel,  and  then  adjourned
    the appeal for the decision to be remade.  That  is  the  matter  which
    comes before me today.

The Law

 5. The Appellant brings his appeal under the provisions of  paragraph  390
    of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC 395 which reads  as
    follows:

    390. An application for revocation  of  a  deportation  order  will  be
         considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
         following:

         (i)  the grounds on which the order was made;

         (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;

         (iii)    the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
             of an effective immigration control;

         (iv) the interests of the applicant,  including  any  compassionate
             circumstances.

    The Appellant appeals on  the  grounds  set  out  in  Section  84(1)(c)
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002   that  the  decision  is
    unlawful under Section 6 Human Rights Act 1998  as  being  incompatible
    with his Convention rights.  The Appellant cannot pursue an  appeal  on
    the basis that he qualifies for asylum because the Appellant is subject
    to a certificate issued under the  provisions  of  Section  72  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and therefore is  excluded
    from protection under Article 33(2) of the  Refugee  Convention.   That
    certificate is still in force.  However I will  next  consider  if  the
    Appellant is entitled to Articles 2 and 3 ECHR protection.

Articles 2 and 3 ECHR

 6. The Appellant has made a series of statements  concerning  his  reasons
    for fearing a return to  Zimbabwe.   He  was  also  interviewed  by  an
    Immigration Officer in June 2009, and gave oral evidence at the hearing
    before the Panel.  He again gave  oral  evidence  before  me  and  that
    evidence is recorded in the Record of Proceedings.

 7. The Appellant's case is that  he  used  to  live  with  his  family  in
    Mhondoro, a part of Harare.  The Appellant's sister died in  1994,  and
    following the later deaths of his parents, the Appellant  had  gone  to
    live with his brother Alfred in Glen Nora, a suburb of Harare.   Alfred
    and the Appellant's cousin Julius had been members of the MDC.  Because
    of his age,  the  Appellant  had  not  been  much  politically  active,
    although he had attended MDC rallies with Alfred and his other  brother
    Albert who had come to the UK in 1998.   However  in  August  2000  the
    Appellant and Alfred had been arrested along with others  on  suspicion
    of being MDC supporters and using their house for MDC  meetings.   They
    were detained and beaten up over a period of two days  when  they  were
    questioned about their MDC activities.  The Appellant  suffered  severe
    bruising and still has scars.  The  Appellant  then  went  to  live  in
    hiding in Chitungwiza for a  year  during  which  time  he  obtained  a
    passport.  He then joined his brother Albert in the  UK.   His  brother
    Alfred remained in Harare and continued with his  MDC  activities.   In
    his community Alfred was accused of being a traitor by ZANU-PF  members
    as most of his family had gone to live in the UK.  Alfred was  arrested
    regularly in Zimbabwe because of his support for the MDC but was always
    released after a short detention.  On one occasion in 2004  Alfred  was
    severely beaten in  detention  and  as  a  consequence  died  in  2005.
    Following this event the Appellant realised that it was  not  safe  for
    him to return to Zimbabwe,  although  on  one  occasion  the  Appellant
    applied to return to  Zimbabwe  on  a  Voluntary  Return  Scheme.   The
    Appellant has not been politically active in anyway whilst in  the  UK,
    but  wants  regime  change  in  Zimbabwe.   He  is  not  aware  of  the
    authorities looking for him in Zimbabwe.

 8.  Throughout  these  proceedings  there  have  been  issues  as  to  the
    Appellant's credibility, but even taking the Appellant's  case  at  its
    highest, I am not satisfied that the Appellant qualifies for Articles 2
    and 3 protection.  I come to that conclusion by applying the matrix  of
    facts of the Appellant's case to the relevant country guidance cases.

 9. It was decided in HS (returning  asylum  seekers)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2007]
    UKAIT 00094 that failed asylum seekers do not, as such, face a risk  of
    being subjected, on return to Zimbabwe, to persecution or serious  ill-
    treatment whether the return is voluntary or not.  Otherwise  the  risk
    on return is specified in CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe
    CG [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC) where it was decided, inter alia:

      1) As  a  general  matter  there  is  significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN (returnees) Zimbabwe  CG  [2008]  UKAIT
         00083.  In particular, the  evidence  does  not  show  that,  as  a
         general matter, the return of  a  failed  asylum  seeker  from  the
         United Kingdom, having no significant MDC profile, would result  in
         that person facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty  to
         the ZANU-PF.

      2) The position is, however, likely to be otherwise in the case  of  a
         person without  ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  from  the  United
         Kingdom after a significant absence to a rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,
         other than Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South.  Such a person
         may well find it difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to
         serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those
         they control.  The adverse attention may well involve a requirement
         to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF, with  the  prospect  of  serious
         harm in the event of failure.  Persons who  have  shown  themselves
         not  to  be  favourably  disposed  to  ZANU-PF  are   entitled   to
         international protection, whether or not they could  and  would  do
         whatever  might  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  such  loyalty  (RT
         (Zimbabwe)).

      3) The situation is not uniform across the relevant  rural  areas  and
         there may be reasons why a particular individual, although at first
         sight appearing to  fall  within  the  category  described  in  the
         preceding paragraph, in reality does not do so.  For  example,  the
         evidence might disclose that, in the home  village,  ZANU-PF  power
         structures or other means of coercion are weak or absent.

      4)  In  general,  a  returnee  from  the  United  Kingdom   to   rural
         Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South is highly unlikely to face
         significant  difficulty  from  ZANU-PF  elements,   including   the
         security forces, even if the returnee is a MDC member or supporter.
          A person may, however, be able to show that his or her village  or
         area is one that, unusually, is under the sway of a ZANU-PF  chief,
         or the like.

      5)  A  returnee  to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no   significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

      6) A returnee to Bulawayo will  in  general  not  suffer  the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.

10. I find that the Appellant does not have a significant MDC profile.  His
    activities for the MDC in Zimbabwe amounted to  very  little  and  were
    carried out at a time when he had just left school.   He  was  arrested
    and detained on one occasion, but that was as long ago as August  2000,
    and the Appellant has been absent from Zimbabwe since  September  2001.
    He has not been politically active in the UK.  His connection with  the
    organisation known as Communities Point does not  amount  to  political
    activities because as explained in the  statement  of  the  Appellant's
    cousin, Julius Mutyambizi, Communities Point is not a  political  party
    and is not connected to the MDC.  Members  of  the  Appellant's  family
    such as his brother Alfred and his cousin Julius have been more  active
    in the MDC, but Alfred died in 2005, and the Appellant has never  lived
    in the same household as Julius.  I am  not  therefore  satisfied  that
    these connections give the Appellant a significant  MDC  profile.   The
    Appellant's own evidence was that he was not aware of  the  authorities
    in Zimbabwe having any interest in him.

11. The Appellant has no ZANU-PF connections, and indeed is  in  favour  of
    the overthrow of that regime, and will be returning to Zimbabwe after a
    significant absence.  However, the Appellant will not return to a rural
    area.  He will return to Harare where his home in Zimbabwe always  was.
    There is no evidence as to what density area the Appellant might return
    to, but as already mentioned, the Appellant does not have a significant
    MDC profile, and there is no evidence that he features  on  a  list  of
    those targeted for harassment.  He has not expressed a wish  to  engage
    in any political activities on return to Zimbabwe.

12. In any event, I find it will be safe for the Appellant to  relocate  to
    Bulawayo.  The Appellant has never had any connection with  that  city,
    but otherwise there was no evidence that it would  be  unreasonable  by
    way of being unduly harsh to expect him to live there.

13. For these reasons I find that the Appellant is not entitled to Articles
    2 and 3 ECHR protection.

Article 8

14. It is no part of the Appellant's case that paragraphs 399 and  399A  of
    HC 395 apply to him and I so find.

15. I will now consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.  To do so, I
    will follow the format given by the questions of the late Lord  Bingham
    in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

16. The relevant evidence is as follows.  The Appellant now  has  no  close
    family in Zimbabwe.  His extended family in the UK amount  to  an  aunt
    and uncle and cousins including Julius.

17. When the Appellant first came to the  UK  he  lived  with  his  brother
    Albert who subsequently married Rachel Gorogondo and had  two  children
    namely Nyaradzo born in October 2001 and Simba born in September  2006.
    According to the Appellant he lived with Albert and his family for  his
    first three years in the UK, although  according  to  the  evidence  of
    Rachel Gorogondo given to the Panel he lived with them for only a short
    period in 2001.  Whatever is the truth, at about the time the Appellant
    was sent to prison Albert and his family moved to  live  in  Edinburgh.
    It was there that Albert committed suicide in the summer of 2009.   The
    Appellant visited Albert's widow in April 2009 and June  2009  when  he
    assisted with the funeral  arrangements.   The  Appellant  claims  that
    since then he has telephoned Rachel Gorogondo every day and has visited
    her every few months in order  to  provide  support  for  her  and  her
    children.  However there is no recent evidence from Rachel Gorogondo to
    this effect.

18. The Appellant also has a son names Mathew Heffen born  on  18th  August
    2004.  The  mother  of  that  child  is  named  Victoria  Heffen.   The
    paternity of Mathew is disputed by the Respondent, but for the purposes
    of this consideration I will take it that the Appellant is the  natural
    father of Mathew.  The evidence is that Mathew has never lived  in  the
    same household as the Appellant.  Indeed, there was no contact  between
    them at all until April 2009.  The Appellant states that he now  has  a
    normal father/son relationship  with  Mathew  and  to  begin  with  had
    contact with him once every two weeks.  However  it  is  apparent  from
    what the Appellant said at  the  hearing  that  his  relationship  with
    Victoria Heffen  is  difficult  and  as  a  consequence  at  times  the
    Appellant does not see his son at all.  For example, in  his  statement
    of January 2013 the Appellant indicated that he  had  not  seen  Mathew
    since August 2012.  There was no evidence in support of the appeal from
    Victoria Heffen at the hearing before me because, apparently,  she  was
    on holiday in Wales.

19. The Appellant has a partner named Elizabeth Paul.   She  is  a  British
    citizen who has lived all of her life in the UK.  She is employed,  and
    has two adult children who also  live  in  the  UK.   The  relationship
    between the Appellant and Elizabeth Paul started  some  time  in  2009.
    They have cohabited since April 2011 apart from a period between August
    and December 2011 when the relationship broke down  and  the  Appellant
    had a relationship with a woman known as Shami.  If the  Appellant  was
    removed from the UK, Elizabeth Paul would not go to live  with  him  in
    Zimbabwe.

20. The Appellant committed the offence  of  robbery  in  March  2007.   It
    amounted to a mugging of a woman in order to steal  her  handbag.   The
    Appellant committed the offence in order to fund a gambling habit.  The
    Appellant was released from his prison sentence on 15th  January  2009.
    He committed a further offence of theft in December 2011 for  which  he
    was sentenced to 50 hours' community service.

21. From this evidence I deduce that the Appellant has a family  life  with
    his son Mathew and also with  Elisabeth  Paul.   There  is  conflicting
    evidence as to the extent of the Appellant's relationship with  Mathew.
    Referring to Elizabeth Paul's statement  of  13th  June  2013,  and  in
    particular paragraph 5 thereof, it would seem that the contact  between
    the  Appellant  and  Mathew  has  been  extensive  at  times,  but  the
    Appellant's indication at the hearing before me was that he  was  again
    not enjoying good relations with Mathew's mother and that  contact  had
    almost come to an end.   However,  the  Appellant  can  rely  upon  the
    presumption contained in the decision in  Berrehab  v  the  Netherlands
    [1989] 11 EHRR 322 that family life exists between a biological  parent
    and child.  The Appellant and Elizabeth Paul have not entered into  the
    commitment of marriage but that is not necessary  for  family  life  to
    exist  between  them.   Apart  from  one  aberration,   they   have   a
    longstanding and caring relationship.

22. It must also be the case that the Appellant has a private life  in  the
    UK having lived here since September 2001.  There was  no  evidence  of
    the detail of that family life, but during that time the Appellant  has
    studied,  worked,  and  been  engaged  with   organisations   such   as
    Communities Point.

23. I am satisfied that the Appellant's departure from the UK would  result
    in an interference with that family and private life to such  a  degree
    of gravity as to engage his Article 8 rights.  At least in the case  of
    Elizabeth Paul, it will be the effective end of that relationship.   As
    was decided in VW (Uganda) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5  the  test  to
    establish such interference does not have  a  high  threshold.   Indeed
    little more than a technical or inconsequential interference is needed.



24. I will now consider  proportionality,  balancing  the  public  interest
    against the Appellant's circumstances, bearing in mind  that  the  best
    interests of the child, Mathew are a  primary  consideration,  although
    not the primary consideration and not a paramount consideration.

25. The deportation order which the Appellant seeks to revoke was made as a
    consequence of his offence of robbery.   Referring  to  the  sentencing
    remarks of His Honour Judge Spencer, the background to the offence  was
    that the Appellant had gambled away his wages and was without funds and
    desperate for money.  The offence was committed in order to replace the
    money which the Appellant had gambled away.  The victim of the offence,
    which happened in the dark, was a lone  woman  returning  home  from  a
    shopping expedition.  The Appellant snatched her handbag  from  her  as
    she was opening the security gate  to  her  home.   The  Appellant  was
    chased by a member of the public and apprehended.  The  Judge  rejected
    submissions made on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the  offence  was
    unplanned and opportunistic.  The offence was serious  because  of  the
    consequences for the victim who had been frightened and  upset  to  say
    the least.  The offence merited an immediate custodial sentence.

26. At the hearing before the Panel there  was  evidence  in  the  form  of
    reports that the Appellant was of a  low  risk  of  reoffending.   That
    evidence is  now  irrelevant  because  the  Appellant  has  reoffended.
    Subsequent to that later offence, there has been  no  further  evidence
    put before me as to the likelihood of the Appellant committing  further
    offences.  I find that I must deal with him on the basis that he  is  a
    person who has a propensity to commit criminal offences.

27. I find that I have to attach considerable weight to the public interest
    because of the Appellant's criminal behaviour despite the fact that the
    main offence was committed by the Appellant now over six years ago  and
    the Respondent  took  no  immediate  action  to  remove  the  Appellant
    following the making of the deportation order.

28. Such weight is necessary as a consequence of the basic  principles  set
    out in the decision in Masih (deportation -  public  interest  -  basic
    principles) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046 (IAC).

29. On the other side of the  balance,  I  will  first  consider  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's son Mathew.  He is now nearly 9  years  of
    age and lives  with  his  mother.   Mathew  had  no  contact  with  the
    Appellant until April 2009, and contact since then has been  fragmented
    and irregular.  I cannot agree with the Appellant's assessment that  he
    has a normal father/son relationship with Mathew.  Although it  may  be
    assumed that it would be in the best interests of a child to have  some
    relationship with his biological father, there is no evidence before me
    that Mathew's best interests would be damaged by the  end  of  personal
    contact with the Appellant.  The limited contact which has occurred  so
    far can be continued to some extent by modern methods of communication.



30. I accept that the Appellant's removal would amount to the effective end
    of his relationship with Elizabeth Paul.  Her  circumstances  are  such
    that it would be unreasonable to expect her to follow the Appellant  to
    Zimbabwe.  I have commented about the nature of this relationship  when
    deciding that the Appellant and Elizabeth Paul have a family life.   On
    that basis I am not satisfied that the consequences  of  the  effective
    end of the relationship outweighs the public interest.

31. As regards the Appellant's private life, this includes the  Appellant's
    relationship with Albert's widow and her two  children.   According  to
    the  Appellant,  they  speak  regularly  by  telephone,  but  such   an
    arrangement could continue if the Appellant was  removed  to  Zimbabwe.
    Otherwise the  Appellant  visits  Rachel  Gorogondo  and  her  children
    occasionally.  Although if deported the Appellant would not be able  to
    visit them again, it is not  out  of  the  question  for  her  and  the
    children to visit the Appellant in Zimbabwe.  Otherwise,  there  is  no
    evidence before me that the other aspects of  the  Appellant's  private
    life in the UK could not be continued in Zimbabwe.

32. Otherwise, the Appellant is a healthy young man of 31 years of age.  He
    has lived in the UK for nearly twelve years, and it is the case that he
    now has no family, home, or employment in Zimbabwe.  However, there was
    no evidence before me that he could not successfully readjust  to  life
    in that country.

33. Taking all these factors into account, I find that the public  interest
    carries most weight and therefore that the Respondent's decision not to
    revoke the deportation order is proportionate.

Paragraph 390 of HC 395

34. All of the factors required to be considered  by  this  paragraph  have
    been dealt with above.  My decision is that the deportation order  made
    against the Appellant should  not  be  revoked.   The  Appellant  comes
    within the provisions of paragraph 398(b) of HC 395, but not paragraphs
    399 nor 399A by virtue of the provisions of paragraph 399(a)(ii)(b) and
    399(b)(i).  Therefore by virtue of paragraph 390A it will  only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in  maintaining  the
    deportation order will be outweighed  by  other  factors.   As  I  have
    already explained, I find no such exceptional circumstances.

Decision

35. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  It has been set aside.

36. I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

37. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.   There
    has been no application that I should make such an order and I find  no
    reason to do so.






Signed                              Date 22nd July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
