
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00383/2014
                                                               IA/00393/2014
                                                               IA/00397/2014
                                                               IA/00402/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23 July 2015                      |On 3 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MTH
                                     RS
                                     MTT
                                     TZ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Azmi, instructed by Kingswood Legal Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant before us  was  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. For the sake of consistency with the decision in the First-
    tier Tribunal we shall refer to her as the respondent and to  MTH,  RS,
    MTT and TZ as the appellants.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellants. This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court  proceedings.  We  do  so  in  order  to
    preserve the anonymity of the children,  one  of  whom  has  a  serious
    medical condition.

I. Background

 3. All of the appellants are nationals  of  Bangladesh.  MTH  and  RS  are
    father and mother to MTT who is aged 14 and TZ who is aged 6.

 4. The key facts in this appeal are summarised  in  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Pitt's error of law decision dated 10 June 2015 (appended):

         "4. The appellants are a family from Bangladesh. They came  to  the
         UK in order for RS to study for an  MSc  at  Birmingham  University
         which she was subsequently awarded.

         5. The family made an application for further leave  to  remain  on
         Article 8 grounds as MTT is very unwell. He has tufting enteropathy
         which is incurable. He is unable to digest food through his stomach
         and requires parenteral  nutrition.  This  procedure  involves  the
         insertion of a catheter into a blood  vessel  close  to  his  heart
         through which he is fed intravenously for  approximately  12  hours
         each day, seven days a week. The facilities provided in the UK have
         enabled him to do this whilst he moves around  carrying  a  bag  of
         nutritional solution. His parents have been trained  to  administer
         his nutrition.

         6. Prior to coming to the UK, MTT  received  similar  treatment  in
         Singapore but his parents are concerned about returning  there  for
         treatment as he was not diagnosed correctly  initially  when  there
         and caught serious infections twice in the three week  period  that
         he was treated.

         7. The family  are  also  concerned  that  provision  for  parental
         nutrition is not available at all in Bangladesh and even if were it
         would be very difficult to administer as the  nutritional  solution
         has to be kept between 2 and  8  degrees.  MTT  was  very  ill  and
         underweight prior to travelling to Singapore and the UK."

 5. It was common ground before us that the appeal is brought on Article  8
    ECHR private life grounds and turns on the serious medical condition of
    MTT.

 6. The family cannot meet  the  private  life  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The parties therefore addressed us  on
    a second stage Article 8 assessment of the private life of  the  family
    outside the provisions of the Immigration Rules; MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and SS (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387 applied.



II. Legal Principles to be applied in Second Stage Article 8 Assessment

 7. We have conducted the second stage Article 8 assessment  in  line  with
    the well-established principles of R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and
    Huang v  SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.

 8. When assessing proportionality, we bore in mind  that,  notwithstanding
    the provisions of the Immigration Rules which express the  respondent's
    legitimate view of what will usually amount to a successful  Article  8
    claims it remains the case, as confirmed in [29] of SS (Congo) that:

         "It is clear, therefore, that it cannot be maintained as a  general
         proposition that LTR or LTE outside the  Immigration  Rules  should
         only be granted in exceptional cases."

 9. However, this is an Article 8 "medical" case and the Court of Appeal in
    the cases of MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 and GS (India)  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40  has  also  indicated  that  there  is  a  high
    threshold for a claim on that basis to succeed.

10. MM dealt with a mentally ill offender, his offending arising  from  his
    mental ill health. The discussion of how an Article 8  "medical"  claim
    could succeed is at [16] to [24]:

         "Article 3 and Article 8

      1. The first issue with which this appeal is concerned relates to  the
         application of Article 3 and Article 8 of the Convention  to  cases
         where it is sought to compare the availability of medical treatment
         in the United Kingdom with the country to which it is  proposed  to
         deport an applicant. The decisions of the House of Lords and of the
         European Court of Human Rights establish that even where a claimant
         is suffering from mortal illness such as advanced HIV/Aids and,  if
         deported, would deteriorate rapidly and suffer an early  death,  no
         breach of Article 3 is established.

      1. The essential principle is  that  the  ECHR  does  not  impose  any
         obligation on the contracting states to  provide  those  liable  to
         deportation  with  medical  treatment  lacking   in   their   "home
         countries". This principle applies even where the consequence  will
         be that the deportee's life will be  significantly  shortened  (see
         Lord Nicholls in N v Home Secretary [2005] 2 AC 296, 304 [15] and N
         v UK [2008] 47 EHRR 885 (paragraph 44)).

      1. Although that principle was expressed in those cases in relation to
         Article 3, it is a principle which must  apply  to  Article  8.  It
         makes no sense to refuse to recognise a "medical  care"  obligation
         in relation to Article 3, but to  acknowledge  it  in  relation  to
         Article 8. In N v UK, the ECHR took the view that no separate issue
         under Article 8 arose [517].

      1. Despite that clear-cut principle, the courts in the United  Kingdom
         have declined to say that Article 8 can never  be  engaged  by  the
         health  consequences  of  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.   In
         R(Razgar) v Home  Secretary  [2004]  2  AC  368,  the  question  of
         principle was whether the rights protected by Article  8  could  be
         engaged by the foreseeable consequences for health  or  welfare  of
         removal of the United Kingdom pursuant to an immigration  decision,
         where such removal does not violate Article 3 [1].  Lord  Bingham's
         answer was that such rights could be  engaged  by  the  foreseeable
         consequences for health of removal from the  United  Kingdom,  even
         where such removal does not violate Article 3, "if the facts relied
         on by the applicant  are  sufficiently  strong"  [10].  Lord  Steyn
         agreed with Lord Bingham. Lord Walker agreed  with  Lord  Bingham's
         observation and Lord Carswell considered the question to be whether
         removal would amount to  a  "flagrant  denial  of  the  appellant's
         Article 8 rights to the preservation of his mental stability" [74].



      1. Baroness Hale admitted of the possibility  that  in  a  case  where
         removal will lead to a violation of a person's convention rights in
         the country to which he is to be removed (a "foreign case") a  case
         could fail under Article 3 but succeed under  Article  8.  But  she
         acknowledged:-

             "Although the possibility cannot be excluded, it is  not  easy
             to think of a foreign health care case which would fail  under
             Article 3 but succeed under Article 8. There clearly must be a
             strong case before the Article is even engaged and then a fair
             balance must be struck under Article 8(2).  In  striking  that
             balance, only the most compelling humanitarian  considerations
             are likely to prevail  over  legitimate  aims  of  immigration
             control or public safety. The expelling state is  required  to
             assess the strength of the threat and strike that balance.  It
             is not required to compare the adequacy  of  the  health  care
             available in  the  two  countries.  The  question  is  whether
             removal to  the  foreign  country  will  have  a  sufficiently
             adverse effect upon the applicant. Nor can the expelling state
             be required to assume a more  favourable  status  in  its  own
             territory than the applicant is  currently  entitled  to.  The
             applicant remains to be treated as someone who  is  liable  to
             expulsion, not as someone who is entitled to remain." [59]

             None of the other members of the Committee expressly refer  to
             this passage.

      1. Since Razgar this court has reiterated the principle  expressed  in
         Bensaid (q.v.  supra)  that  if  removal  would  have  sufficiently
         adverse effect upon  mental  health,  it  is  capable  of  engaging
         Article 8 (see AJ (Liberia) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1736 [17]). But again, the court pointed
         out that legitimate immigration control would ordinarily  meet  the
         test of necessity under Article 8(2) and decisions taken "bona fide
         in the exercise of such control would be proportionate in all but a
         small minority of truly exceptional cases, in which the  imperative
         of proportionality demands an outcome  in  the  claimant's  favour"
         [18].

      1. Thus the courts have declined to close the door on the  possibility
         of establishing a breach of Article 8 but  they  have  never  found
         such a breach and have not been able to postulate circumstances  in
         which such a breach is likely to be established. Since  Bensaid  in
         2001 there has been no example of a successful Article 8 claim in a
         mental health case. The courts and tribunals have merely been  left
         with the difficulty of identifying a "flagrant denial" or a  "truly
         exceptional"  case,  neither  of  which  provide  any  standard  of
         measurement.

      1. The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate  medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance, with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage  Article  8.  Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing medical treatment here, coupled with  his  dependence
         on the family here for support, together establish  'private  life'
         under Article 8. That conclusion would  not  involve  a  comparison
         between medical facilities here  and  those  in  Zimbabwe.  Such  a
         finding would not offend the principle  expressed  above  that  the
         United Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to provide medical
         treatment here when it is not available in the country to which the
         appellant is to be deported.

      1. But the question remains whether the appellant has established that
         deportation would infringe his rights enshrined in Article 8."

11. GS (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 dealt with five appeals where  the
    applicants had End Stage Kidney Disease and one where the applicant was
    at an advanced stage of HIV infection.

12. The learning of Laws LJ on Article 8 "medical" claims  is  at  [85]  to
    [87]:

         "THE ARTICLE 8 CLAIMS

      1. It is common ground  that  in  cases  where  the  claimant  resists
         removal to another State on health grounds, failure under Article 3
         does not  necessarily  entail  failure  under  Article  8.  In  her
         skeleton argument at paragraph 55 Ms Giovanetti for  the  Secretary
         of State cites JA (Ivory Coast) & ES (Tanzania) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA
         Civ 1353, in which the  appellants  had  been  given  a  "de  facto
         commitment" that they would be allowed to  remain  in  the  UK  for
         treatment. Sedley LJ, with whom Longmore and Aikens LJJ agreed said
         this at paragraph 17:

             "There is no fixed relationship between Art.  3  and  Art.  8.
             Typically a finding of a violation of the former  may  make  a
             decision on the latter unnecessary;  but  the  latter  is  not
             simply a more easily accessed version of the former. Each  has
             to be  approached  and  applied  on  its  own  terms,  and  Ms
             Giovannetti is accordingly right not to suggest that  a  claim
             of the present kind must come within Art. 3 or fail.  In  this
             respect, as in  others,  these  claims  are  in  Mr  Knafler's
             submission distinct from cases such as D and  N,  in  both  of
             which the appellant's presence and treatment in  the  UK  were
             owed entirely to their unlawful entry ... ."

         86.      If the Article 3 claim fails (as  I  would  hold  it  does
         here), Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate or additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with the paradigm [citing paragraph 23
         of MM]. "

      1. With great respect this seems to me to be entirely right. It  means
         that a specific case has to be made under Article 8. It  is  to  be
         noted that MM (Zimbabwe) also  shows  that  the  rigour  of  the  D
         exception for the purpose of Article  3  in  such  cases  as  these
         applies with no less force when the claim is put  under  Article  8
         [citing paragraphs 17 and 18 MM]."

13. In GS, Underhill LJ also commented at [111] on [23] of MM:

         "... two essential points are being made.  First,  the  absence  or
         inadequacy of medical treatment, even life-preserving treatment, in
         the country of return, cannot be relied  on  at  all  as  a  factor
         engaging article 8: if that is all there is, the claim  must  fail.
         Secondly, where article 8 is engaged by  other  factors,  the  fact
         that the claimant is receiving medical treatment  in  this  country
         which may not be available in the country of return may be a factor
         in the proportionality exercise; but that factor cannot be  treated
         as by itself giving rise to a breach since  that  would  contravene
         the "no obligation to treat" principle."

14. There is the additional factor here that MTT and TZ  children.  Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizens and Immigration Act 2009 requires us  carry
    out our task so that it is:

         "... discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and  promote
         the welfare of children who in the United Kingdom."

15. At [33] of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, Baroness  Hale  provided
    guidance on to how to apply s.55 in an Article 8 case:

         "In making the proportionality assessment under Article 8, the best
         interests of the child must be a primary consideration. This  means
         that they must  be  considered  first.  They  can,  of  course,  be
         outweighed by the cumulative effect of other considerations."

16. In the case of R (SQ (Pakistan)) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 the  Court
    of Appeal addressed the question of how to approach  Article  3  and  8
    "medical" cases concerning a child. At [17], Maurice Kay LJ stated,  in
    the context of an Article 3 case, that:

         "I accept that there are circumstances in which the threshold  will
         be reached in relation to a child where it would not be reached  in
         the case of an adult".

17. At [21], the Court  confirmed  that  "ZH  (Tanzania)  demonstrates  the
    central role of the best interests of children in an  Article  8  case"
    and went on to consider the potential impact of the ZH principle  in  a
    proportionality assessment at [26] and [27]:

         "26.     What  this  case  demonstrates  is  that  in  some  cases,
         particularly but not only in relation to children,  Article  8  may
         raise issues separate  from  Article  3.  In  JA  (Ivory  Coast)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1353, an
         adult succeeded under Article 8 (but not Article  3)  in  a  health
         case. Sedley LJ emphasised (at paragraph 17) that each of  the  two
         Articles "has to be approached and applied in its own  terms".  The
         leading authorities of D and N  were  distinguished  on  the  basis
         that, in both of them, the appellants' presence  and  treatment  in
         this country " were owed entirely to unlawful entry".  JA's  appeal
         was  allowed  and  her  case  remitted  because  of  the  potential
         significance of the fact  that,  following  her  lawful  entry  and
         subsequent  diagnosis  of  HIV+,  she  had  been  granted   further
         exceptional leave to remain for  treatment.  Although  no  separate
         Article 8 issue arose in D or N, it plainly did in JA.

      1. I do not intend to predict or seek to influence the outcome of  the
         present case on remittal. On the one hand, MQ can pray in  aid  his
         lawful entry and his status as a child with the protection  of  the
         ZH approach. On the other hand, he arrived with his serious medical
         conditions at an advanced  stage  and,  although  not  an  unlawful
         entrant, it will be relevant to consider whether his  arrival  here
         was a manifestation of "health tourism". If it was, that would fall
         to be weighed in the balance. After all, this country is  under  no
         international obligation always to act  as  "the  hospital  of  the
         world".  The  difficult   question   is   whether   it   would   be
         disproportionate to remove this child  in  the  light  of  all  the
         evidence in the case, including  the  medical  evidence  which,  at
         present, is not as clearly presented as it could be.

18. The approach identified in SQ was confirmed  in  AE  (Algeria)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 653, the lead judgement again being  given  by  Maurice
    Kay LJ. At [2], referring to his earlier decision:

         "2. As in the recent case of R (SQ  (Pakistan))  v  Upper  Tribunal
         [2013] EWCA Civ 1251, this case is concerned with  the  application
         of Articles 3 and 8 when it is proposed to remove a very sick child
         to his or her home country where available healthcare provision  is
         substantially inferior but where the evidence does not point to the
         likelihood of an early death. The leading authorities  in  "health"
         cases concerned adults: D v United Kingdom [1997] 24 EHRR 423; N  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] 2AC 296; and  its
         sequel in the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR),  N  v  United
         Kingdom [2008] 47 EHRR 39. It is well known that these  authorities
         place a high hurdle in the way of adult applicants in health cases.
         In SQ, this court accepted that there can be circumstances in which
         the high threshold can be reached in relation to a child  where  it
         would not be reached in the case of an  adult  (paragraph  17).  It
         also accepted that, in the light  of  Article  3.1  of  the  United
         Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC)  and  section
         55 of the Borders Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009,  special
         considerations in relation to children arise under Article 8 of the
         ECHR such that the best interests  of  the  child  are  "a  primary
         consideration", as explained in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department [2011]  (UKSC4).  The  submissions  on  the
         present appeal to a large extent replicate those  advanced  in  SQ.
         However, the cases are necessarily fact sensitive. In SQ the appeal
         was dismissed in relation to Article 3  but  was  allowed,  to  the
         extent of a remittal to the UT, in relation to Article 8."

    and at [7]:

         "7. SQ shows that, particularly in relation to a child,  Article  8
         may be more protective than Article 3. On the other hand, where  it
         is engaged, the fact that it concerns a qualified right means  that
         everything  will  ultimately  depend  on  the  balancing   exercise
         pursuant to Article 8.2."

19. The case law we  have  considered  requires  "other  factors  which  by
    themselves engage Article 8" or "some separate  or  additional  factual
    element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm  ...  or  a
    state of affairs having some affinity with  the  paradigm"  beyond  the
    medical issues if an Article 8 claim is to succeed where  it  does  not
    under Article 3. It appeared to us that the approach taken in SQ and AE
    was that the minority of an appellant had that potential,  Maurice  Kay
    LJ stating at [24] that "the issue of interference must admit  of  only
    one answer here".  We  could  not  identify  anything  other  than  the
    appellants' minority  in  SQ  and  AE  distinguishing  them  from,  for
    example, N in N v UK or appellant KK in GS who was considered  at  [97]
    not to have a private life beyond that allowed by his treatment in  the
    UK. We accepted that the minority of two of the appellants  here  meant
    that we should follow SQ and AE in finding  Article  8  engaged  and  a
    proportionality  assessment  of  the  interference  with  private  life
    required.

20. From this learning of the Supreme Court and Court of  Appeal,  we  take
    the following principles as  being  of  particular  relevance  to  this
    appeal:

          a. The threshold in a "medical" case is very  high.  Even  if  an
             appellant  is  suffering  from  "mortal  illness"  and  "would
             deteriorate rapidly and suffer an early death"  a  claim  does
             not succeed ([16] of MM) .

          b. The very high threshold must be applied in  a  "medical"  case
             brought under Article 3  and  Article  8.   A  case  will  not
             usually succeed on the same medical evidence under  Article  8
             where it does not under Article 3 ([16] and [18] of MM ,  [87]
             of GS).

          c. A "medical" case that does not meet the high  threshold  under
             Article 3 can only succeed under Article 8 if there are "other
             factors which by themselves engage Article 8" ([23 of MM])  or
             "some separate or additional factual element which brings  the
             case within the Article 8 paradigm ... or a state  of  affairs
             having some affinity with the paradigm" ([86] of GS).

          d.  The  proportionality  assessment  cannot  turn  solely  on  a
             comparison between medical treatment  available  here  and  in
             Bangladesh and the consequences  for  the  appellant  although
             that will be one of the factors to be taken into  account.  To
             do  otherwise  would  offend  the  "no  obligation  to   treat
             principle" ([23] of MM and [111] of GS).

          e. The best interests of a child are to be weighed as  a  primary
             factor ([33] of ZH).

          f. MTT's minority brings the case within the Article  8  paradigm
             and is a factor capable of  making  to  return  to  Bangladesh
             disproportionate when that would not be so for an adult.  That
             will not necessarily be so  as  it  will  depend  on  all  the
             factors in play in the balancing exercise ([26] of SQ and  [7]
             of AE).

          g. The assessment will be fact specific. The case  law  discussed
             above identifies relevant considerations such as  legal  entry
             and residence (SQ at  [26]),  entry  where  an  appellant  was
             already aware of illness (SQ at [27]), de facto assumption  of
             care ([85] of GS), previous leave being granted  in  order  to
             remain for treatment (SQ at [26]) and family support on return
             (AE at [4]) but there is no definitive list or guidance as  to
             what weight might attract to these factors in different cases.



21. Before proceeding to assess proportionality we  reminded  ourselves  of
    the need for "other factors which by themselves engage  Article  8"  or
    "some separate or additional factual  element  which  brings  the  case
    within the Article 8 paradigm ... or a state  of  affairs  having  some
    affinity with the paradigm" beyond the medical issues.  The  discussion
    in the case law above of an appellant's minority and role of s.55 is in
    the context of an assessment of proportionality rather  than  the  need
    identified in MM and GS for there to be "additional factors" within the
    Article 8 paradigm that might  allow  for  a  different  outcome  under
    Article 8 than under Article 3.

22. We observed, however, that in SQ the Court  of  Appeal  found  for  the
    minor appellant as the First-tier Tribunal had decided incorrectly that
    Article 8 was not engaged as interference with  private  life  had  not
    been shown. At [24], Maurice  Kay  LJ  indicated  that  "the  issue  of
    interference must admit of only one  answer  here".  The  feature  that
    appears to have allowed the Court of Appeal in that case to  find  that
    an Article 8 case had the potential to  succeed  where  had  not  under
    Article 3 was that SQ was a child.

23. We are therefore satisfied that Article 8 is engaged here  where  there
    is a minor appellant and that the respondent's decision  amount  to  an
    interference with the child's private life, requiring us to proceed  to
    assess whether the interference is proportionate.

24. We are also required to apply the provisions  of  paragraphs  117A  and
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; Dube (ss117A-
    117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC) and Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015]
    UKUT 00412 (IAC) applied. Those provisions are as follows:

         117A Application of this Part

           (1)   This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
                determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-



                (a)    breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                    family life under Article 8, and

                (b)    as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                    Human Rights Act 1998.

           (2)   In considering the public interest question, the court  or
                tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                (a)    in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                    117B, and

                (b)     in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.



           (3)   In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means
                the question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's
                right to respect for private and family  life  is  justified
                under Article 8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

           (1)   The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
                the public interest.

           (2)   It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons  who  can
                speak English-

            [pic] [pic]  [pic]

                (a)    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)   It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
                interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,
                that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons-

                (a)    are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                (b)    are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)   Little weight should be given to-

                (a)    a private life, or

                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that
                    is established by a person at a time when the person  is
                    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)    Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
                established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
                immigration status is precarious.

           (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                the public interest does not require  the  person's  removal
                where-

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                    leave the United Kingdom.

III. Medical Evidence

25. MTT's condition is at the centre of  our  consideration  as  it  is  an
    essential element in the  assessment  of  his  private  life  and  best
    interests so we start our consideration with the medical evidence  that
    was before us.

26. We were provided with a number of letters from MTT's  current  treating
    team at Birmingham Children's Hospital. In a letter dated  10  February
    2014, Dr Rafeeq Muhammed, Consultant Paediatric Gastroenterologist  and
    Christine Holden, Head of Nutritional Care, stated:

         "[MTT]  previously  lived  in  Bangladesh  for  10  years  and  was
         extremely unwell with high risk of dying due to his  complex  bowel
         problems. When he came to Britain ...  he  was  severely  emaciated
         .... He is on life saving treatment everyday and would be in severe
         danger if treatment is stopped. It is not possible for this  to  be
         undertaken in Bangladesh.

         ...

         Without  parenteral  nutrition  [MTT]  will  have  serious   health
         problems which could result in his death.  The  prognosis  of  this
         condition remains poor without parenteral nutrition, however,  with
         parenteral nutrition children can live into adulthood  and  have  a
         good quality of life.

         This treatment is  essential  for  [MTT]'s  survival  in  terms  of
         growth, development, general health and his problem maintaining his
         body's salt balance. ... I would not recommend long distance travel
         for [MTT], particularly  in  a  flight,  because  of  the  risk  of
         dehydration and  infection.  [MTT]  also  receives  treatment  from
         Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Dental  teams  for  problems  (sic)
         poor  bone  and  teeth  health  which  are  related  to  his  bowel
         condition.

         We would hope you would look  sympathetically  at  this  appeal  as
         [MTT] could die if the specialised treatment cannot be continued."

27. Dr Muhammed and Ms Holden confirm these views  in  a  number  of  other
    letters. In his most recent letter dated  29  June  2015,  Dr  Muhammed
    stated:

         "With the treatment  provided  by  the  multidisciplinary  team  in
         Birmingham Children's Hospital, [MTT]'s quality  of  life  is  very
         good. [MTT] is also looked after by many other specialists  in  our
         hospital regarding his bone and dental health, mobility and hearing
         problems.  We  have  enquired  about  health  care  facilities   in
         Bangladesh and they do not have  facilities  no  where  (sic)  near
         which  we  provide  in  the  UK.  I  believe  that  [MTT]'s  health
         consequences could be so severe that his life could be in danger if
         he is forced to move back to Bangladesh and discontinue the current
         treatment."

28. Christine Holden indicated in her most recent letter dated 3 July 2015:



         "[MTT] is on life saving treatment every day and would be in severe
         danger if treatment was stopped.

         ...

         Without  parenteral  nutrition  [MTT]  will  have  serious   health
         problems, which could result in his death.  The  prognosis  of  his
         condition remains poor without parenteral nutrition,  however  with
         parenteral nutrition children can live into adulthood and will have
         a good quality of life.

         I would not recommend long distance travel for [MTT],  particularly
         a flight, because of the risk of dehydration and infection.

         ...

         In view of all of the above and the needs of [MTT] and  his  family
         it is imperative they are allowed to  remain  in  this  country.  I
         would hope you would look sympathetically at this appeal  as  [MTT]
         could die if treatment does not continue in this country."

29. The evidence was clear as to parenteral nutrition not  being  available
    at all in Bangladesh. The treatment is complex and relatively rare even
    in the UK with a range of regular support from hospital  and  community
    medical teams  required  on  an  ongoing  basis.    The  expertise  and
    equipment required is not available in Bangladesh with  the  additional
    difficulties of storage of  the  solution  and  administration  in  the
    required sterile conditions being very difficult due to the climate and
    erratic electricity supply.

30. We accept without hesitation that  MTT  has  a  very  serious,  chronic
    condition. We recognise that this has lead to him being very ill due to
    undernourishment  and  side-effects  of   treatment   all   his   life.
    Complications have included weak bones and fractures due to  inadequate
    nutrition and he has recently experienced hearing loss.

31. What we also take from the evidence  of  Dr  Muhammed  and  Ms  Holden,
    however, is that on return to Bangladesh without  parenteral  nutrition
    MTT "could" or "could probably"  or  "would  potentially"  die.   Their
    evidence was no more specific as to the likelihood of MTT  dying  after
    return or how limited MTT's life expectancy might be.

32. It appeared to  us  that,  although  very  concerning,  this  prognosis
    explained why the case did not succeed under Article 3 ECHR before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and there was no challenge  to  that  part  of  the
    decision. We reminded ourselves, however, that although  the  threshold
    remains high in an Article 8 "medical" case, the failure under  Article
    3 does not mean an Article 8 claim cannot succeed,  particularly  where
    it concerns children.

33. In addition to the evidence from  the  team  at  Birmingham  Children's
    Hospital, we also had evidence from  Michelle  Snipe,  Palliative  Care
    Nurse who cares for MTT in the community. She states in her  letter  of
    17 February 2014 that:

         "Withdrawal from this treatment package in essence would  be  fatal
         for [MTT]"

    and in her further letter dated 8 July 2015 that:

         "[MTT] does not have positive memories of his life in Bangladesh as
         he was unwell  throughout  this  period  of  his  life.  [MTT]  has
         reported demonstrate  (sic)  anxiety  and  distress  regarding  his
         future and mortality at the prospect of returning to Bangladesh  as
         he is acutely aware of the limitations  that  would  challenge  his
         medical and educational care."

34. Carole Benson, Paediatric Homecare Nurse comments in a letter  dated  7
    July 2015 that:

         "Without Parenteral Nutrition (PN) [MTT] would not grow up  at  all
         and would not survive.

         ...

         Again without  PN,  [MTT]  would  have  a  poor  quality  and  fore
         shortened (sic) existence full  of  pain  and  discomfort  with  no
         independence or active part to play.

         ...

         By denying permission you are breaching his rights  and  condemning
         him to a shortened, painful and joyless life with no expectation of
         contributing to society.

         If he was forced to return to Bangladesh it is a 12 hour flight,  a
         journey in  total  of  almost  24  hours.  This  journey  would  be
         detrimental to his health as he would not be  able  to  receive  PN
         during the journey or after its conclusion."

35. Where Ms Snipe and Ms Benson state that absence of parenteral nutrition
    "would be fatal" and that MTT "would not survive" we prefer the opinion
    of MTT's Consultant  and  the  Head  of  Nutrition  at  the  Birmingham
    Children's Hospital who state only that he "could" be  so  at  risk  on
    return. We take that view not just on the basis of their  seniority  of
    Dr Muhammed and Ms Holden but because  their  opinions  are  consistent
    with the fact of MTT surviving in Bangladesh from birth to the age of 2
    and then on return from 2004 to 2011 after he returned from Singapore.

36. We had a similar difficulty with the comments as to the risks to  MTT's
    health and wellbeing if he undertakes the journey  to  Bangladesh.  The
    evidence is that he flew to  the  UK  after  7  years'  of  sub-optimal
    treatment in Bangladesh. He has now had 4 years' of treatment that  has
    improved his  health  to  some  extent.  His  condition  has  now  been
    definitively diagnosed and it appeared to us that plans can be made  to
    ameliorate the risk of deterioration in his health during the  journey.
    If necessary the journey could be undertaken in  stages,  with  breaks,
    possibly in  countries  that  can  provide  parenteral  nutrition,  his
    parents indicating in their witness statement, for  example,  that  MTT
    received this treatment in Singapore when he was a young child.

    Circumstances on Return to Bangladesh

37. We had the evidence set out above from the medical team in  the  UK  on
    MTT's health and likely circumstances on return to Bangladesh. We  also
    heard evidence from MTT's father, MTH, about how the family dealt  with
    MTT's health problems when they were in Bangladesh from 2004  to  2011,
    those conditions realistically being those he  would  be  returning  to
    now.

38. We found the dignified and straightforward manner in which MTH gave his
    evidence on such acutely difficult matters deeply impressive.

39. MTH told us that life in Bangladesh had been a struggle for MTT.  Every
    week he had to go to hospital for treatment. At  the  hospital  he  was
    given glucose and protein  lipid  drips  via  a  vein  which  was  very
    unpleasant. Every two or three days the vein would become  blocked  and
    other veins used, all of which was very painful for MTT. A  great  deal
    of MTT's life was staying in bed at home. MTH and RS were both  working
    in Bangladesh before they came to the UK. Together with RS's mother and
    a maid who lived in the flat opposite, they cared for MTT.

40. MTH accepted that the family are privileged. They had  enjoyed  a  high
    standard of living in Bangladesh and could  expect  to  return  to  the
    same.  MTH  is  a  Deputy  General  Manager  of  the  Central  Bank  of
    Bangladesh. His wife, RS, works for  the  Bangladesh  Government  as  a
    senior Assistant Chief in the Ministry of Planning. MTH commented  that
    her post-graduate degree from the University of Birmingham will  assist
    her in her furthering her career. In addition. three of MTT's aunts are
    doctors, two of them Professors, an uncle is in the banking sector, and
    another uncle is  a  Lieutenant  Colonel  in  the  army.  Relatives  in
    Bangladesh have been sending money to help the  family.  MTH  confirmed
    this was for living costs and that the family  had  not  paid  for  the
    treatment or the education MTT and ZT had accessed in the UK.

41. MTH accepted that the family could recreate the same system of care for
    MTT on return as had been in place before they left Bangladesh but this
    was very difficult for them to contemplate.

42. In particular, MTT had spoken to MTH asking him not to allow him to  be
    returned to Bangladesh as he feared he would die. We noted that that is
    the view he also expressed to Ms Snipe at  [30],  above.  It  was  also
    mentioned by MTT's Family Support Worker, Sonia Grant, who wrote  in  a
    letter dated 26 June 2015 that he is fearful of returning to Bangladesh
    as he was so unwell when he lived there.

43. We accept that MTT's quality of life in Bangladesh will be  very  poor,
    that he will once again become mainly house-bound, if  not  often  bed-
    bound, will not be able to have a life of much  substance  outside  the
    home and will really only socialise with his  immediate  relatives.  He
    will have a high level of family support, possibly  more  so  than  now
    where he has only his parents with him  rather  than  grandparents  and
    aunts and uncles.

44. We also accept that he will not be able to go to school,  make  friends
    and socialise as he has here. The family has already  established  that
    even private schools in Bangladesh would find it difficult  to  address
    his needs by way of equipment and personal support were he well  enough
    to attend. His father has indicated that the family can pay for private
    tuition but this can only provide a limited form of education  compared
    to that he has been able to access in the UK. Slightly more positively,
    we noted that his Family Support Worker identified IT  as  a  favourite
    subject and that he enjoys  TV  and  computer  games,  aspects  of  his
    current life that could be replicated in his home in Bangladesh.

IV. Article 8 Assessment

    Best Interests

45. It is obvious to us that it must be in MTT's best interests  to  remain
    in the UK in order  to  continue  with  his  treatment  and  to  remain
    relatively  well.  If  he  returns  to  Bangladesh  he  will  face  the
    possibility of  early  mortality  and  the  certainty  of  limited  and
    unpleasant medical treatment.

46. It is entirely understandable that it is the wish of his parents and of
    MTT himself that the family remains in  the  UK.  We  place  particular
    weight on his wishes when assessing his best interests given that he is
    14 years' old and that although we did not have evidence directly  from
    him, he has made his view clear to a number of those around him.

47. In addition  to  his  compromised  health,  we  also  accept  that  his
    educational development and life opportunities  in  the  broader  sense
    will be hampered by his removal, albeit he can be  tutored  and  access
    modern media in his home. The quality of life that he has been able  to
    develop in the UK because of  his  treatment  and  special  educational
    support is of a much more significant depth and variety  than  that  he
    had and will have on return to Bangladesh.

48. We also found that  TZ's best interests really run in parallel to those
    of MTT. Her circumstances on return will be less stark  than  his.  She
    will be  with  her  parents  and  other  relatives,  has  a  relatively
    privileged background and will able to attend school, form  friendships
    and so on. But where her  brother's  life  in  Bangladesh  will  be  so
    difficult this can only but have  a  negative  impact  on  all  of  the
    family, however assiduous the parents are in reducing the  consequences
    for TZ. We accept that it is in her best interest to remain in  the  UK
    where her brother can be relatively well.

    Proportionality

49. We have accepted that the best interests of both of the  children  here
    lie in remaining in the UK. That must remain a primary consideration in
    our assessment regardless of the other factors in play.

50. We have accepted above that the medical evidence shows that  MTT  could
    die without parenteral nutrition although no indication is given as  to
    how reduced his life expectancy might be. As above, we could not  avoid
    the fact that he lived in Bangladesh for 10 years playing a part in our
    thinking. What is certain is that his quality of life will be  poor  as
    only limited  and  unpleasant  treatment  will  be  available  to  him,
    significantly affecting his health and well-being.

51. The impact of MTT's compromised health  and  quality  of  life  on  his
    parent younger sister is also a significant factor.

52. We took into account  also  that  even  though  they  have   been  here
    lawfully, the family came with limited leave in order for RS  to  study
    not for MTT to receive medical treatment. There has  never  been  a  de
    facto commitment that MTT would be  allowed  to  stay  in  the  UK  for
    medical treatment or leave granted for that purpose.

53. We are also required to apply the provisions of s. 117B. The family  do
    not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  weighs
    against them where the maintenance of effective immigration controls is
    in the public interest. The family speak English  but  that  is  not  a
    factor that can weigh positively in  their  favour;  see  AM  (S  117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and Forman.

54. We did not find that the family is financially  independent  given  the
    reliance on public funds for MTT's medical and educational and  special
    needs provision and also TZ's education. We have been given no  figures
    but there must be a very significant burden on the taxpayer  given  the
    specialist treatment MTT is receiving and the support  he  receives  at
    his special school. His parents are  unable  to  pay  for  his  medical
    treatment or education and are not paying for TZ's education. We accept
    that MTT and RS have otherwise been able  to  maintain  the  family  by
    working lawfully, obtaining support from family members  in  Bangladesh
    and being accommodated by friends in the UK.

55. It is our view that the significant burden on the taxpayer now  and  in
    the future if the family remains in the  UK  is  a  significant  factor
    weighing against them in the balancing exercise. As at [9] of AE:

         "Moreover, I do not consider that it would be inappropriate for the
         future cost and duration  of  [M]'s  treatment  and  care  in  this
         country to play  a  part  in  the  balancing  exercise  as  matters
         relating to the economic  wellbeing  of  this  country,  given  the
         strains on the public finances."

56. Section 117B(5) mandates that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life that is established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the
    person's immigration status is precarious. The  case  of  AM  (S  117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) states at paragraph 4 of  the  head  note
    that:

          "Those who at any given date held a precarious immigration  status
         must have held at that date an otherwise lawful grant of  leave  to
         enter or to remain. A person's immigration status  is  "precarious"
         if their continued presence in the UK will be dependent upon  their
         obtaining a further grant of leave.

57. As above, it is undisputed that the family here have always been in the
    UK lawfully. The application  for  further  leave  that  led  to  these
    proceedings   was   made   in-time   and   so   the   family's   lawful
    student/dependent leave has been  extended  under  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

58. We were unsure whether it was correct to apply here the full  force  of
    the definition of "precarious" in AM.  Following  ZH,  the  immigration
    history of the family cannot be used to reduce the fixity of the weight
    that attracts to the best interests of MTT and TZ. We noted that ZH was
    decided prior to the introduction of s.117B, however.

59. It appeared to us that the position was as at [52] above,  less  weight
    attracting to the family's side of the balance where the family entered
    with limited leave and no expectation that  any  of  the  family  could
    remain on medical grounds.

V. Conclusion

60. At the outset of MM, Moses LJ stated that it was "a  sad  and  worrying
    case". We found this appeal to be so, also. However  much  sympathy  we
    have for MTT, his sister and his parents, however, our judicial duty is
    to apply the law as we understand it to the facts as we  find  them  to
    be.

61. We have endeavoured to set out above as clearly as possible our view of
    the law and our findings so that the family can at least  know  why  we
    have reached the conclusion that we cannot allow the appeal.

62. No one factor played a definitive part in our decision. We kept in mind
    at all times the clarity of the  children's  best  interests  being  in
    remaining in the UK. It remains the case that  the  evidence  does  not
    show that return to Bangladesh will definitely lead to a  very  reduced
    life expectancy. The medical evidence is that MTT's life "could" be  in
    danger in Bangladesh without parenteral nutrition. The evidence is also
    that he survived in Bangladesh for 10 years, other than a short  period
    in Singapore, before coming to the UK. We did not find that  the  facts
    here were sufficiently close  to  the  high  threshold  required  in  a
    "medical" case, even where we are concerned with  the  futures  of  two
    children.

63. We know that MTT's life on return to Bangladesh will be very  hard  and
    unpleasant and that it will be difficult for his  family  where  he  is
    suffering. Against that, however, we are mandated  to  weigh  the  very
    significant burden to the taxpayer arising from MTT treatment  and  his
    and TZ's education.

64. In all the circumstances, we found that it was  proportionate  for  MTT
    and his family to return to Bangladesh.

Decision:

    We dismiss the Article 8 ECHR appeal.


Signed:     [pic]      28 August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



