
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00605/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                               alicia Promesse
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None (but see below)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, who is a citizen  of  St  Lucia,  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to  refuse  her  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights, which is  her  qualified  right  to  respect  for  her
    private and family life.

2.   The Appellant's appeal was heard on 26 June 2015  at  Hatton  Cross  by
    Judge Manyarara.  The Appellant appeared in person; the Respondent  was
    not represented.  In a decision promulgated on 8 July 2015  the  appeal
    was allowed under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8  human  rights
    grounds.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted to  the  Respondent  on  30  September
    2015 by Judge Osborne in the following terms:-

         "1.  The grounds seek permission to appeal the decision and reasons
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara who in a  decision  and
             reasons promulgated 8 July 2015 allowed the Appellant's appeal
             against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  an   illegal
             entrant/person subject to administrative removal under Section
             10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999,  under   the
             Immigration Rules and in relation to Article 8.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge made a material error of law
             in allowing the appeal.  The Judge found that there  are  very
             significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  returning  to  St.
             Lucia because she would have no family there to  support  her.
             The Respondent submits that the finding  is  superficial;  the
             Appellant's evidence is that she is  now  estranged  from  her
             family in the UK and cannot turn to  them  for  support.   The
             Appellant did not demonstrate that she would be  incapable  of
             establishing herself independently of her family (as  she  has
             done in the UK) in St. Lucia.   The  friends  who  financially
             support her in terms of her son's  medical  needs  in  the  UK
             could continue to do so.  The Judge also  erred  in  assessing
             Article 8.  The Judge should have had regard to  all  relevant
             factors within Section 117.   The  passing  reference  to  the
             English language requirement is  insufficient  to  demonstrate
             lawful engagement with the public interest factors.

         3.   In an otherwise careful and focused decision and reasons it is
             nonetheless arguable that the Judge arguably erred in  law  in
             failing to find that the Appellant's friends could continue to
             financially support her son's medical needs even  if  she  and
             her son lived in St. Lucia.  It is  arguable  that  the  Judge
             erred in finding that there are very significant obstacles  to
             the Appellant's returning to St. Lucia due to  the  fact  that
             she has no family there to support her particularly as she  is
             estranged from those members of her family who live in the UK.



         4.   As those arguable errors of law have been identified, all  the
             issues raised in the  grounds  are  arguable.   Permission  to
             appeal is granted."

4.   On 23 October 2015 the Appellant's  representatives,  Apex  Solicitors,
    submitted a bundle of evidence to the Upper  Tribunal.   They  did  not
    comply with Rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, which requires an explanation  why  the  evidence  was  not
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  At the error of law  hearing  Mr
    Norton raised no objection to submission of the additional evidence, on
    the basis that the Tribunal would be much  better  placed  to  reach  a
    decision with the benefit of all  of  the  evidence.   I  accepted  the
    Appellant's bundle of evidence.

5.   On the day of the hearing  the  Appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal saying that they would not be attending the hearing, at  which
    the Appellant would be representing herself.  The Appellant said at the
    hearing that this was because she had not been able to  afford  to  pay
    them.

6.    I  explained  the  procedure  to  the  Appellant.   Mr   Norton   made
    submissions.  The Appellant replied, saying that she  relied  upon  the
    decision of the first judge.  I reserved my decision.

Determination

7.   As to the Immigration Rules, the evidence before  the  judge  was  that
    the Appellant is estranged from her family in the UK and cannot turn to
    them for support.  The Appellant did not however demonstrate  that  she
    could not establish herself independently in St  Lucia.   The  evidence
    was that her friends support her financially in relation to the medical
    needs of her son, which are now the subject of evidence.  However there
    was no evidence that they could or would not continue to do  so  in  St
    Lucia.

8.   Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) required the Appellant to show  that,  aged  18
    or above and having lived continuously in the UK for less  than  twenty
    years, there would be very significant  obstacles  to  her  integration
    into St Lucia.  The finding of the judge at  paragraph  26  that  there
    would be such obstacles was not grounded in the evidence.  This was  an
    error of law.

9.   As to Article 8, the  judge  was  required  to  consider  all  relevant
    factors under Section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  At paragraph 34 the judge took into account  the  fact  that
    the Appellant was currently being supported by friends; her  child  was
    an EEA national but not a British citizen; and the Appellant  was  able
    to understand English.  However the judge did not take into account the
    public interest factors of the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control and the particular weight which was to be accorded to  it  when
    the Appellant's immigration  status  was  precarious.   His  Article  8
    proportionality assessment at paragraphs 33 to  35  did  not  therefore
    take due account of these considerations.  This too  was  an  error  of
    law.

10.  I accordingly set the decision aside.  The appeal is to be  reheard  at
    Hatton Cross by any judge other than Judge Manyarara.

Notice of Decision

11.  The original decision contains a material  error  of  law  and  is  set
    aside.

12.  The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  at
    Hatton Cross by any judge other than Judge Manyarara.


Signed   Dated: 11 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
