
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00425/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2015                   |On 20 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                               melisa ann ames
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood instructed by One Immigration (Leicester)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. The appellant who is a citizen of the United States born 4 January 1966
    has been granted  permission  to  appeal  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew. For reasons given in her determination  dated  1
    August 2014, the judge dismissed the appeal against the decision  dated
    5  December  2013  to  remove  the  appellant  as  someone  subject  to
    administrative removal under s.10 of the 1999 Act.

 2. That decision was in response to an application dated 23 November  2012
    for leave to remain on form FLR(O) on human rights grounds.  The  basis
    of the application was the appellant's relationship with Mr Patel  whom
    she had been living with since 2008.   An  aspect  the  respondent  was
    asked to consider was the regular care that Mr Patel and  his  brothers
    provide for their mother. She has schizophrenia and also has had recent
    physical ill-health.

 3. The respondent set out her reasons for refusing the  application  in  a
    letter dated 5 December 2013.   The  application  had  been  considered
    under Appendix FM "partner" and the relationship had been  accepted  as
    genuine and subsisting; the appellant met the eligibility  requirements
    of Appendix FM E-LTRP1.2(a) and 1.7.  The case  had  been    considered
    under  section  EX  however  it  was  not  accepted  that  there   were
    insurmountable obstacles preventing the parties from  continuing  their
    relationship in the United States;  this  was  on  the  basis  that  Mr
    Patel's mother was in receipt of a care package provided by  the  local
    authority and there were other family members who could provide help.

 4. The circumstances of the appellant were also considered under paragraph
    276ADE.  The respondent did not accept that the requirements  had  been
    met.  The appellant had arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  April  2006
    when she was 40 and had thus spent the majority  of  her  life  in  the
    United States where she would not be without cultural  or  social  ties
    and where she had two daughters, one grandchild and other relatives.

 5. The judge heard  evidence  from  the  parties  but  came  to  the  same
    conclusion; there was nothing to show that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to them carrying on family life together in America.  It  had
    not been argued before her that the appellant met the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE.  Specifically in respect  of  Article  8,  the  judge
    concluded that she could not find arguably  good  grounds.   There  was
    nothing preventing the appellant from returning to  the  United  States
    and applying to re-enter as the partner of Mr Patel.  The judge did not
    go on to consider  whether  there  were  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules and thus dismissed the appeal.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that there were  arguable
    grounds the judge may have erred in law, having regard to the  judgment
    of Aikins LJ in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 984.

ERROR OF LAW

 7. Permission was granted on the three grounds advanced and I  begin  with
    my decision on whether the judge erred in law.  I start with the second
    ground since it is a challenge to the judge's assessment  on  the  case
    under the Rules on the basis that the judge's approach to the issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles was wrong.  It is also argued that the correct
    approach to Article 8 in this context is that of  reasonableness;   the
    judge had imposed too high  a  burden  and  furthermore  had  erred  in
    relation to the evidence.  The focus of Mr Mahmood's submissions was on
    that latter aspect.   He  argued  that  there  had  been  no  issue  of
    credibility and that the judge had not carried out a  proper  analysis.
    Mr Mills argued that the judge had applied the test correctly  and  had
    proper regard to all the evidence.

 8. My conclusion is that although the judge did  not  specifically  direct
    herself as to the way in which the test was to  be  approached,  it  is
    nevertheless evident from the substance of her determination  that  she
    had evaluated "...the degree of difficulty the couple face rather  than
    the 'surmountability' of the obstacle" see  Izuazu  (Article  8  -  new
    Rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) at [57] as approved in MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

 9. The second limb to this ground relates to  the  judge's  assessment  of
    those obstacles.  It is accepted that the judge  was  correct  to  note
    that she had no evidence from Mr Patel's mother's carers but there  was
    evidence from the appellant and Mr Patel as to the likely very  serious
    adverse effects their absence would have.

10. The judge said this about this aspect at [11]:

         "I have read with care and noted  the  evidence  of  Mr  Patel.   I
         accept  that  his  mother  has  both  physical  and  mental  health
         problems.  However, she is supported not only by Mr Patel but  also
         by his two brothers.   In  addition  she  has  a  package  of  care
         provided for her.  There is nothing before me to show that  any  of
         her care has to be carried out by either the  appellant  or  by  Mr
         Patel.  I accept that it might be desirable that some of  her  care
         is so carried out but it is not a necessity."

11. In my view there is no reason to believe that the judge  had  not  read
    with care and noted the evidence of Mr Patel.  His statement covers the
    regime of care the three brothers provide to their mother, none of whom
    now lives with her.  Reference is also made to care  workers  attending
    their mother on a regular basis during the day.  The statement is based
    on the expectation that if the appellant is not  successful,  Mr  Patel
    would remain in the United Kingdom  and  the  disappointment  he  would
    encounter were that so.

12. The appellant is a qualified social worker.  She had worked pursuant to
    a permit obtained by Birmingham  City  Council  Social  Services.   Her
    statement includes a detailed analysis of Mr  Patel's  mother's  health
    difficulties.   She  candidly  states  that  she  is  not  involved  in
    providing regular care for her.

13. The judge was entitled to note at [14] that she had nothing at all from
    Mr Patel's mother's health or social workers as to the effect  that  it
    would have on her should the  appellant  be  removed  and/or  Mr  Patel
    accompanies her.  As I observed to Mr Mahmood, the  appellant  and  her
    sponsor had a vested interest in the outcome of the appeal.  Whilst the
    judge did not make an adverse credibility  finding,  it  is  inevitable
    that their views are to an extent at least informed by the  appellant's
    immigration circumstances.  It was legitimate for the judge  to  expect
    more and she was entitled to note the absence of third  party  evidence
    which would have been readily  available  in  the  light  of  the  care
    package being provided.

14. A further aspect relied on by the appellant is Mr Patel's dyslexia.  It
    is argued that the judge ignored the evidence of Mr Patel of the  years
    of difficulties he has had as a consequence  of  this  condition.   For
    reasons given at [16], the judge accepted the condition but in my  view
    she was entitled to observe that there was nothing before her  to  show
    that it would involve any abnormal period of hardship as he adjusted to
    his new  surroundings.  She  correctly  observed:  "further,  there  is
    nothing before me to show that he will be unable to  obtain  employment
    there with the same level  of  support  that  he  has  in  his  present
    employment for his dyslexia."

15. I can make little sense of the third aspect of this limb  which  argues
    the judge had distorted the legal test by suggesting it was a matter of
    choice for the sponsor as to whether he goes to the United States.   It
    is  clear  from  Mr  Patel's  evidence  that  he  did  not  contemplate
    accompanying the appellant and it was open to the judge to examine  the
    reasons given for that position.

16. The final point made describes as a "very casual finding" the view that
    Mr Patel could make frequent visits to the United Kingdom  to  see  his
    mother.  The judge was rationally entitled to observe that it was  open
    to him to do so.

17. Accordingly I am not persuaded that the judge erred in respect  of  the
    second ground.  I turn now to the first and third grounds, which may be
    taken together for reasons that  follow.   The  first  is  that  simply
    because it had been held there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  Mr
    Patel joining the appellant in the United States, it did not  mean  the
    claimant could not succeed under Article 8.  The  third  ground  argues
    the relevance of s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended).

18. Candidly Mr Mills accepted that the judge had erred in her approach  to
    Article 8 in failing to undertake a proper analysis.  He argued however
    that the error was not material as the outcome was inevitable with  the
    factors having already been considered properly under the Rules.

19. Mr Mills was correct to make this concession.  As  was  made  clear  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in R (on the application of) Oludoyi & Others
    v SSHD (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre (IJR) [2014] UKUT 539  (IAC)
    the authorities must not be read as seeking to qualify  or  fetter  the
    assessment of Article 8 in the light of the observation by the Court of
    Appeal in MM & Others that there is no utility in  imposing  a  further
    intermediate test as a preliminary consideration of an Article 8 claim.
     Quoting from the headnote to that case:

         "As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  2712  (Admin),
         there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise  of
         discretion  should  be  considered;  rather  the  nature   of   the
         assessment and the reasoning which are called for are  informed  by
         threshold consideration."

20. The glib reference by the judge to the possibility of a holiday in  the
    United States is unfortunate.  Given the potential impact of removal  a
    greater analysis of article 8 was  required  than  that  given  by  the
    judge.  I heard extensive submissions from Mr Mahmood  with  regard  to
    the factors he considered should have been considered under Article  8.
    I accept these factors indicated the possibility a viable case  outside
    the Rules, particularly in the light of the factors in Part 5A  of  the
    2002 Act.

21. Section 117A(2) requires when considering the public interest  question
    that the Tribunal must in particular have regard -

         "(a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in s.117B, ...".

    Section 117A(3) provides -

         "In subsection  (2),  'the  public  interest  question'  means  the
         question of whether an interference  with  the  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2)."

22. Section 117B is in these terms -

         "Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases:

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom  unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child and,

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

23.  Interpretation provided in s.117D specific to this case is that a-

         "'Qualifying partner' means a partner who -

         (a)  is a British citizen...".

24. It is unarguable that the appellant speaks  English  and  that  she  is
    financially independent in the sense that she is able to work here  and
    has a history of having done so with a work permit.   Her  relationship
    was formed with a qualifying partner whilst she was here lawfully  and,
    furthermore, the private life that she has established was  whilst  she
    was here with such leave.

25. Mr Mills argued that the effect of the appellant  coming  within  these
    criteria (or not falling foul of it) was neutral.  I am  not  persuaded
    that even if he is  right,  the  error  by  the  judge  in  failing  to
    undertake an adequate analysis was not material; there were  sufficient
    factors that required a detailed Article 8 analysis.  Accordingly,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal on Article 8 grounds is set  aside.



REMAKING THE DECISION

26. As I observed  to  the  parties  there  has  been  no  compliance  with
    directions and with no new evidence before me, I re-make  the  decision
    based on the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  taking  account
    also the detailed submissions I had heard on  error  of  law.   Neither
    representative had  anything  to  add  to  those  submissions  for  the
    purposes of re-making.

27. In the  circumstances  of  this  case  I  can  proceed  immediately  to
    proportionality.  It is accepted that the appellant has  established  a
    family life in the United Kingdom and it is  unarguable  that  she  has
    also established a private life during her period of lawful  residence.
    By the time her application was made she was without leave.  It appears
    that difficulties arose because she failed to pay the fee when she made
    application for settlement after five years' employment in  the  United
    Kingdom on 26 October 2012.  It appears also that  her  employers  were
    only prepared to support an application for  further  leave  to  remain
    when she re-applied on 23 November 2012.  Mr Mills accepted that what I
    have been told is accurate.

28. The appellant was dismissed from her employment on  10  December  2012.
    This was because she did not have the right to work  and  in  addition,
    the decision related to performance issues.  The evidence  demonstrates
    that  the  latter  aspect  is  not  something  that  the  Council   has
    subsequently wished to pursue further.  In any event it is  clear  that
    the period of time the appellant  was  without  leave  before  she  re-
    applied was quite short in contrast to the  lengthy  period  of  lawful
    leave.

29. I accept Mr Mills' submissions that the scales are preloaded  with  the
    public  interest  consideration  of  the   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control.  Section 117B (1) makes that clear. This  is  less
    than the heavy weighting where there has been criminal behaviour.  I do
    not accept his argument that the effect of the  appellant  meeting  the
    117B (2) and (3) criteria is neutral. As Parliament has decided that is
    in the public interest that persons who seek to  enter  or  remain  are
    able to speak English and that they are financially independent,  these
    aspects, if positively met, are factors that have  application  in  the
    balancing  of  protected  rights  against  the   public   interest   in
    maintaining immigration control. They have the potential to enhance the
    weight be given to the competing family and private life interests that
    are in play.  This does not mean that  if  the  criteria  are  met  the
    scales automatically tip in an applicant's favour; there will always be
    residual weight in the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls.
    It is a matter of assessing the  proportionality  of  the  interference
    with the protected rights against the competing public interest.

30. Private and/or family life  established  whilst  someone  had,  but  no
    longer  has,  lawful  leave  is  unlikely  to  be   decisive   of   the
    proportionality exercise but is  capable  of  considerable  weight.  As
    observed by Sales LJ in SSHD v AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA  Civ  1636,  the
    Secretary of State, "retains a general discretion outside the Rules  in
    exercise of which, in some circumstances, decisions may need to be made
    in order to accommodate certain claims for leave to remain on the basis
    of Convention rights, as explained in Huang and R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin).

31. In R (Nagre) Sales J characterised the enquiry at [29] of his  judgment
    as one of considering "whether there are compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the new rules to  require  the  grant  of
    such leave".

32. The decision of the House of Lords in Huang  v  SSHD  [2007]  2WLR  581
    remains the correct approach to Article 8 considerations.  As  observed
    by Lord Bingham at [20] -

         "In an Article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the Appellate Immigration  Authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by Article 8."

33. There is no doubt about the strength of the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and Mr Patel reflected in the amount of time that  they  have
    been together.  That  relationship  was  formed  and  developed  during
    several  years  of  lawful  leave  whilst  the  appellant  undertook  a
    responsible  job  in  the   healthcare   sector.    Even   though   the
    circumstances of Mr Patel's mother are not an  insurmountable  obstacle
    to the family life being continued elsewhere, her ill  health  and  the
    role that Mr Patel  plays  in  her  life  has  some  relevance  in  the
    balancing exercise.

34. The appellant has demonstrated a considerable degree of integration  in
    the United Kingdom through her studies and lawful employment and I have
    no doubt that she would be able to obtain further employment  were  she
    granted  permission  to  remain,  particularly  as   it   appears   the
    disciplinary matter against her was dropped.

35. The appellant explains that she did not seek to vary the basis  of  her
    leave to remain whilst employed based her  relationship;  she  had  two
    years remaining on her work permit when they could have  applied  after
    two years together in 2010 and she wanted the satisfaction of obtaining
    leave to remain independently. The  evidence  shows  that  the  parties
    would have met the financial criteria of the Rules  certainly  pre-July
    2012 and probably thereafter. Matters went awry for the  appellant  but
    not through any deliberate mischief on her part.  She  did  not  go  to
    ground but promptly sought to  regularise  matters  with  the  November
    application.  It appears that were she to apply from abroad  there  now
    may well be a problem meeting the financial criteria as the couple  can
    no longer rely on a joint income and Mr Patel's  income,  although  now
    higher, does not reach the criterion in the Rules.

36. The couple do not have the right to dictate where they spent their life
    together. Whilst there are no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  Mr  Patel
    travelling to the U.S., the indication that he will not do so has  been
    rationally explained.  The evidence shows that  removal  is  likely  to
    result in a prolonged separation which having regard to the strength of
    the relationship would be very distressing. I have  no  doubt  that  if
    granted leave, the appellant would be able to resume employment and  an
    income of the kind she had before.

37. The compelling factor in this case is the maturity of the  relationship
    that has flourished since 2008 and importantly has grown in  a  setting
    of extended lawful presence.  The rules do not make provision  for  the
    state of affairs such as  in  this  case.   The  reality  is  that  the
    relationship is dependant on the parties  remaining  together  in  this
    country for it to continue.  If that is made possible, there will be no
    charge on the public purse.  On the particular facts of this  case  and
    having regard to all the factors that weigh in favour of the appellant,
    I consider that the force of the private and family rights in  play  is
    sufficiently strong and compelling to  outweigh  the  public  interest.
    Accordingly I am satisfied that interference with  the  rights  of  the
    appellant and the other  parties  engaged  under  Article  8  would  be
    unjustified and disproportionate.

38. By way of summary the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside
    insofar as it relates to Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention.   I
    re-make the decision on that ground and allow the  appeal.  By  way  of
    postscript, subsequent to the hearing of this appeal I have received an
    application for an anonymity order to protect the identity  Mr  Patel's
    mother. She has not been named.



Signed        Date 16 February 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

