
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/00207/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       | Decision & Reason Promulgated   |
|On 3 July 2017                            | On 7 July 2017                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Waheed Ahmad
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the claimant: Mr C Timson, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davies  promulgated   14.11.16,   allowing   the
    claimant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    21.12.15, to refuse his  application  for  LTR  as  a  Tier  4  Student
    Migrant.  The Judge heard the appeal on 1.11.16.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    31.5.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 3.7.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. The claimant's application  was  refused  because,  allegedly,  in  his
    previous application made in August 2012 he submitted  an  ETS  English
    language certificate to the Home Office, and his sponsor  in  order  to
    obtain a CAS. ETS had identified that the test  had  been  taken  by  a
    proxy and thus the Secretary of State was satisfied that  it  had  been
    obtained fraudulently and thus refused the application under  paragraph
    322(2) of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The application was additionally refused because when the register  was
    checked on 21.12.15, the college that had  provided  the  CAS  for  the
    claimant's August  2014  application,  the  application  which  is  the
    subject of this appeal, the college  was  no  longer  listed.  He  thus
    failed to qualify for the necessary points under Appendix A.

 7. At the First-tier Tribunal  appeal  hearing,  Judge  Davies  heard  and
    accepted the claimant's account that he had never in fact submitted the
    ETS certificate as he had never been issued with one, having failed the
    test taken on 16.5.12. The  submitted  CAS  had  been  valid  when  the
    application was made.

 8. The claimant's account is that having failed the ETS test, he  went  on
    to take a further test, which he passed, and it  was  this  later  test
    that was relied on in his application.

 9. There is some confusion in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  as
    it refers to the application having  been  made  on  15.8.15,  when  it
    appears it was made on 15.8.14.

10. Judge Davies pointed out that the Home  Office  had  not  produced  the
    certificate  which  the  claimant   is   alleged   to   have   obtained
    fraudulently, which the judge considered  fatal  to  the  Secretary  of
    State's case.

11. Permission was granted on the basis that the judge misdirected  himself
    as to the applicable burden  and  standard  of  proof  at  [4]  of  the
    decision, stating that the burden was on  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    demonstrate that  the  TOEIC  certificate  from  ETS  was  fraudulently
    obtained, pursuant  to  paragraph  322(2)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Complaint is made that the judge failed to follow SM and Qadir  (ETS  -
    evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC), in  distinguishing
    the evidential and legal burdens.

12. However, even if the judge had set out that the evidential  burden  was
    on the Secretary of State, which could be discharged by the generic and
    specific evidence as to the test taken, so that the burden  shifted  to
    the claimant to demonstrate an innocent explanation, on the findings of
    the First-tier Tribunal the  evidential  burden  could  not  have  been
    discharged without producing the certificate  which  it  was  said  was
    obtained by fraud and submitted with his application.  The Home  Office
    bundle  includes  the  generic  evidence  explaining  the  process   of
    determining whether a proxy test taker had been used, together with the
    look up tool spreadsheet identifying the claimant and  linking  him  to
    the questioned test. However,  it  was  the  claimant's  case  that  he
    submitted a different test, one taken later, as the  first  test  would
    have been of no use to him, he having failed the test. It follows  that
    the Secretary of State failed to  discharge  both  the  evidential  and
    legal burdens of proof.

13. Judge Davies went on to consider that as the CAS was valid at  date  of
    application but the college was no  longer  on  the  list  of  approved
    educational sponsors by the date of the Secretary of State's  decision,
    in fairness the claimant should have been granted an opportunity of  60
    days' grace to obtain an alternative college and CAS. On that basis the
    appeal was allowed.

14. At the hearing before me, the claimant pointed  to  the  fact  that  he
    failed the ETS test taken in May 2012, but passed the  subsequent  ESOL
    University  of  Cambridge  test,  taken  on  30.6.12.  The  2012  leave
    application was made in August 2012, relying the second  test  and  not
    the first failed test.

15. It appears that the Home Office argument at the First-tier Tribunal was
    that it mattered not which test certificate was relied on for the  2012
    application, and whether or not he passed, because he used deception in
    using a proxy  to  take  the  first  test.  However,  paragraph  322(2)
    requires the false representation to be made to the Secretary of  State
    or third parties "in order to obtain documents from  the  Secretary  of
    State or a third party required in support of... a  previous  variation
    of  leave."  There  has  to  be  a  causal  link  between   the   false
    representation and the making of an application. There is no such link,
    as it was the subsequent test, taken on 30.6.12, that was used  in  the
    application made in August 2012.

16. It would make little sense for the claimant to rely on a test  that  he
    conspicuously failed, as he would not have been able to  obtain  a  CAS
    and his application could not have succeeded.  It  seems  pretty  clear
    that whatever the truth relating to the first test it was not relied on
    and thus paragraph 322(2) cannot be  made  out.  In  any  event,  Judge
    Davies accepted that the appellant had not used a proxy test  taker  in
    the earlier ETS English language test and found that  the  Home  Office
    failed to produce the certificate they claim he obtained  fraudulently,
    failing to discharge the  burden  of  proof.  However  the  burden  and
    standard of proof is addressed, on the facts of this case as  found  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, the basis for refusal of the  application  was
    not and cannot be made out.

17. There is one caveat that would have required some further evidence from
    the Home Office to establish. That is that in the Home  Office  bundle,
    the CAS assigned to the  claimant  on  7.8.12  refers  to  evidence  of
    English language qualification having been demonstrated by an ETS  test
    with scores that appear to correspond to the impugned  and  invalidated
    ETS test. The claimant's case was and is that he  never  submitted  the
    ETS test taken in May 2012, but  rather  the  later  test  referred  to
    above. However, as far as I can see, the CAS submitted  cites  the  ETS
    test. The Tribunal was not shown an  ETS  test  certificate  showing  a
    failed score. This was not addressed in the submissions before me,  and
    at the First-tier Tribunal the judge accepted  the  claimant's  account
    that he did  not  submit  that  earlier  test.  On  the  basis  of  the
    documentation, that claim may  be  doubted,  but  not  on  the  limited
    evidence before the Tribunal,  in  which  the  Home  Office  failed  to
    produce the  certificate.  However,  it  may  be  a  matter  which  the
    Secretary of State will pursue in further investigation.





Conclusions:

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision. The appeal remains allowed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        31 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The claimant's appeal remains allowed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



