
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00176/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th July 2016                         |On 25th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          Mr MUHAMMAD HAROON YOUNAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge I Malcolm, promulgated on 19th November 2015, following a hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 13th November 2015.  In the determination, the judge
    dismissed the  appeal  of  Muhammad  Haroon  Younas,  who  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  11th
    June 1988 and is 28 years of age.  He appealed against the decision  of
    the Respondent dated 2nd February 2015, refusing  his  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that although the appeal was arranged for 28th
    September 2015, he submitted a letter on  25th  September  enclosing  a
    copy letter from his GP requesting an adjournment to 14th October 2015,
    as he was suffering from  a  back  injury,  but  this  adjournment  was
    refused and it was communicated to him, but the Appellant still did not
    attend on 28th September 2015.  Second, the Appellant detailed that  he
    did not complete his course during his interview and had  not  obtained
    any qualifications but is now doing a different course which he intends
    to complete "it being his intention to obtain some diploma in  the  UK"
    (paragraph 11).  The Appellant confirmed that he will  be  studying  at
    Docklands Academy, and that the course had four semesters, and that  he
    had started two semesters.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge, who did not have the benefit  of  having  the  Appellant  in
    attendance, but also did not have the benefit of having the  Respondent
    in attendance, determined the appeal "on the papers" and held that  the
    Appellant had been "unable to give clear answers as to the job which he
    would be able to get with the  qualifications  which  he  is  studying"
    (paragraph 19).  But more importantly when  asked,  about  whether  the
    course was still continuing, his answer was, "still  it  is  continuing
    because you just deposit the fees and go and give the paper" (paragraph
    21).  The judge observed that, "the Appellant's application was refused
    as the Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant  was  a  genuine
    student" (paragraph 22).  This was a  case  where  "there  was  no  CAS
    certificate with the papers" (paragraph 24)  and  this  being  so,  the
    judge could not dispute the Respondent's decision to  award  no  points
    for Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies.   The  Appellant  had  been
    given the opportunity to supply further evidence but had failed  to  do
    so (paragraph 26).  The failure of the  Appellant  to  provide  further
    documentation was fatal to his appeal (paragraph 27).  The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge misdirected himself  at
    paragraph  9  of  the  determination  by  placing  reliance  upon   the
    Respondent's "erroneous decision" not to award the Appellant any points
    for a valid CAS because this was not the issue, given that the  refusal
    was by reference to paragraph 245ZX(o) of the Immigration Rules.

 6. On 17th June 2016, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    the failure to make  a  finding  in  relation  to  the  core  issue  of
    paragraph 245ZX(o) at paragraph 22 may be an error although, "any error
    may be found not to be material".

Submissions

 7. At the  hearing  before  me  on  15th  July  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented,  and  indicated  that  he  did  not   have   any   legal
    representation, and was content to  represent  himself.   He  submitted
    that at the time of the hearing he did not send the bundle of documents
    as he did not have a CAS but he has now fulfilled all the requirements.
     He was asked to explain this further but was unable to do so.

 8. For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that he would rely upon his Rule 24
    response dated 7th July 2016.  This demonstrated that Judge Malcolm had
    indeed made findings in relation to the core  issue  of  refusal  under
    paragraph 245ZX(o) by taking a cumulative approach to the findings as a
    whole in the determination.  Mr Whitwell submitted that the  judge  had
    made his reasons clear at paragraphs 21 and 22 for why the decision  of
    the Respondent was correct.  This was an open and shut case.

 9. For his part, Mr Younas submitted that he could not understand what was
    said at paragraphs 21 and 22.  The relevant paragraphs  were  drawn  to
    his attention by Mr Whitwell who helpfully undertook to do so, but  the
    Appellant said that he could now satisfy the Rules.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

11. First, there is a letter  from  UK  Visas  and  Immigration  dated  5th
    December 2014 addressed to  the  Appellant  in  person  at  his  Ilford
    address.  This makes specific reference to paragraph 245ZX(o) and  sets
    out the reasons for why it was concluded that the Appellant was  not  a
    genuine student.  At question 7 of the  interview,  the  Appellant  was
    asked, "Why have you chosen to study in the UK?"  and  he  had  replied
    that at the time when he was doing his ACCA, "My  father  said  if  you
    complete some paper I will send you in UK so I will try my best to pass
    the paper  ...".   This  answer  brought  into  doubt  the  Appellant's
    intention to study as he was not clear about the reason for doing so.

12. Second, at question 19 he was asked, "Why  have  you  chosen  this  new
    course at this level?" and the Appellant simply said,

         "Uh this one in the UK?  Uh, I have chosen this one course  because
         it is also related to ACCA you  know,  accounting  and  finance  so
         that's why I will choose this one, it is more easy for me because I
         already study this one course so when I choose this one it is quite
         easy for me to study this one".

13. He was asked at question 21 how this course  related  to  his  previous
    course and he had said that it related to cost accounting and the  ACCA
    quality management.  Given that in both his answers the  Appellant  had
    said that the course related to accounting and finance, he could not be
    a genuine student because the Sponsor's website demonstrated that  none
    of the modules were accounting related.

14.  Third,  the  course  was  mainly  teaching  business  management   and
    leadership.  When the Appellant was asked at question 20  if  he  could
    provide an overview of the current course and how  many  modules  there
    were, he had said, "I think it has four semester" but the Appellant had
    failed to give sufficient explanation of the course's contents at  all.
    It was when considering these matters that the judge  stated  that  the
    Appellant was not a "genuine student" (paragraph 22).  The judge did so
    after himself noting (at paragraph 21) that the Appellant had said that
    the course was continuing because all one had to do was to "deposit the
    fees and go and give the paper".

15. What the judge might possibly have  done,  in  order  to  make  matters
    absolutely clear was to have  made  his  own  clear  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not a genuine student, but this was not a material  error
    of law that would have led to a different  decision  being  made.   The
    judge was correct (at paragraph 28) to note that the  burden  of  proof
    lies with the Appellant.  The grounds simply amount to  a  disagreement
    with the adverse outcome of the appeal without identifying any arguable
    error of law.  As the grant of permission noted, if the  letter  relied
    upon by the judge, namely the Home Office  letter  of  7th  July  2016,
    demonstrated that rational reasons existed for the  conclusion  arrived
    at, then, "any error may be found not to be material".  I find this  to
    be the case here.

Notice of Decision

16. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

17.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd July 2016


