








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00456/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23 September 2014                         |On: 14 October 2014          |
|Prepared: 6 October 2014                      |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                             Mrs Sandhya Maulik
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Miss Z Ahmed, counsel (instructed by ICS Legal)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of India, born on 12th January  1941.  She
      arrived in the UK on 20th June 2012 on a visit visa valid  until  20th
      December 2012. On 6th December 2012, she applied for leave  to  remain
      indefinitely outside the immigration rules on the basis of her  family
      and private life in the UK.


   2. She was not able to meet the rules under paragraph 276ADE.


   3. The respondent  also  considered  her  application  on  the  basis  of
      exceptional circumstances which, consistent with her right to  respect
      for private and family life within  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention, might warrant consideration by the respondent of  a  grant
      of leave to remain in the UK outside the requirements  of  the  rules.
      It was decided that  they  did  not.  The  threshold  for  exceptional
      circumstances is high and her claims did not meet that threshold.


   4. Her appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge  K.  St.  J.  Wiseman  was
      dismissed both under the rules and on Article 8 grounds.


   5. The background circumstances are that the appellant  was  a  permanent
      resident of Kolkata in India. Her sponsor was her  son.  He  has  been
      resident here since 2009 for processional reasons.


   6. He contended that his mother had 'no close ties to take care  of  her'
      or to provide her with emotional support  in  India  and  was  largely
      dependent on  him  for  financial  support  to  meet  her  living  and
      financial expenses. She broke her leg in  2010  and  was  consequently
      hospitalised, requiring special treatment to regain mobility. She  has
      not recovered fully and requires assistance for travelling and  moving
      about. He referred to other ailments such  as  chronic  arthritis  and
      high blood pressure.


   7. In May 2012 she was granted a visit visa to see him and his wife.  She
      was not in a position to make the trip on her own, so he travelled  to
      India to accompany her here.


   8. She was scheduled to travel back to India on 4th  December  2012  with
      her sponsor son. However, on 21st November 2012 their four  month  old
      child, Maimik, had a scalding injury.  This  required  hospitalisation
      and "now requires constant medical attention" and frequent  visits  to
      hospital.  His  treatment  is  likely  to  take  several  months   and
      accordingly it has not been possible for her son to accompany  her  to
      India. She cannot make the trip alone.


   9. There is no other relative in the UK who can assist her with this. The
      injury to her grandchild caused her even more emotional distress.


  10. The respondent noted that the appellant had not made an application as
      an adult dependant relative and as such could not be considered  under
      the rules. In any event, such an application would fail on  the  basis
      that entry clearance as an adult dependant  relative  is  a  mandatory
      requirement.  The  respondent  thus  contended  that  the   particular
      circumstances did not constitute exceptional circumstances  warranting
      consideration outside of the rules.


  11. Judge Wiseman noted [41] that the case put forward on  behalf  of  the
      appellant had shifted. The application form itself requested temporary
      leave as well as there being a reference to  the  rules  on  dependent
      relatives "and was  almost  implying  that  the  appellant  should  be
      allowed to stay here for a further  period  of  time  because  it  was
      difficult for the sponsor to  accompany  her  back  to  India  in  the
      immediate aftermath of the accident to his son."


  12. It seemed to the Judge that as time has gone on, everyone's  view  has
      changed to a position where it  is  now  said  that  it  is  virtually
      impossible for the appellant to leave the UK at all, and both she  and
      her family wanted to be able to live the rest of their lives together.


  13. He had regard to the substantial changes in the  rules  together  with
      the mandatory requirements in respect of specified  evidence  referred
      to in Appendix FM-SE  (although  he  did  not  identify  the  specific
      paragraphs, it is evident  that  he  was  referring  to  the  evidence
      required in respect of adult dependant relatives set out at paragraphs
      33-37. I was informed by  the  representatives  that  these  were  the
      paragraphs in force at the time of  the  appellant's  application  and
      decision. T


  14. The Judge had  particular  regard  to  the  evidence  required  to  be
      produced, namely that the appellant would be  unable,  even  with  the
      practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK, to  obtain  the
      required level of care in India where she  is  living.  That  evidence
      should be produced from a central or local health authority;  a  local
      authority; or a doctor or other health professional [30].


  15. He found that compliance with  many  of  these  requirements,  and  in
      particular  evidence  from  India  itself  in  this  case,  would   be
      completely bypassed if appellants are permitted to travel to the UK on
      a visit visa and then simply "take root here". If appellants  were  in
      all but the most exceptional circumstances permitted to remain in  the
      UK the new rules, including the "will of  Parliament"  might  just  as
      well have never been enacted [40].


  16. He found that without the appellant making the application from abroad
      with the appropriate supporting evidence in accordance with the  rule,
      it would be impossible to say whether she  would  meet  the  necessary
      requirements or not. What is required is an assessment  of  the  whole
      position from the appropriate doctor in  the  home  country,  and  not
      simply the recital from a doctor in the UK for what he now  sees  here
      "when there is no doubt,  inevitably  (sic)  pressure  for  supportive
      comment."


  17. He accordingly found that Chikwamba was "entirely inappropriate." This
      was not a question of going back just to  seek  entry  clearance.  The
      return would be to see whether the appellant did or did  not  actually
      qualify under the new rules "and  I  am  far  from  certain  that  she
      would."


  18. The Judge went on to state that even looking at the matter outside the
      rules, the requirement for the appellant to return home to make an out
      of  country  application  in  accordance  with  the  rules  is  wholly
      proportionate under Article 8(2) [45].  The  immediate  shock  of  the
      accident to the sponsor's son has passed and the return journey can be
      made under the same "difficulties" as the original  trip  to  the  UK.
      There is suitable finance within the family for the  position  of  the
      appellant to be stabilised both in terms of medical care and  personal
      care. If the requirements of the  rules  can  be  met,  she  would  be
      permitted to return in due course.


  19. This he found would not be a pointless  exercise.  It  is  effectively
      compliant with the rules governing the right to settle in  the  UK  as
      well as meeting the current requirements of immigration control. It is
      very much in the best interests of  others  entitled  to  access  hard
      pressed NHS facilities in the UK that it should not  be  possible  for
      individuals "to beat the system" by circumventing the  rules  entirely
      simply by bringing an elderly relative to the country  and  trying  to
      take the matter on from here "without them ever going home" [45].


  20. On 11th August 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Renton granted the appellant
      permission to appeal. Following the decision in MM v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
      Civ 985, it was arguable that the approach  provided  by  the  Gulshan
      test might amount to an error of law. The other grounds could also  be
      argued.


  21. Miss Ahmed referred  to  the  written  argument  in  response  to  the
      respondent's Rule 24 notice. The Judge failed to address the case  law
      referred to in Shahzad (Article 8:  Legitimate  aim)  Pakistan  [2014]
      UKUT 85 (IAC). She submitted that whilst the  respondent's  contention
      regarding the maintenance of effective immigration control was not  as
      such a legitimate aim under Article 8(2) of the ECHR, it can  normally
      be assumed to be either an aspect of "prevention of disorder of crime"
      or an aspect of "the economic well being of the country" or both.


  22. She submitted that when 'that authority' is applied to the appellant's
      case, it is evident that she had not  committed  any  crime;  she  has
      lived here as a law abiding citizen; she enjoyed family life with  her
      son and his family and "was unable to relocate."


  23. The Judge had not provided  any  reasoning  as  to  how  it  would  be
      proportionate for her to be removed from the UK.


  24. She submitted  that  this  contradicted  what  the  Judge  claimed  at
      paragraph 42 of the determination, namely that the appellant could not
      succeed under the dependant  relative  rules  under  Appendix  FM  yet
      claimed at paragraph 45 that it would  be  proportionate  for  her  to
      leave the UK and apply for entry clearance.


  25. She also submitted that the Judge did not take into consideration  the
      appellant's age and medical documents. They had  been  presented  with
      evidence that she had no close relatives to provide her with care  and
      support. She contended that the  rules  did  not  require  her  to  be
      assessed by a medical practitioner in her home country.  Nor  did  the
      Judge consider  the  strong  family  ties  that  existed  between  the
      appellant and her son. There was "clear emotional dependency."


  26.  The  Judge  did  not  use  the  guidance  in   Huang   in   assessing
      proportionality.  There  is  no  legal  test  of  "truly   exceptional
      circumstances".


  27. She submitted that the immigration rules themselves always require  an
      assessment of proportionality in accordance  with  Article  8  of  the
      Human  Rights  Convention  and  in  accordance  with  the   Strasbourg
      jurisprudence. The Judge here  provided  no  careful  reasoning,  even
      though the appellant suffers from serious medical conditions.  She  is
      73 years old and requires personal care from her sponsor in the UK.


  28. The Judge  did  not  consider  whether  the  appellant's  removal  was
      proportionate and erred in his findings at paragraphs 44 and 45.


  29. The only guidance which was available  with  regard  to  Appendix  FM,
      family life (as a partner or parent) and private life: ten year route,
      was  that  of  July  2014.   In  accordance  with  that,   exceptional
      circumstances  do  not  mean  unusual  or  unique  circumstances.  For
      example, a case is not exceptional just because the criteria  set  out
      in EX.1 of Appendix FM have been missed by a small  margin.  The  word
      "exceptional" means circumstances in which  refusal  would  result  in
      unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual  or  their  family
      such that refusal of the application would not be proportionate  under
      Article 8.


  30. Cases that raise exceptional circumstances that  warrant  a  grant  of
      leave outside the rules are likely to be rare. In determining  whether
      there are exceptional circumstances, the decision maker must  consider
      all relevant factors raised by the applicant and  weigh  them  against
      the public interest under Article 8.


  31. She submitted that 'none of  these  factors'  was  considered  by  the
      respondent, nor by the Judge.  It was a wrong approach by the Judge to
      state that there  are  other  people  in  the  same  position  as  the
      appellant. This appeal was about this appellant and not the population
      of India.


  32. Ms Ahmed conceded that the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
      rules. She referred to the decision in MM (Lebanon) and others v  SSHD
      [2-14] EWCA Civ 985 and in particular to paragraphs 133 to 135.


  33. In summary, she submitted that the  Judge  failed  to  provide  proper
      reasoning on the removal of the appellant in line with  Article  8  of
      the Human Rights Convention and failed to consider the appeal  in  the
      context of a family group.


  34. On behalf of the respondent, Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  it  was  not
      simply a single condition that prevented the  appellant  from  meeting
      the rules. The application was required to be made from  abroad.  This
      constitutes a strong declaration in the public interest. It  has  been
      introduced in order to impose a prohibition on switching.


  35. Appendix FM changed the landscape from paragraph 317 of the  rules  to
      the current rules.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant's  submissions
      failed to have regard or reference to Appendix FM-SE and in particular
      Rules 33-37. That sets out clearly  what  evidence  is  required  from
      abroad.


  36. Paragraph 33 to 37 of Appendix FM-SE sets out the evidence required in
      respect  of  applications  involving  adult  dependant  relatives.  It
      stipulates clearly the evidence required from  abroad.   Paragraph  34
      stipulates evidence required in a case  where  as  a  result  of  age,
      illness or disability, the applicant requires long term personal care.




  37. The First-tier Tribunal Judge properly had regard to those  provisions
      at paragraph 42 of the determination. There had been  no  evidence  in
      line with Appendix FM-SE.


  38. Mr Jarvis submitted that paragraph 3 of the grounds  'is  wrong'.  The
      assertion made is that the rules in Appendix FM  do  not  require  the
      applicant to be  assessed  by  a  medical  practitioner  in  her  home
      country. However, it is plain from  the  rules  that  there  are  such
      requirements.


  39. The Court of  Appeal  has  accepted  that  exceptionality  amounts  to
      circumstances in which refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
      consequences for the applicant or her family, such that it  would  not
      be proportionate under Article 8.


  40. He submitted that the Judge did consider the  matter  outside  of  the
      rules, finding that the requirement for her to return to make  an  out
      of country application was proportionate. He referred to the Court  of
      Appeal decision in Haleemudeen v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558  and  in
      particular paragraphs 44-47 where Lord  Justice  Beatson  stated  [47]
      that the passages  from  the  judgments  in  cases  of  Nagre  and  MF
      (Nigeria) appear to give the rules greater weight  than  as  merely  a
      starting point for the consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an
      interference with Article 8 rights. He stated that he did not consider
      that it is necessary to use the term "exceptional" or "compelling"  to
      describe the circumstances, and it would suffice if that can  be  said
      to be the substance of the Tribunal's  decision.  In  that  case,  the
      First-tier Tribunal gave no explanation of why that was so.


  41. With regard to the application of the Home Office  policy,  there  was
      nothing to show that the application of that policy had been unlawful.




  42. Mr Jarvis had regard to the contention that she had not committed  any
      crime and has lived as a law abiding citizen in the UK enjoying family
      life with her son and his family. It was asserted that  these  factors
      had not been properly assessed by the Judge  in  relation  to  how  it
      would be proportionate for her removal from the UK.


  43. Mr Jarvis submitted that  those  claims  by  the  appellant  were  not
      relevant. He relied on Nasim and Others (Article  8)  Pakistan  [2014]
      UKUT 25 (IAC) and in particular paragraph 27 where the  Tribunal  held
      that the only significance of not having criminal convictions and  not
      having relied on public funds  is  to  preclude  the  respondent  from
      pointing to any public interest in respect of the appellant's  removal
      over and above the basic importance of maintaining a firm and coherent
      system of immigration control.


  44. He submitted that from the reasoning of Judge  Wiseman,  it  is  clear
      that he was  referring  at  paragraph  45  to  the  interests  of  the
      respondent in maintaining a firm and coherent  system  of  immigration
      control.


  45. With regard to MM, supra, the  Tribunal  did  not  hear  arguments  on
      whether  the  new  MIR  together  with  the  Guidance  constituted   a
      "comprehensive code" but whether or not they do, makes  no  difference
      on an analysis of the Master of the Rolls in  MF  (Nigeria).  This  is
      because, as he says (at [45]) in any event, it would be  necessary  to
      apply  a  "proportionality  test"  with  regard  to  the  "exceptional
      circumstances" guidance in order to be compatible with the  Convention
      and in compliance with Huang at [20].


  46. Mr Jarvis submitted that the  Judge  paid  particular  regard  to  the
      evidence available, including the evidence from the doctor in the  UK.
      He had regard at paragraph 31 to the  significant  medical  assistance
      required for the appellant were she  to  be  required  to  have  heart
      surgery or anything similar. That would  be  extremely  expensive  and
      there was no indication given to the Judge that the  associated  costs
      could be met if the appellant  were  to  require  it  in  due  course.
      Accordingly, Mr Jarvis submitted that it was not entirely evident that
      reliance would not be had on public funds.


  47. Finally, he submitted that ground 5 was wrong insofar  as  it  submits
      that the Judge provided  no  careful  reasoning  with  regard  to  the
      appellant suffering from a serious medical condition.


     Assessment


  48. The parties  both  agreed  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
      accurately and properly set out the development of the law as referred
      to from paragraphs 35-40 of the determination.


  49. He has also had regard to the submissions on behalf of  the  appellant
      during the hearing as to the scope  and  consideration  of  Article  8
      cases outside Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE.


  50. It had been conceded at the hearing [28] that the appellant could  not
      meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE but the contention was  that
      the case had to be looked  at  outside  the  rules  on  the  basis  of
      exceptional circumstances, particularly in  relation  to  her  present
      state of health. Her medical problems were set out and  identified  at
      paragraph 28. It was also accepted by the appellant that if removed to
      India, adequate treatment might be available, however the issues would
      be around accessibility and the fact  that  she  had  no  other  close
      relatives to take her to the doctor or hospital. Hired help was not an
      alternative.


  51. The Judge  had  proper  regard  to  the  current  regime  relating  to
      applications made by a dependant parent. The evidence required  to  be
      produced is set out in Appendix FM-SE (paragraphs 34 onwards). He also
      had regard to the fact that there had been  no  evidence  produced  in
      line with FM-SE [42]. The contention that this is  not  a  requirement
      under the rules is incorrect.


  52. He found after considering the evidence as a whole that there were not
      exceptional circumstances in this case.


  53. In the grounds of appeal, it  is  asserted  that  the  Judge  did  not
      properly identify the legitimate interests of the respondent. However,
      he found [45] that it would not be a pointless exercise to require the
      appellant to apply from  abroad.  It  is  effectively  compliant  with
      immigration rules as well  as  meeting  the  current  requirements  of
      immigration control. It is very much in the best interests  of  others
      entitled to access hard pressed NHS facilities in the country that the
      rules should not be "circumvented" in a case such as this.


  54. The fact that she had not committed any crime and has lived as  a  law
      abiding citizen in the UK enjoying family life with her  son  and  his
      family  are  not  matters  relevant   to   the   assessment   of   the
      proportionality of her removal from the UK.


  55. Although as submitted, Judge Wiseman did not set out the step by  step
      approach required in Razgar, and although his consideration might have
      been more detailed, he has nevertheless balanced the competing factors
      in the proportionality assessment.  That included the  fact  that  the
      accident suffered by her grandson had long passed. A  return  journey,
      as originally contemplated, could thus be made on the  same  basis  as
      the original trip to the UK. He had regard to the fact that  there  is
      suitable finance in the family for the position of the appellant to be
      stabilised both in terms of medical and personal care.


  56. He also  had  regard  to  the  original  application  which  requested
      temporary leave implying that the appellant should be allowed to  stay
      here for a further period as it was difficult for her son to accompany
      her back to India in the aftermath of her grandson's accident.


  57. Finally, the Judge noted the  reliance  on  Chikwamba  and  found  for
      reasons given [43] that it was  inappropriate  in  the  circumstances;
      there has been no challenge to that finding.


  58. He also stated that it would  not  simply  be  an  empty,  formalistic
      exercise to require her to apply from abroad, as it was  by  no  means
      certain that the requirements would be met [43].  Further,  the  Judge
      also found that there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  maintaining  the
      appellant on an indefinite basis,  save  with  regard  to  significant
      medical assistance which may be  required  for  her,  which  would  be
      extremely expensive. There had been no indication given that the costs
      of that kind could be met if she were to require it in the due passage
      of time [31].


  59. Although as contended, the Judge might have adopted  a  more  detailed
      and structured approach, he has in fact given sustainable reasons  for
      his findings  when  dismissing  the  appeal  under  Article  8.  Those
      findings were available to him on the basis of the evidence  produced.




     Decision


     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
any material  error of law and shall accordingly stand.


          No anonymity direction made.




                               Signed                     Date 6/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


