

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00604/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 20 January 2017                            |On 23 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                RESHMA AFROZE

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The SSHD appeals against a determination by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    promulgated on 14 September 2016, allowing an appeal by  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh on Article 8 grounds "to a limited extent".

 2. The rest of this determination refers to parties as they  were  in  the
    FtT.

 3. The position of the appellant's husband (also a citizen of  Bangladesh)
    at the time of the hearing in the FtT was  that  he  had  no  leave  to
    remain in the UK.  He was subject to a decision relating  to  deception
    (or alleged deception) in an ETS test, which carried a right of  appeal
    exercisable only from outside the UK.  He had not left the UK.  He  had
    made an application for judicial review to the Upper Tribunal.  On  the
    basis of  the  case  law  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  the  UT  refused
    permission.  The UT further  held  that  the  application  was  totally
    without merit (and so could not be renewed  orally).   The  appellant's
    husband applied to the UT for permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal, which was refused.  He applied  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  for
    permission to appeal, and for an extension of time within which to make
    such an  application,  which  remained  outstanding.   (Representatives
    agreed that the situation remained the same on 20 January 2017.)

 4. The FtT held as follows:

      [28] ... I am satisfied that the appeal should be allowed albeit on  a
      limited basis.

      [29] ... the proper course would be for the [appellant's  husband]  to
      be granted leave  to  remain  pending  determination  of  his  current
      proceedings before the Court of Appeal. It would be for the respondent
      to determine what period of leave was appropriate ...

      [30] I reached this view because it did seem to me that currently  the
      appellant's husband has a right to remain in the UK.  He  has  pending
      proceedings before  the  Court  of  Appeal  which  may  be  determined
      relatively soon. In my view, it would not be proportionate to  require
      the appellant to leave the UK pending determination of that claim.

      [31] She continues to suffer from complications arising from a  recent
      operation. She is the mother of a very young  child  ...  They  are  a
      close couple and I was entirely persuaded that the appellant's husband
      offers  her  clear  care  and  support...  and  ...  is  in  the  main
      responsible for running the household and  caring  for  his  wife  and
      infant child.

      [32] It simply did not appear to me to be fair or right to require her
      to return to Bangladesh at this  time,  not  least  because  what  was
      sought ... was a limited grant of leave to remain pending the  outcome
      of other proceedings.

      [33] In reaching this view I also had regard to the best interests  of
      the infant child. Those interests are for the child to  be  with  both
      parents ...

      [34] The public interest does not require removal at  this  time.  The
      husband of the appellant has had his leave extended by virtue  of  his
      own appeal. There is no clear interest in removal at this  time  given
      this.

      [35] Accordingly I allow the appeal on human rights grounds...

      [36] It will be for the respondent to determine the  period  of  leave
      ... No doubt that will be linked to the currency  of  the  proceedings
      before the Court of Appeal.

 5. The proceedings taken by the appellant's husband are not  of  a  nature
    which gives him any right to remain in the UK. Mr Ndubuisi, although he
    made no concession, was unable  to  summons  up  any  argument  to  the
    contrary.

 6. The judge was handicapped by  the  absence  of  representation  of  the
    respondent, and there may have been in the background  a  misconception
    arising from those cases where leave is  extended  during  a  statutory
    appeal.  However, the grounds and submissions for the  respondent  show
    that the judge unfortunately fell into clear error,  in  particular  at
    paragraphs 30 and 34.  The misconception that the  appellant's  husband
    had a right to remain in the UK was the crux of his decision.

 7. Mr Matthews drew attention to the respondent's Enforcement Instructions
    and Guidance, chapter 60, to the effect that where it has been  decided
    that permission to apply for judicial review is refused  and  that  the
    application is totally without merit or that renewal is not to be a bar
    to removal, then removal may proceed.  Removal is barred only where  an
    applicant obtains an injunction or interdict.  He also cited  the  case
    law which led the respondent to frame that policy.

 8. The respondent's policy was not referred to in the FtT,  although  both
    parties were under a duty to draw attention to it.  In any  event,  the
    error of law  is  plain,  without  reference  to  the  policy  and  its
    underpinnings.

 9. The grounds demonstrate another error in the  decision,  which  is  the
    absence of reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act, either explicitly
    or implicitly.  As Mr Matthews submitted, the section sets out  "public
    interest considerations applicable  in  all  cases".   They  cannot  be
    overlooked because a tribunal thinks that  only  short  term  leave  is
    justified.

10. Mr Ndubuisi sought to justify the decision by  reference  to  the  fact
    that the respondent has not  taken  any  active  steps  to  remove  the
    appellant's husband,  but  that  is  irrelevant,  and  does  not  imply
    approval of his continued presence in the UK.

11. Either of the two errors in the FtT's decision would require it  to  be
    set aside.

12. This is, as Mr Matthews submitted, a case which  on  proper  inspection
    has only one answer. The appellant, taking away the misconception  that
    her husband has even a short term  right  to  remain,  has  established
    nothing by which it might be found disproportionate to expect her,  her
    husband and their young child to remove from the UK to Bangladesh.

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

14. The decision substituted is that the appeal, as originally  brought  to
    the FtT, is dismissed.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



            [pic]


            20 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




