
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00429/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 August 2013                               |On 5 September 2013        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              MS FUNMILOLA AMAO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, instructed by Ajo Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born 2 November 1980.  She first
    entered the United Kingdom on 8 June 2007 with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    student, such leave being  conferred  until  20  August  2010.   On  25
    November 2010 the appellant was granted leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant until 25  November  2012.
    She sought to further extend her leave, this time as a Tier 2 (General)
    Migrant, in an application of the 9 November 2012. On the  13  December
    2012 the Respondent refused this application and,  at  the  same  time,
    made a decision to remove the appellant pursuant to Section 47  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  appellant  appealed
    these decisions to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. By way of a determination promulgated on 22 March  2013  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Heynes allowed the appellant's appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to remove her.  The  respondent  has  not
    sought to challenge this conclusion, which in  any  event  is  entirely
    consistent with the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Ahmadi  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 512.

 3. Judge Heynes dismissed the appeal brought by the appellant against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse to vary her leave;  giving  the
    following reasons for doing so:

         "7.  The appellant accepts that she did not have a  certificate  of
             sponsorship.  She claims that, having been a Tier  1  Migrant,
             she did not need to produce one.  The Immigration Rules do not
             provide for such an exception.  Paragraph 79D [of  Appendix  A
             to the Rules] states that no  points  for  appropriate  salary
             will be awarded if no certificate has been  provided.   I  can
             only conclude that  the  appellant  was  correctly  scored  in
             relation to Appendix A.

         8.   The appellant accepted that the bank statements that  she  had
             provided were three days short  of  the  requisite  period;  a
             matter that she had subsequently rectified.  However,  whether
             or not the respondent ought to have exercised  the  evidential
             flexibility policy is neither here nor there  given  that  the
             application could not succeed for want  of  a  certificate  of
             sponsorship.

         9.   In view of the chronology, a decision to remove the  appellant
             under s.47 was unlawful. Since the only valid decision is  the
             refusal to grant further leave to remain, human rights  issues
             do not arise."

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    following grounds:

       (i)    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  failing  to  consider
           Article 8 ECHR;

       (ii)   the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing  to  make  any
           "helpful  directions  to  remedy  the  defect/error   which   he
           identified";

       (iii)  the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  failing  to  conclude
           that the UKBA had unlawfully  failed  to  apply  its  evidential
           flexibility policy.

 5. By way of a decision of 2 July 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal but limited such grant to the  first
    of the aforementioned grounds.

 6. Thus the appeal came before us.

Error of Law

 7. At the outset of the hearing Mr McVeety conceded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision contained an error on a point of law,  in  that  it
    failed to consider whether the Secretary of State's  decision  breached
    the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.  He further accepted  that  such
    error ought to lead to the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    being set aside.  We  find  such  concessions  to  have  been  entirely
    appropriate and need say no more in this regard other than to cite  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA  Civ  1402,
    which identifies that Tribunal does  have  jurisdiction  to  deal  with
    human rights issues on an appeal against a decision to refuse  to  vary
    leave, irrespective of whether a decision to remove has been made.

 8. Consequently, for this reason, we set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal. We informed the parties of this decision at the  hearing
    and indicated our intention to re-make the decision  ourselves.  Whilst
    Mr Nicholson expressed surprise that the appeal was not to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal, he did not seek to persuade us to take that
    course.

Re-making of Decision on Appeal

 9. We directed that the decision be re-made  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds
    alone.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision  made  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules has not been the subject of successful  challenge  to
    this Tribunal and remains standing. Neither party sought to submit that
    such a course was not appropriate.

Evidence

10. We have before us a bundle produced by the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department dated 6 February 2013, which includes within it,  inter
    alia, a copy of  the  application  form  completed  by  the  appellant,
    extracts from the appellant's  passport  as  well  as  copies  of  bank
    statements provided by the appellant with her Tier 2  application.   We
    also have before us a bundle from the  appellant,  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal under cover of a letter of  13  August  2013,  running  to  59
    pages. This bundle is indexed  and  we  do  not  therefore  repeat  its
    contents herein.

11. We observed at the hearing that we were unable to read pages 7A  and  8
    of the appellant's bundle, due to the  poor  quality  of  the  copying.
    These are each  detailed  in  index  to  the  bundle  as  "letter  from
    appellant's nieces". Mr Nicholson indicated that his  copies  of  these
    documents were also unreadable; nevertheless, he did not invite  us  to
    adjourn the appeal to obtain better copies of these documents,  neither
    did he seek to submit that we should receive  better  copies  of  these
    documents after the hearing.

12. The appellant was called to give oral evidence to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In  examination-in-chief  she  adopted  the  contents  of  her  witness
    statements dated 4 March 2013 and 10 August 2013.

13. In  the  earlier  of  these  statements  the  appellant  sets  out  her
    immigration history in the United Kingdom and provides reason as to why
    the Secretary of State's decision of 13 December 2012 made in  relation
    to the Immigration  Rules  was  wrong  in  law.   We  pause  to  remind
    ourselves that this latter matter was resolved against the appellant by
    the First-tier Tribunal and has not  been  the  subject  of  successful
    challenge before us.

14. The appellant continues by asserting that she is currently a healthcare
    worker in the  United  Kingdom  and  that  her  employment  is  on  the
    occupation  shortage  list  compiled  by  the  Home  Office.   She  has
    developed a therapeutic relationship with the service users, which  has
    enabled her to gain their trust and respect.   She  also  earns  up  to
    �20,000 per annum from Kingfisher Investments Limited, is the treasurer
    for a charitable  organisation  and  assists  in  the  organisation  of
    community initiative programmes that help improve the local  community.
    The appellant finally states that she has built strong  ties  with  her
    nieces in the United Kingdom, her house being "their second home  where
    they spend the weekend".

15. In her most recent statement the appellant observes that her sister has
    recently given birth, so that she [the appellant] now has three  nieces
    in the United Kingdom.  Her sister is a mental  health  nurse  and  her
    brother-in-law is  a  dentist.   They  both  have  extremely  demanding
    occupations and consequently her nieces spend a lot of time with her on
    her free days and in the evenings.  She has  developed  a  strong  bond
    with her nieces. She takes them to school on occasion and also  to  the
    doctors, friends' houses, parties and shopping.  She attends church  on
    Sundays and takes her nieces with her. She cannot imagine life  without
    her nieces and she misses them when she is not with them.   She  speaks
    regularly to them on the telephone.  She, her sister and her brother-in-
    law mutually depend on each other for moral and emotional  support,  as
    well as spiritual guidance.

16. In her oral evidence  the  appellant  further  confirmed  that  she  is
    currently a director of Kingfisher Investments Limited,  having  joined
    the organisation on 31 January 2011. In relation to  her  nieces,  they
    telephone her "approximately five times per day".

17. Under cross-examination the appellant stated that  her  mother,  father
    and sister still live in Nigeria, that she is not in a relationship  in
    the United Kingdom and that she no longer lives with her sister in  the
    United Kingdom having moved into her own accommodation  in  2011,  such
    accommodation being approximately a ten  minute  drive  away  from  her
    sister's house.  When she originally arrived in the United  Kingdom  it
    was her intention to return  to  Nigeria.   She  became  aware  of  her
    sister's presence in the United Kingdom in early 2008, after her sister
    made contact with her.  She does not wish to return to Nigeria  because
    she has been in the United Kingdom for six years, has a good job  here,
    and she takes good care of her nieces.  Her nieces have no other family
    members from Nigeria living in the United Kingdom.

18. Ms Odubanjo was then called to give oral evidence, adopting when  doing
    so the contents of a letter of the 12 August 2013 drawn  in  her  name.
    In that letter Ms Odubanjo asserts  that  the  appellant  is  the  only
    family member she has in the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  has  a
    special bond with her [Ms Odubanjo's] children; she has helped to  take
    care of them and has given them moral support.   Whilst  the  appellant
    was living with them she would play with the children, take them to the
    park, and help them  with  homework.   She  provides  a  link  for  the
    children with  their  African  heritage.   She  provides  a  source  of
    inspiration for the eldest daughter, and the children look  forward  to
    each weekend  when  they  enjoy  seeing  and  spending  time  with  the
    appellant.

19. Ms Odubanjo further stated, in chief, that her children would miss  the
    appellant 'very much' and would be 'devastated' if the  appellant  were
    to leave the country.  She was not cross-examined.

Submissions

20. Mr McVeety conceded that the appellant had established both  a  private
    and family life in the United Kingdom and submitted that the only issue
    for the Tribunal to consider was whether  requiring  the  appellant  to
    return to Nigeria would be  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    maintaining immigration control.  Rather confusingly  Mr  McVeety  then
    asserted that the appellant had failed to establish that there  was  in
    existence more than normal emotional ties as between  her,  her  sister
    and her sister's family [the appellant's nieces and brother in law]. We
    attempted to clarify with Mr McVeety whether, by the latter submission,
    he was in fact asserting that the appellant had not established  family
    life with her sister and sister's family [see Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ
    31]. In response Mr McVeety maintained both  the  concession  that  the
    appellant had established a family life in the United Kingdom  and  his
    submission that she had not established the existence of 'more than the
    normal  emotional  ties'.   We  take  these  apparently   contradictory
    submissions to mean that although it is accepted that the appellant has
    a family life in the United Kingdom, such ties should  nevertheless  be
    given limited weight when considering the issue of proportionality.

21. Mr McVeety then reminded  us  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, that she had come to the  United
    Kingdom with the intention of returning to Nigeria, that she  had  been
    living lawfully in the United Kingdom on only a  temporary  basis,  had
    never been given the expectation that she was entitled to  remain  here
    indefinitely, still has ties to Nigeria and that she  had  accepted  in
    her evidence that she could continue attending church in Nigeria.

22. In response Mr Nicholson invited us to allow the appeal  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.  He submitted that it was not  "necessary"  to  interfere
    with the appellant's family life by removing her; in the alternative he
    asserted that it was not proportionate  to  do  so.   He  reminded  the
    Tribunal that the appellant had remained lawfully in the United Kingdom
    for some six years and had not  engaged  in  any  acts  of  criminality
    during that time.  He submitted that it was in the  best  interests  of
    the children, the appellant's nieces, for the appellant  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom; observing when doing  so  that  the  appellant  has
    cared for the children for the past five years and  is  thought  of  as
    part of the family unit.  There were, he  asserted,  no  countervailing
    reasons for  requiring  the  appellant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    contrary to the best interests of the children.

23. In relation to the relevance of the appellant's  failure  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules, Mr Nicholson submitted that little weight should  be
    attached to this fact, given that the reason for her failure to  comply
    with the Rules was not of her own making but rather  a  change  in  the
    Rules themselves.

Findings and Reasons


24. Article 8 provides, so far as is relevant, that;


           "1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
           life....
           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this   right except such as is  in  accordance  with
           the law  and  is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
           interests of national security, public safety  or  the  economic
           well-being of the country, for the  prevention  of  disorder  or
           crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
           protection of the rights and freedoms of others."


25. When considering Article 8 we remind  ourselves  of  the  opinion  Lord
    Bingham in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  [2004]  INLR  349  in  which  he
    identified a number of questions  that  decision  makers  have  to  ask
    themselves, on a step-by-step basis, when Article 8 grounds  are  being
    considered. These questions are:


         "(1)  Will  the  proposed  removal  be  interference  by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life.
         (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity
         as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?
         (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
         (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a  democratic  society
         in the  interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or  the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder
         or crime, for the protection  of  health  or  morals,  or  for  the
         protection of the rights and freedom of others?
         (5) If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved"

26. The burden of proving that Article 8 is engaged is upon the  appellant.
    The standard of proof is  one  of  balance  of  probabilities.  If  the
    appellant demonstrates, to the requisite standard, that  Article  8  is
    engaged, it is for the Secretary of State to justify interference  with
    the protected right. The burden of proving the  relevant  facts  relied
    upon remains with the appellant throughout, even at the proportionality
    stage of the consideration.

27. We have set out above the appellant's immigration history in the United
    Kingdom.  She has lived here continuously for just over six years.   We
    accept that she has  been  working  as  a  care  worker  for  the  same
    partnership since June 2007,  originally  as  "bank  staff"  and,  from
    February 2012, as a permanent member of staff.  We further accept  that
    she joined Kingfisher Investments Limited as a director on 31st January
    2011 and has worked part-time for the company since that date.  She  is
    also a regular attender at the Mountain of Fire and Miracle  Ministries
    in Liverpool and the treasurer of a charitable organisation.

28. Having considered and applied the decisions of the Court of  Appeal  in
    Kugathas and ZB (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 834 we agree with  Mr
    McVeety's concession that the appellant has  a  family  life  with  her
    sister and her sister's family unit.  There  is  no  dispute  that  the
    appellant's relationship with her sister in the United Kingdom began in
    2008 and that for a period of time the appellant lived with her  sister
    and her sister's immediate family.

29. The appellant's nieces are, respectively, aged 10 years, 7 years and  5
    months.  We accept that the appellant has formed a close bond with  her
    nieces, in particular with the elder two nieces. She has  in  the  past
    resided in the same house as them and, since 2011  when  the  appellant
    moved out of her sister's accommodation, has regularly cared for  them.
    We accept in particular that the elder two nieces spend  weekends  with
    the appellant and that she has, on occasion, taken them to school. Both
    the appellant's sister and  her  sister's  husband  work  full-time  in
    demanding occupations and the family unit function as a whole with  the
    appellant stepping in to care for her  nieces  as  and  when  required,
    although she is, of course, also in full time employment.

30. We further accept that by requiring the appellant to return to  Nigeria
    there would be an interference with the appellant's private and  family
    life in the United Kingdom and  that  such  interference  would  be  of
    sufficient severity so as to engage Article 8.

31. It has not been suggested that by  refusing  to  vary  the  appellant's
    leave to remain the Secretary of State  had  acted  otherwise  than  in
    accordance with the law (in the wider sense given to this  phrase  when
    the ECHR is under consideration).

32. Mr Nicholson invites us to  separately  consider  whether  or  not  the
    interference with the appellant's private and family life in the United
    Kingdom is necessary. The necessity test under Article 8  is  explained
    in a long series of authorities, including  the  case  of  Uner  v  The
    Netherlands [2007] 45 EHRR 14.  Decisions requiring  an  individual  to
    leave the United Kingdom must be taken in accordance with the  law  and
    be necessary to a democratic society: that is to say,  justified  by  a
    pressing  social  need  and,  in  particular,  proportionate   to   the
    legitimate aim pursued.  It cannot be disputed that the maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is a legitimate aim.  Although  there  is
    no basis for saying that this appellant would be a drain on the economy
    if she were to remain in the United Kingdom, a fact we  have  borne  in
    mind throughout, that justification does not have to be  fact-specific.
    As Elias LJ stated in SSHD v Treebhowan [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 at 76

         "[i]t would wholly undermine effective immigration control  if  the
         Secretary of State had to discharge such a  burden,  identifying  a
         specific risk with respect to each applicant who  is  asserting  an
         Article 8 claim outside the Rules. It would  also  be  inconsistent
         with the observation of Lord Bingham in Huang ... paragraph  20  to
         the effect that in practice it would be relatively rare for Article
         8 claims to be sustained when an appellant could not remain in  the
         United  Kingdom  in   accordance   with   the   Immigration   Rules
         themselves".

33. Our focus must be on the question of whether requiring the appellant to
    return to Nigeria would, on the facts of this case, be proportionate to
    the legitimate aim pursued.

34. It is to that consideration that we now turn.  The public interest in a
    firm and  fair  system  of  immigration  control  is  considerable  [EB
    (Kosovo) per Lord Bingham at  (10)].   We  remind  ourselves  that  the
    appellant  has  been  found  not  to  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  As Mr Nicholson observes, she fails to do  so;  not
    because of any positive action on her behalf  which  led  her  to  fall
    outwith the Rules, but as the consequence of the fact  that  the  Rules
    have been subject to change such  that  she  can  no  longer  meet  the
    requirements  laid  down  therein.  Nevertheless,  the  fact  that  the
    appellant does not satisfy the Immigration Rules is a  matter  of  some
    weight in our considerations. The appellant has remained in the  United
    Kingdom lawfully since her entry here in June 2007 but at no point  has
    she been given an expectation that she would be entitled to remain here
    indefinitely.

35. When considering the issue of  proportionality  we  must  consider  the
    rights of the appellant's family unit as a whole  (Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
    [2009] 1 AC 115).  In doing so, we have taken into account that  it  is
    the interests of the appellant's sister  and  brother-in-law  that  the
    appellant remain here.  We have no doubt that  the  family  unit  would
    function better with the appellant in the United Kingdom and we have no
    doubt that in the absence of the appellant, her sister and  brother-in-
    law would have to find other  carers,  likely  to  be  in  the  private
    sector, for their children.

36. We find that it is in the best interests of the appellant's nieces that
    the appellant remain in the United Kingdom as a part  of  their  family
    unit here.  We have detailed above the relationship the  appellant  has
    with her nieces, accepting that she has a strong bond with  them.  They
    would, we have no doubt, be distressed by her  departure.   They  would
    also lose both the moral and emotional support the  appellant  provides
    to them, as well as an important connection to their cultural heritage.
     We have treated the best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
    consideration.

37. As to the appellant's employment with  Kingfisher  Investments  Limited
    there is no information before us to suggest that  this  company  could
    not continue operating, as it presently does, in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant, perhaps  by  hiring  someone  with  similar  skills  to  the
    appellant.  In relation to her job as a carer, there is no  information
    before us that the partnership she  has  been  working  for  since  the
    middle of 2007  could  not  employ  another  carer  to  take  over  the
    appellant's duties.  We take into account that the appellant is  likely
    to have developed relationships with the persons she is caring for  but
    there is no evidence before us that any of those persons would suffer a
    significant detriment if another suitable  professional  were  to  take
    over their care.  Again, whilst we  accept  that  the  appellant  is  a
    treasurer of a charitable organisation, there is no evidence before  us
    to support a conclusion that an  alternative  treasurer  could  not  be
    found if the appellant were to leave the United Kingdom.

38. The appellant's parents and sister live in Nigeria  and  the  appellant
    has lived there for the majority of her life.  She has obtained  skills
    and qualifications in the United Kingdom and it is not  suggested  that
    she could not make use of these in Nigeria.  She accepts that she could
    continue her religious activities there.

39. Looking at all the evidence before us in the round, and despite what we
    say about the best interests of the appellant's  nieces  and  the  fact
    that the appellant has formed a cohesive part of a family unit  in  the
    United Kingdom and that she has remained here lawfully  for  six  years
    establishing stable employment here,  we,  nevertheless  conclude  that
    requiring  the  appellant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom   would   be
    proportionate.

40. The appellant came here in a temporary capacity, does not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules and has never been  given  an  expectation  that  she
    could remain here indefinitely.  The best interests of the  appellant's
    nieces do not operate as a trump card.  The  children's  interests  are
    not  to  be  treated  as  the  primary  consideration  but  a   primary
    consideration.  We confirm that when coming to our conclusion  we  have
    not treated any other consideration as inherently more significant than
    the best interests of the children, however, having looked at  all  the
    facts of this case in the round, we conclude that, despite it being the
    best interests of the children that the appellant remain in the  United
    Kingdom, it is proportionate to remove her to Nigeria.

41. At the risk of repeating ourselves, we accept that the reliance  placed
    on the appellant by her sister and brother-in-law, in relation  to  the
    care of her nieces, would be lost; as would  the  moral  and  emotional
    support and the cultural benefits that  the  appellant  brings  to  the
    family unit.  We also accept that the children would be extremely upset
    by the appellant's departure from the United Kingdom. However there  is
    no medical  evidence  before  us  to  support  a  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's  departure  would  lead  to  any  long  term  psychological
    difficulties for the children or indeed that it would have any  adverse
    impact on their education or long term development.  The children would
    be remaining in the United Kingdom with their  caring  and  responsible
    parents in a fully functioning family unit.

42. The consequences to the family unit of the appellant leaving the United
    Kingdom, even when taken together with all other matters to be  weighed
    positively in the  appellant's  favour,  do  not,  in  our  conclusion,
    outweigh the public interest in requiring her to leave.

Decision

For  the  reasons  given  above  we  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
determination of the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision to refuse to vary  her  leave.   Having  re-made  the  decision  on
appeal for ourselves we dismiss the appeal both  on  Immigration  Rules  and
Article 8 ECHR grounds.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, made  in  relation  to  the  appeal
against the Secretary of State's decision to remove the  appellant,  remains
standing; that appeal having been allowed.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
                            Date:  24 August 2013
