
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00607/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 February 2016                  |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                           MR ANBALAGAN SATHAIYAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is a national of India whose date of birth
    is 27 June 1986. His appeal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent
    refusing to grant him leave to remain and  to  remove  him  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006 was heard and dismissed by Judge Hodgkinson, a  Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal for reasons given in his determination  promulgated
    on 7 August 2015. There was no appearance  at  the  hearing  by  or  on
    behalf of the appellant as well as the respondent. The appellant sought
    and was granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  17
    December 2015 by Judge P J M Hollingworth, a Judge of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal.

 2. In its response to the grant  of  permission  the  respondent  contends
    inter alia that the assertion made by the appellant in his  grounds  of
    appeal that he had sought adjournment of the hearing before  the  First
    Tier but that application had not been considered by  the  Tribunal  is
    unproven. The respondent also contends that she has not  had  sight  of
    any evidence that the appellant was not fit to attend  the  hearing  of
    his appeal before the First Tier Tribunal on 23 July 2015.

 3. For the hearing before me a fax had been received the day  before  from
    Shrewsbury Road Surgery, Forest Gate, London stating that the appellant
    "has  been  suffering  from   depression   with   difficulty   sleeping
    intermittently since 2014. Recently his symptoms got worse and attended
    surgery few times for the same. He has been  assessed  and  started  on
    antidepressants and also been referred for counselling."  The  fax  was
    not accompanied  by  a  letter  or  note  from  the  appellant  seeking
    adjournment of the hearing. Nevertheless, I  treated  the  letter  from
    Shrewsbury Road Surgery as an application for adjournment.

 4. I gave careful consideration to the faxed letter from  the  appellant's
    surgery. I noted that the letter does not state that the  appellant  is
    unfit to attend the hearing. It certifies that the appellant  has  last
    attended the surgery on 4  February  2016  when  he  was  put  on  anti
    depressant medication. I note that the letter does not state  that  the
    appellant has been a regular visitor to the  Surgery  but  simply  that
    after his last visit on 10 July 2014, the appellant  had  next  visited
    the surgery on 4 February 2016 complaining of insomnia and  depression.
    Upon this information I was not persuaded that  I  should  adjourn  the
    hearing listed before me.  I  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    received valid notice of the hearing and that if he had  wanted  to  he
    could and should have attended the hearing either in person or  through
    an appointed legal representative.

 5. In the circumstances I proceeded with the hearing. On the case  file  I
    found no evidence that the appellant had sought an adjournment  of  the
    hearing before the First Tier Tribunal as he contends in the grounds of
    appeal upon which he was granted permission to appeal. The assertion is
    not proved and the suggestion  that  the  hearing  took  place  without
    regard for Rules of Natural Justice has  not  been  made  out.  I  have
    looked at the determination of Judge Hodgkinson with care  and  I  find
    that the Judge has directed himself properly on the  facts  before  him
    and the law relevant to those facts. I find that even if the  appellant
    had attended the hearing, the result would not have been any  different
    on the facts that had been presented to the respondent and  the  Judge.
    It is a matter of great surprise that the appellant secured  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  I  have  sympathy  for  the  argument
    advanced by the respondent that the Judge granting permission  had  not
    used the correct legal criteria for grant of permission.

 6. I find that the determination of Judge Hodgkinson was not  in  material
    error of law and must therefore stand. This appeal is dismissed.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
20 February 2016
