
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/00418/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                             eugenia ataa afjei
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Justice and Law
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Clayton)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on  13  December  2013  to
    refuse a residence card under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
    ("the 2006 Regulations") as confirmation of being the spouse of an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

Introduction

 3. The respondent entered the UK on a working holiday visa valid  from  20
    December 2005 to 20 December 2007.  On  12  December  2007  she  sought
    further leave to remain in the UK as a student but that was refused  on
    10 January 2008 with no  right  of  appeal.  On  28  October  2013  the
    respondent applied for a residence card.

 4. The Secretary of State disputed the validity of the proxy  marriage  in
    Ghana, whether the relationship between  the  respondent  and  the  EEA
    sponsor was genuine and the  credibility  of  the  EEA  sponsor  as  to
    whether he was  genuinely  working  in  the  UK.  The  application  was
    therefore refused.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 2 March 2015. She was represented  by  Mr  N
    Garrod, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent  and
    the EEA sponsor had a genuine subsisting relationship,  a  valid  proxy
    marriage did take place in Ghana and  the  EEA  sponsor  is  a  Belgian
    citizen who came to the UK to work and was exercising treaty rights  in
    the UK. The appeal was allowed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law
    because  there  was  no  finding  that  the  proxy  marriage  would  be
    recognised under Belgian law, the judge gave no reasons for the finding
    that the EEA sponsor was in employment in the UK despite  the  concerns
    of the Secretary of State.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson
    on 22 June 2015 because there was no finding that  the  proxy  marriage
    would be recognised under Belgian law, the judge  gave  no  explanation
    for the finding that the EEA sponsor was working in the UK and  it  was
    arguable that the judge took the view at paragraph 38 of  the  decision
    that the EEA sponsor was exercising treaty  rights  simply  because  he
    came to the UK to work.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Mr Nath relied upon the grounds of appeal.

10.  Mr  Sharma  submitted  that  the  judge  did  consider  the   marriage
    certificate plus the expert report.  Such  marriage  is  acceptable  in
    Belgium. The respondent's bundle includes a copy of the  register  from
    Companies House showing that the employer company is genuine and  there
    was ample evidence of work in the form of pay slips and BACS.  The  EEA
    sponsor did give evidence that he was paid in cash - that  is  how  the
    case was dealt with on the day. It is not clear why the pay slips refer
    to BACS as the method of payment.

11. The Secretary of State did not accept that the proxy marriage in  Ghana
    was valid. I have considered the findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) (2014) UKUT 00024 (IAC). The  general
    principles from that case are as follows;

      i) A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who  is  a  qualified
         person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free movement and
         residence if proof of the marital relationship is provided.

     ii) The production of a marriage  certificate  issued  by  a  competent
         authority (that is, issued according to the  registration  laws  of
         the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place)  will  usually  be
         sufficient.  If not in English (or Welsh in relation to proceedings
         in Wales), a certified translation of the marriage certificate will
         be required.

    iii) A document which calls itself a marriage certificate will not raise
         a presumption of the marriage it purports to record unless  it  has
         been issued by an authority with legal power to create  or  confirm
         the facts it attests.

     iv) In appeals where there is no such  marriage  certificate  or  where
         there is doubt that a marriage certificate has  been  issued  by  a
         competent authority, then the marital relationship may be proved by
         other evidence.   This  will  require  the  Tribunal  to  determine
         whether a marriage was contracted.

      v) In such an appeal, the starting point will be to decide  whether  a
         marriage was contracted between the  appellant  and  the  qualified
         person according to the national law of  the  EEA  country  of  the
         qualified person's nationality.

     vi) In all such situations, when resolving issues that arise because of
         conflicts of law, proper respect must be  given  to  the  qualified
         person's rights as provided by the European Treaties, including the
         right to marry and the rights of free movement and residence.

    vii) It  should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.   Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries.  Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
         similar reasons, carry no weight.

   viii) These remarks apply solely to the question of whether a person is a
         spouse for the purposes of EU law.  It does  not  relate  to  other
         relationships that might be regarded as similar to  marriage,  such
         as civil partnerships or durable relationships.

12. In this case, the judge gave reasons at paragraphs  35-37  for  finding
    that as at the date of application the  parties  were  validly  married
    according to Ghanaian customary law. However, there is no finding  that
    the marriage would be recognised under Belgian law. That is a  material
    error of law in light of Kareem.

13. The Secretary of State raised clear issues about the claim that the EEA
    sponsor was working including discrepancies in the pay  slips  and  the
    fact that the EEA sponsor claimed to be paid in cash  even  though  the
    pay slips said he was paid by BACS. I find that the  reasons  given  by
    the judge at paragraph 38 are inadequate because the contested  matters
    of evidence are simply not addressed. The judge merely stated  that  "I
    accept the respondent's submission that there was  a  lack  of  clarity
    concerning  his  employment  but   nevertheless   on   a   balance   of
    probabilities I accept that he did come to the UK for  the  purpose  of
    work and since that time has been exercising  treaty  rights".  I  find
    that the failure to give adequate reasons is a further  material  error
    of law.

14. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the 2006 Regulations involved the making of  an  error  of
    law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

15. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. However, the Secretary of State does  not
    dispute all of the  findings  made  by  the  judge  and  the  following
    findings are preserved;

      i) The respondent and  the  EEA  sponsor  have  a  genuine  subsisting
         relationship.

     ii) A valid proxy marriage did take place in Ghana and  the  respondent
         and the EEA sponsor  are  validly  married  according  to  Ghanaian
         customary law.

    iii) The EEA sponsor is a Belgian citizen and came to  the  UK  for  the
         purpose of work.

16. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 12 September 2015

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
