
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00131/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 March 2019                              |On 3 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                           SELVA KUMAR BOOMINATHAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant, Selva Kumar Boominathan, is a citizen of India  born  on
    24 December 1988. He is single and has no  dependants.  On  19  October
    2009 he entered with leave as a Tier  4  (General)  student  which  was
    later extended to expire on 5 September 2013. On 3  September  2013  he
    applied for further leave in the same capacity.



The SSHD's Original Decision

 2. On 4 July 2018, almost five years after the application had been  made,
    the SSHD refused it on the ground that the Certificate of Approval  for
    Study (CAS) upon which the Appellant relied  had  been  assigned  to  a
    different  person  and  consequently  he  did  not  meet  the  relevant
    requirements of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules. The Respondent did
    not go on to consider whether  the  Appellant  met  any  of  the  other
    requirements for further leave as a student.

 3. The Appellant lodged an appeal and requested an oral hearing. There was
    an issue about payment of fees which was ultimately resolved.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. By a decision promulgated on 26 October 2018 Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Alis on the basis of the papers in  the  Tribunal  file  found
    that although a copy of the grounds of appeal had been requested by the
    Tribunal on 20 August 2018, the Appellant had failed to file them by 25
    October 2018. Accordingly, he found the Appellant to be  in  breach  of
    the relevant Procedure Rules and proceeded to determine the  appeal  on
    the basis of the papers in the Tribunal file. He  noted  the  Appellant
    had failed to provide any hint of the reason  for  the  appeal  and  so
    dismissed it.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. The grounds assert  the  CAS
    was issued to the Appellant by  Quinton  College  Ltd  and  he  had  no
    knowledge of it being assigned to anyone else. The SSHD had  failed  to
    prove the assertion that the CAS was not  issued  to  him.  The  SSHD's
    delay in dealing with the application resulted in significant detriment
    to the Appellant. Further, the Appellant stated he had not received the
    request of 20 August 2018 from the Tribunal to file grounds  of  appeal
    and so the dismissal of his appeal was procedurally unfair.

 6. On 12 November  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nightingale
    refused permission to appeal noting that the Appellant  had  been  sent
    the request to file grounds of appeal by both e-mail and post.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Appellant renewed to the Upper Tribunal his permission  application
    on the same grounds. On 14 December 2018 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Davidge granted permission because the dispatch and receipt of  the  20
    August request for grounds for appeal was questionable in the light  of
    the difficulties previously experienced in relation to the  payment  of
    fees to the Tribunal.

 8. On 18 March 2019 the Appellant sought an adjournment of the hearing set
    for 28 March on the basis of a letter from his GP stating he was unable
    to attend Court due to stress and  lack  of  sleep  following  injuries
    sustained in a road traffic accident. In support of the application  he
    enclosed a copy of an assessment of 27 December 2018 by  an  individual
    described simply as a "therapist" stating that the Appellant  would  be
    able to return to work or education  within  2-3  weeks  and  that  any
    appropriate treatments would be completed by the end of February 2019.

 9. The request for an  adjournment  was  refused  on  26  March  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Lindsley.

10. The Appellant appeared in person accompanied by a friend  who  did  not
    take part in the proceedings. I explained the purpose and procedure  to
    be adopted at an Error of Law  hearing.  The  Appellant  confirmed  his
    address.

11. I noted that the Tribunal file did in fact include  grounds  of  appeal
    lodged by the Appellant and the indication was that they had been filed
    at the Tribunal well before 25 October 2018. In  the  circumstances,  I
    considered that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained  an
    error of law because it had not addressed the grounds  for  appeal  and
    the Appellant had been denied the opportunity to present his  case.  Mr
    Tarlow for the SSHD quite properly took no objection.

12. I indicated I was ready to proceed with a hearing  of  the  substantive
    appeal. The Appellant sought an adjournment on the basis  that  he  was
    not ready to proceed to a  substantive  hearing.  I  said  that  having
    regard  to  the  delay,  the  appeal  should  be  decided  as  soon  as
    practicable and I intended to retain it in the Upper Tribunal.

13. I have now reached the conclusion that it would be procedurally  unfair
    to the Appellant for the substantive appeal to  be  heard,  effectively
    for the first time, in the Upper Tribunal. He had  requested  and  paid
    for a hearing in the First-tier Tribunal which, as explained,  has  not
    taken place.

14. In the circumstances described, I think the better  course  is  to  set
    aside in its entirety the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    procedural unfairness and direct the appeal be heard  substantively  at
    an early date in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

15. No anonymity direction has been requested  and  having  considered  the
    nature of the appeal, I find none is warranted.

Directions

16. For the re-hearing in addition to any directions which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal may make: I direct that not less than 10 days before the  next
    hearing date:

         The Appellant do file and serve documentary evidence to  show  what
         he has been doing between the date of his application and the  date
         of the SSHD's decision and  if  he  cannot  show  he  continued  in
         education, what enquiries he had made of Quinton  College  and  its
         responses and why he did not continue in education.

         The SSHD do file and serve an explanation for the delay in reaching
         the decision under appeal.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    with no findings of fact preserved.

    No anonymity direction.

    Directions: see paragraph 16.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 29. 03. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
