
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00133/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 28 May 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MS UDENI ANUSHA RUPASINGHE
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Esen Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafer of counsel instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd.
solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal before me is the Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department. She appeals against the decision of Judge  Parker,
    a Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal  who  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent on Article 8 grounds, a national of Sri  Lanka  against  the
    decision of the appellant  before  me  directing  the  removal  of  the
    appellant as an illegal entrant following an application  made  by  the
    respondent on 27 March 2013 for further leave to remain on  grounds  of
    long residence and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. Judge Parker heard the appeal on 4 November at  Taylor  House  and  her
    written  reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  were  promulgated  in   a
    determination dated 24 November 2014. It is worthy of note that at  the
    hearing before Judge Parker no one appeared on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State whilst the respondent was represented and gave oral  evidence.
    However on 2 December 2014 the Secretary of State sought permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal alleging that the decision made  by  Judge
    Parker was in material error of  law  on  the  grounds  stated  in  the
    application for permission to appeal.

 3. Judge McDade, a Judge of the First Tier gave permission to appeal on 15
    January 2015. In her decision granting permission the Judge  said  that
    "The grounds of application for permission to appeal  assert  that  the
    judge has failed to  apply  correctly  or  at  all  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 117B(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    and that it was an arguable error of law for  the  Tribunal  to  attach
    weight to the Appellant's former representative being at fault  in  the
    absence of evidence  coming  within  the  terms  of  BT  Nepal.  In  an
    otherwise careful decision it is arguable that  the  judge  had  fallen
    into error in respect of these two issues. There is an  arguable  error
    of law."

 4. I heard submissions from Mr Tufan and Mr Jafer. Mr Tufan amplified  the
    grounds submitted with the application contending that Judge Parker had
    made material error in law in allowing the appeal under Article 8.  The
    Judge had made no finding as per  relevant  case  law  that  there  are
    compelling or exceptional circumstances, which engaged the  conditional
    rights under Article 8 on grounds of private and family  life.  It  was
    his submission that there were  no  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
    case. He took me to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  SS  [Congo]
    Paragraphs 21 and 25 of the decision [2015] EWCA Civ 440. He also asked
    me to bear in mind headnote 4 and  contents  of  paragraph  77  in  the
    judgment of AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT (IAC) Mr  Tufan  argued  that
    the Judge  had  also  been  wrong  in  law  in  giving  weight  to  the
    appellant's assertion that she had been let down by her  solicitor.  In
    this regard he  relied  on  the  decision  of  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal in BT.

 5. Mr Jafer took me through the determination consisting of 88  paragraphs
    and argued that the determination had taken full and proper account  of
    all the relevant circumstances. He argued that the grounds  upon  which
    the Secretary of State had  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  were
    dressed up as points of law whereas in reality they were no  more  than
    disagreements with findings of fact  properly  and  correctly  made  by
    Judge Parker.

 6. Reminding me that the Judge  granting  permission  had  summarised  the
    grounds as being two in number - the first being  in  relation  to  the
    application or proper application of  paragraph  117B  (5)  and  second
    being the weight attached to being let down by the legal representative
    contrary to the principles set out in the  decision  in  BT,  Mr  Jafer
    argued that the first ground had no merit as the appeal  was  dismissed
    under Immigration Rules and that in any event Appendix FM only  applied
    to free standing applications made under Article  8.  Mr  Jafer  argued
    that Judge Parker had taken great care in taking  account  of  all  the
    evidence adduced before her and the Judge had referred to  and  applied
    correctly and with care all the relevant case law to the facts  of  the
    case before her. He argued that the principle in the decision in BT was
    an obvious one based on Rules of Natural Justice but in this particular
    case the conduct of the respondent's solicitor had not been even mildly
    determinative of the appeal that the Judge had allowed. The  Judge  had
    heard evidence from the respondent to this effect and was  entitled  to
    find it credible. The Judge analysed the relevant evidence with care as
    is evident from the contents of paragraphs 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 40 of
    the determination. Mr Jafer said the conduct of the solicitor  and  its
    impact on the respondent was a factor that the Judge  was  entitled  to
    take into account as a factor  in  the  proportionality  exercise.  The
    ground of appeal based on BT, said M Jafer has no merit. I agree.

 7. I find the same in respect of the other  ground.  The  Judge  has  made
    clear and reasoned findings on compelling or exceptional  circumstances
    before going on to determine the rights of the respondent under Article
    8  of  the  ECHR.  I  found  the  determination  in  this  appeal  most
    comprehensive  in  the  evaluation  of  all  relevant  facts  and  very
    impressive  in  setting  out  and  applying  all  the  relevant   legal
    principles as set out in the case  law  as  well  as  the  Rules.   The
    approach of the Judge to the appeal is faultless as can be seen from  a
    full appraisal of all the relevant  facts.  The  Judge  has  considered
    whether there  would  be  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  family  life
    continuing  outside  of  the  UK  (paragraph  57)  and  quite  properly
    concluded, for reasons given in paragraphs 57, 58 and  59,  that  there
    would be insurmountable obstacles for the family life  to  continue  in
    Sri Lanka. The Judge, as can be seen from the contents of paragraphs 66
    and 67 and 68 in  which  the  Judge  has  cited  the  decisions  in  MM
    (Lebanon) Nagre [2013] EWHC (Admin), Gulshan 2013 UKUT 640  (IAC),  has
    correctly  concluded  in  paragraph  68  that  "there  are  exceptional
    circumstances in this case as the  refusal  decision  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant and her partner such
    that refusal of the application would not  be  proportionate".  I  note
    that the Judge has referred to the principles set out in Razgar [2004},
    EB (Kosovo) [2008], Patel [2013] UKSC and Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

8.   The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed, as I have  found  no
    material error of law in the decision of Judge Parker.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Date: 8 June 2015

