

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00450/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|10  October 2013                              |11 October 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President

                                   Between

                                 ERUJ JAVAID

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against  the  Respondent's  decision  refusing  her  leave  to
    remain, outside the Immigration Rules.  Judge  Eldridge  dismissed  the
    appeal in a determination sent out on 28 April 2013.

 2. The appellant then sought permission to appeal.  The grounds  were,  in
    essence, that quite apart from the decision under appeal, she had  made
    an earlier application for variation of her leave, the refusal of which
    had been challenged by way of judicial review.   The  grounds  asserted
    that that application was still pending in the High Court, and that the
    issues raised in those proceedings were  necessarily  relevant  to  the
    present claim.   Judge  Perkins  was  persuaded  that  that  point  was
    arguable, and granted permission to appeal.

 3. Investigation by the Tribunal  revealed,  however,  that  the  judicial
    review proceedings were dismissed by the High Court on  29  June  2012,
    long before the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  assertion  in
    the grounds of appeal was not correct.  That point has now been  raised
    with the appellant's solicitors, who, for whatever reason, were unaware
    of it.  They acted on the instructions and  information  received  from
    their client.  She, the appellant, is now without representation.

 4. The solicitor's letter to the Tribunal contained the following passage:-



           "16. It has now emerged that Ms. Javaid failed to re-submit  her
              papers.  When we approached her  regarding  a  clarification,
              she has still indicated that she will  be  re-submitting  the
              papers and she has been unable to do so as  she  was  waiting
              for further verification documents from the concerned bank.


           17. It is with this background  that  we  have  dealt  with  Ms.
           Javaid's case.


           18. However, it now appears that Ms. Javaid has  mis-represented
              to us or failed to act as indicated to us.  We have relied on
              the information provided by Ms. Javaid and  have  endeavoured
              to act in the best interest of our client.


           19. Therefore, it is clear now that the basis  of  Ms.  Javaid's
              permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal does not exist  at
              the moment."

 5. In a letter to the appellant on 9 September 2013 I drew  her  attention
    to that passage, and indicated that in the absence any proposal to  the
    contrary within 14 days, I proposed to dismiss her appeal without  more
    ado.  No reply of any sort has been received.

 6. It is clear that permission was obtained  by  a  mis-statement  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  There is no proper basis upon which an appeal could
    be allowed; and no perceptible error of law by the First-tier Tribunal.
     This appeal is dismissed.







                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 10 October 2013
