


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Numbers: IA/00232/2016

                                                        IA/08545/2015

                                                        IA/08241/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Rolls Building, London           |      Decision  & Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 13 February 2018                       |      On 19 February 2018        |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                           amandeep kaur sarn (1)
                             raj kumar kumar (2)
                                   aa (3)
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, instructed by Asher & Tomar
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a family group.  The first two appellants  are  wife
    and husband, and they are the parents of  the  third  appellant.   They
    appeal, with permission, against the decision and reasons statement  of
    FtT Judges Chohan and Boylan-Kemp (the panel),  promulgated  on  2  May
    2017.

 2. After considering all the written arguments and hearing the submissions
    of Mr Richardson and Mr Melvin, I indicated at the end of  the  hearing
    that I found no material legal error in the panel's decision.   I  gave
    brief reasons at that time, but reserved my full reasons, which  I  now
    give.

 3. The first issue was whether the panel erred by considering  the  appeal
    under the new appeal regime (that is the regime introduced by  s.19  of
    the Immigration Act 2014 that came fully into effect from 6 April 2015)
    rather than under the old appeal regime.  It is evident from paragraphs
    3 to 6 that the panel relied on the new  appeal  regime.   It  is  also
    obvious from the date of the refusal decision recorded in  paragraph  2
    (6 February 2015) that the new appeal regime did not apply.

 4. This is an obvious legal error.  The panel wrongly self-directed itself
    as to the legal framework in which the appeal  was  to  be  considered.
    The error is compounded because it is evident from the original grounds
    of appeal (settled on 23 February 2015) that  the  appellants  did  not
    rely on human rights grounds.  As such, it is reasonable to infer  that
    the panel did not look at the actual grounds of appeal, namely  whether
    the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  immigration  rules  or
    otherwise not in accordance with the law.

 5. The question arises as to whether this error was material.   I  do  not
    find it is material, but to explain  why  I  must  look  at  the  other
    grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The second issue relates to  whether  the  panel  wrongly  applied  the
    burden of  proof  when  deciding  that  discretion  has  been  properly
    exercised when the respondent decided to curtail the leave  granted  to
    the appellants.  The reasons for curtailment were that  the  appellants
    had recourse to child benefit and child tax credit during their  period
    of leave.  They were not entitled to public funds, and at  the  hearing
    below conceded that they were not so entitled.

 7. The question arises as to who had the burden of proof  in  relation  to
    paragraph 323 of the immigration rules.  The respondent  curtailed  the
    first appellant's leave under paragraph 323(i) and  the  leave  of  the
    second and  third  appellants  under  paragraph  323(iii).   The  first
    appellant's leave was curtailed because she had failed to  comply  with
    one of the conditions attached to the grant of leave.  The  second  and
    third appellants' leave was curtailed because they  were  dependent  on
    the first appellant.

 8. It is established law that where the respondent invokes the  provisions
    under part 9 of the immigration rules, the burden of proof lies on  the
    respondent (see JC (Part 9 HC395, burden of proof) China  [2007]  UKAIT
    00027).  But in this case the appellants admit to having  breached  one
    of the conditions attached to their leave.  This admission means  there
    was no need for  the  panel  to  make  a  finding  as  to  whether  the
    appellants had failed to comply with the public  funds  restriction  on
    their leave.  The admission meant the respondent had nothing to prove.

 9. The next question  relates  to  whether  discretion  should  have  been
    exercised in favour  of  the  appellants  given  their  explanation  of
    innocently claiming the public funds.  This explanation was not  before
    the decision-maker and therefore there was no exercise of discretion in
    favour of the appellant.  The argument was presented to the panel,  who
    at paragraph 10 decided the explanation was not credible.  The question
    for me is whether the panel erred by shifting the burden of proof on to
    the appellants.

10. I have considered two interrelated factors.   First,  the  exercise  of
    discretion requires a holistic approach to the evidence  and  arguments
    and is not a question of finding facts  per  se.   Second,  it  is  the
    responsibility of a migrant subject to conditions to  know  what  those
    conditions are and to stick to  them.   Ignorance  is  not  a  defence.
    These two factors would have to be considered when deciding whether  to
    exercise discretion.  To this extent, the findings at paragraph 10  are
    relevant to the exercise of discretion.  These  findings  underpin  the
    conclusion at paragraph 11 that  discretion  should  not  be  exercised
    differently.

11. Although the panel approached the issue of discretion within an article
    8 framework, it must be remembered that such a framework  requires  the
    assessment of  proportionality.   The  exercise  of  discretion  is  an
    element that is part  of  such  an  assessment;  judges  must  consider
    whether the personal circumstances are sufficient to  depart  from  the
    strictures of the immigration rules.  It is unsurprising therefore that
    the panel examined the issue of discretion  even  though  they  thought
    they did not  have  jurisdiction  to  look  at  the  immigration  rules
    directly.

12. I conclude, therefore, that the panel properly considered the issue  of
    exercising discretion differently and gave reasons for deciding not  to
    do so even though they relied on the wrong legal framework.

13. No other grounds have been pursued.  In light of the  findings  I  have
    made, although there is an obvious legal error in the panel's approach,
    it is immaterial to the outcome for the reasons I have given.



Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails.
Although FtT Judges Chohan and Boylan-Kemp's decision contains an  error  on
a point of law,  it  is  immaterial  to  the  outcome  and  therefore  their
decision is upheld.


Signed                                       Date         13 February 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

