
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00402/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd November 2017                         |On 6th December 2017          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR. MUHAMMAD INAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. Sparling, Counsel instructed by Goodfellows
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant before me,  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for ease of  reference,  in  the  course  of  this
    decision I shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I shall in this decision, refer  to  Mr.  Inam  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The appellant is a Pakistani national who appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision of the respondent dated 8th January
    2016 refusing his application for leave to remain in the UK  under  the
    immigration rules.


 3. In her decision, the respondent noted that the  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 3rd May 2007 following a successful appeal against  a
    decision to refuse his application for leave to  enter  as  a  student.
    The appellant arrived in the UK with leave to  enter  until  8th  March
    2009.  He was subsequently granted further leave to remain in the UK as
    a Tier 4 student until 31st July 2013.   On  13th  February  2015,  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain under the Family and Private life
    10-year route.  That application was initially refused  on  18th  March
    2015, but that decision was withdrawn by agreement between the parties,
    following a claim for Judicial Review.  By her decision of 8th  January
    2016, the respondent refused the application for leave to remain in the
    UK under the immigration rules, and it was that decision that  was  the
    subject of the appeal before the FtT.


 4. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid on 1st February
    2017, and allowed for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on
    16th February 2017.


 5. Permission to appeal was granted on  31st  August  2017  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davies noted that the decision  is  incoherent  and  the
    Judge has not addressed the issues, or the  evidence  that  was  before
    him, in a clear and lucid manner.


 6. Before me, Miss Ahmad relied upon the grounds  of  appeal  and  submits
    that the FtT Judge has  failed  to  address  the  appellant's  case  by
    reference to the immigration rules. The decision of the FtT Judge lacks
    any proper findings, and the reader  is  unable  to  discern  from  the
    decision, the basis upon which the Judge concluded that the  appeal  is
    allowed.  The Judge fails to identify the rules that were in  his  mind
    when considering the evidence, and he fails to set out the  conclusions
    that he reached upon the material issues in the appeal.


 7. Mr Sparling, on behalf of the appellant, in succinct  submissions,  has
    tried to persuade me that  this  is  a  decision  that  is  capable  of
    standing, and does not disclose a material error of  law.   He  submits
    that the issue in  the  appeal  is  whether  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules are met,  and  the  central  issue  was  whether  the
    'insurmountable obstacles' test is met.  He submits  that  the  parties
    are entitled to presume that the FtT Judge is  competent  to  hear  the
    appeal, and that as a specialist Tribunal, the FtT Judge  had  in  mind
    the relevant immigration  rules.   Mr  Sparling  submits  that  as  the
    central issue in the appeal was whether the 'insurmountable  obstacles'
    test is met, one can presume that that was the issue being addressed by
    the Judge.  He accepts that at paragraphs [11] to [14] of the decision,
    the Judge does not refer to the  'insurmountable  obstacles'  test,  or
    even make reference to the words 'insurmountable obstacles'.


 8. I have very carefully read the decision of the FtT Judge and whilst the
    judge appears to note at paragraph [3] of his decision that he has  had
    in mind the relevant paragraphs of the Immigration  Rules,  it  is  far
    from clear from a careful reading of the decision, what if any  of  the
    Rules, the Judge was  in  fact  considering.   Without  being  able  to
    discern from the decision, which of the Immigration Rules the Judge had
    in mind, I cannot be satisfied that  the  Judge  applied  the  relevant
    rules(s) correctly.  The Judge appears to refer to some of the evidence
    that was given before him in the decision, but even if I were to accept
    Mr Sparling's submission that the judge was addressing his mind to  the
    test which is set out in paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules,  that
    is, whether there are any insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant's
    family life with his partner continuing outside of the United  Kingdom,
    the matters that are  set  out  at  paragraphs  [11]  to  [14]  of  the
    decision, could not, in my judgement have come  anywhere  near  meeting
    that test.  There is a test of hardship which the Judge simply does not
    appear to address.  In none of those paragraphs, when  considering  the
    evidence before him,  does  the  Judge  refer  to  the  'insurmountable
    obstacles' test.


 9. Having carefully  considered  the  submissions  that  are  made  by  Mr
    Sparling doing the best he can on behalf of the appellant,  I  have  no
    hesitation in finding that there is a material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the FtT Judge.  In my judgment, the decision fails  to  set
    out the issues, if any, that were considered by the Judge, and although
    the Judge appears to refer to some of  the  evidence  before  him,  the
    decision is devoid of any proper  reasoning  at  all.   As  noted  when
    permission to appeal was granted, the decision is  incoherent.   It  is
    littered with irrelevant considerations and fails to deal adequately or
    at all, with the material issues in the appeal.


10. I have no hesitation in finding that there is an error of  law  in  the
    determination of the FtT. The determination of the FtT is set aside and
    the appeal remitted to be remade entirely de novo in the  FtT.   I  can
    discern no coherent findings of fact having  been  made  by  FtT  Judge
    Majid, but for the avoidance of any doubt, no findings are preserved.


Notice of Decision


11. The appeal is allowed and the appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the appeal.


12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date     29th November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal before me has been allowed.  The matter has been remitted to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the appeal, and  I  make  no  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date     29th November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

