
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00745/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 October 2014                             |On 20 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                              Ms Gagandeep Kaur

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Dogra, Counsel instructed by Maalik & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India and her date of  birth  is  20  May
    1987.  On 30 September 2013 the appellant made an application  to  vary
    her leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Migrant.   Her
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on the basis that the
    appellant had  failed  to  submit  two  documents  in  support  of  her
    application, which were listed on the CAS  letter  that  she  submitted
    with her application, namely as follows:

         "2 - progress letter for  post  graduate  professional  diploma  in
             healthcare management.  The letter was issued by CITEC College
             on 26 March 2012",


    and


         "6 - registration certificate as a nurse and midwife on 30  January
             2009.




2.   The appellant submitted six out  of  the  eight  certificates  required
    which were listed on  the  CAS  letter  that  she  submitted  with  her
    application.


3.   The appellant appealed and her appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge  Mayall
    having been determined on the papers in accordance with the  wishes  of
    the  appellant.   The  decision  was  promulgated  on  4  April   2014.
    Permission was granted to the appellant  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Page on 14 May 2014. Thus the matter came before me.


The Decision of the FtT

4.   The Judge  made  findings  at  paragraphs  8,  9,  10  and  11  of  the
    determination:

         "8.  According to paragraph 245AA of the Rules:


             (a)  where part 6A or any appendices referred to  in  part  6A
                  state that specified documents must be provided, the Entry
                  Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of
                  State  will  only  consider  documents  that   have   been
                  submitted with the application,  and  will  only  consider
                  documents submitted after the application where  they  are
                  submitted in accordance with sub-paragraph (b);


             (b)  if the applicant has  submitted  specified  documents  in
                  which: some of the documents in  the  sequence  have  been
                  omitted (for example, if one bank statement from a  series
                  is missing):


                  (ii) a document is in the wrong format (for example, if  a
                      letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or


                  (iii)    a document is a copy and not an original document
                      ...


             (c)  documents will not be requested if a  specified  document
                  has not been submitted ....


             No evidence of any policy imposing  any  stricter  requirement
             upon the respondent to request missing documents has been  put
             before me.


         9.   The missing documents in this case were  specified  documents.
             Accordingly, in my judgment, there was no obligation upon  the
             respondent  to  afford  the  appellant   an   opportunity   of
             submitting the missing documents.


         10.  In the circumstances the appellant  did  not  qualify  for  an
             award of 30 points in the attributes section.  Accordingly she
             did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


         11.  There was no suggestion in the grounds of appeal or  statement
             that the  decision  was  an  unlawful  interference  with  her
             Article 8 rights.  Even had there been, in the absence of  any
             evidence on this aspect, I would have been satisfied that  the
             decisions were entirely proportionate."

The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

5.   The grounds seeking leave to  appeal  can  be  summarised.   The  Judge
    should have exercised discretion in the appellant's favour.  He did not
    give consideration to fairness and paragraph 245AA of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Secretary of State should have requested further  documents
    in accordance with evidential flexibility.  The documents  had  already
    been  submitted  to  the  respondent  in  an  earlier  application  and
    therefore had been seen by the Secretary of State.

6.   I heard oral submissions from both parties.  Mr Shilliday  submitted  a
    copy of the Home Office policy  version  5.0  (valid  from  7  November
    2013).  The relevant parts of the guidance can be summarised.

         "This  guidance  pulls  together   cross-cutting   guidance   which
         previously existed in  separate  products,  and  combines  relevant
         information from other operational instructions.  It supersedes all
         previous instructions and guidance on evidential flexibility.

         Under the evidential flexibility process, if there are minor errors
         or  omissions  on  specified  documents  submitted  with  a   valid
         application but there is enough evidence to  show  the  application
         would otherwise be granted, you may contact the migrant, sponsor or
         representative as  appropriate  for  clarification  or  to  request
         missing documents and/or information.


         For applications made on or after 13 December 2012


         You can accept a specified document which is:


           . in the wrong format, or


           . a copy of an original document


         if you are satisfied it is genuine and the applicant meets all  the
         other requirements of the Immigration Rules.  You do  not  have  to
         write out in these circumstances.


         However,  the  Home  Office  reserves  the  right  to  request  the
         specified original documents in the correct  format  in  all  cases
         where paragraph 245AA(b) applies, and  to  refuse  applications  if
         these documents are not provided as set out in this paragraph.


         All documentary evidence received must be treated in the  same  way
         as any submitted with the initial application.


         For applications decided on or after 1 October 2013


         Further to amendments made on 13  December  2012  under  evidential
         flexibility you do not have  to  write  to  an  applicant  about  a
         specified document if it does not  contain  all  of  the  specified
         information where you can get the missing information from:


           . other documents submitted with the application


           . the website of the organisation which issued the document, or

           . the website of the appropriate regulatory body.

         For archived versions of the evidential  flexibility  guidance  see
         related link."

7.   Later in the policy guidance at page 7 the following is stated:

         "You must only request additional information if  you  believe  the
         applicant would meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
         given the opportunity to provide this.  If  the  application  would
         fall for refusal, even if the minor  omission  was  corrected,  you
         must not request additional documentation."


8.   The rest of the policy deals with how  the  decision-maker  goes  about
    contacting an applicant.

9.   I heard oral submissions from Ms Dogra in the context of  her  skeleton
    argument.  Mr Shilliday made oral submissions and he  argued  that  the
    policy is not as relevant as  the  Rule  and  the  appellant  does  not
    benefit from paragraph 245.  The evidence in this case was missing.  It
    is accepted that the appellant raised the  policy  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, but she did not make a reference to the  missing  documents  in
    her application.  She did not raise what she is now suggesting,  namely
    that the documents had been submitted to the respondent in  a  previous
    application.

10.  There were two documents listed on the CAS which were not submitted  by
    the appellant with her application.  However,  in  my  view  there  was
    evidence that the documents were in existence because they  are  listed
    on the CAS letter and therefore it can be assumed that they  have  been
    seen by the sponsor.  There would have been little speculation involved
    by the Secretary of State and the decision-maker should have considered
    the policy. I have reached this conclusion having taking  into  account
    paragraphs 91, 92 and 93 of Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA  Civ  2.   In  my  view  there  was  sufficient
    evidence in order for  the  decision-maker  to  find  that  the  policy
    applied in the appellant's favour.

11.  For the above reason, in my view, the Judge made a  material  error  of
    law and I set aside the decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

12.  There is no lawful decision and the  application  remains  outstanding.
    The decision-maker failed to exercise the discretion  invested  in  him
    and the decision is not in accordance with the law pursuant to  Section
    86(3)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 8 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
