
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00848/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 2 December 2019                   |On 17 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     DN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                       Respondent (Claimant)


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Karnik, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter
(Claimant)    (Dale House)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw who, in  a  decision  dated  2  June
    2018, allowed the claimant's appeal on human rights grounds against the
    decision of the Secretary  of  State  who  had  refused  to  grant  the
    claimant leave to remain.

 2. The procedural history of this case  is  somewhat  lengthy.   The  most
    recent aspects of it are as follows.  Following the grant of permission
    to challenge the decision of Judge Bradshaw,  the  matter  came  before
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss, sitting in  Manchester.   Judge  Juss
    found errors of law in Judge Bradshaw's decision.  He set it aside  and
    then proceeded to re-make the decision  by  dismissing  the  claimant's
    appeal.  That decision of  the  Deputy  Judge  was  challenged  by  the
    claimant before the Court of Appeal and, by order of October 2019,  the
    Court of Appeal by consent allowed the claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Deputy Judge's decision.

 3. The statement of reasons sets out the agreed basis upon  which  it  was
    decided by the parties that the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge's  decision
    could not stand.  That is reflected in the order of  the  court.   More
    problematic, however, is the following provision of the court's order:-



         "The matter be remitted de novo to the Upper Tribunal for  a  fresh
         determination of the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's
         decision dated 26 January 2016  to  refuse  the  Appellant's  human
         rights  application  under  Articles  3  and  8  of  the   European
         Convention of Human Rights."

 4. At the beginning  of  the  proceedings  before  me,  I  questioned  the
    representatives as to the contents of that paragraph.  It  is  manifest
    on its face that the Upper Tribunal was told by  the  Court  of  Appeal
    that it should determine the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision of 26 January 2016.  That in turn indicates that there
    was some legal problem with Judge Bradshaw's decision, such  that  that
    decision fell to be set aside.

 5. Otherwise, the terms of the order would have been very different.  They
    would have been that the Upper Tribunal is to consider the Secretary of
    State's challenge to Judge Bradshaw's decision.  It would not have been
    a difficult matter to make that clear.

 6. Nevertheless, both representatives informed me that they had understood
    the position to be that, in the light  of  the  setting  aside  of  the
    Deputy Judge's decision, the Upper Tribunal was in fact in the position
    of considering the Secretary of State's challenge to  Judge  Bradshaw's
    decision.  I of course make no criticism of the Court of Appeal. It  is
    hard-pressed  and  heavily  relies  in  matters  of  this  kind,  where
    proceedings have been settled by consent, upon the assistance  and  co-
    operation of the parties.  In the circumstances, it is regrettable that
    the parties allowed that part of  the  court's  order  to  stand.  They
    should have  drawn  attention  to  the  difficulty  that  I  have  just
    outlined.

 7. Nevertheless, by consent  the  proceedings  before  me  are  to  decide
    whether Judge Bradshaw was wrong in law.  In that regard I consider the
    grounds of application against her decision.  Having set  out  what  is
    said to be the relevant law, including N v Secretary of State [2015]  2
    AC 296 and N v United Kingdom [2008] 47 EHRR  885,  the  grounds  noted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  acknowledged  that  the  claimant's
    mental health fluctuated, and that  there  was  no  clear  or  definite
    diagnosis of his mental health.  Therefore, whilst  the  mental  health
    condition of claimant is said to be serious, it was submitted  that  it
    did not cross the still very high  threshold  of  being  exposed  to  a
    serious  rapid  and  irreversible  decline  in  his  state  of  health,
    resulting in intense suffering, or to a significant reduction  in  life
    expectancy.  Rather, it is said that the claimant's condition  required
    treatment with medication, as opposed to self-medication  with  alcohol
    and cannabis.  More importantly, the grounds  said  that  the  claimant
    needed to demonstrate that treatment would not be available at the date
    of the hearing, rather than relying on the findings made previously  at
    that hearing in 2009.

 8. In order to test those grounds, it is necessary to have regard to Judge
    Bradshaw's decision.  She noted that the claimant had faced a  decision
    to deport as long ago as 2008, although  in  January  2009  his  appeal
    against that decision had been allowed on the basis that to remove  him
    would be a breach of his Article 3 rights because he was assessed to be
    then at high risk of suicide.  That decision of the  Tribunal  was  not
    challenged by the Secretary of State and the claimant  was  accordingly
    granted discretionary leave, expiring in 2010.

 9. An application was made in 2010 by  those  advising  the  claimant  for
    further leave as it was thought, wrongly, that the application was made
    in time.  It was not until 2016 that the application  was  refused  and
    that generated the decision now under challenge.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge who heard the claimant's appeal  in  2017
    dismissed it; but that decision  was  set  aside  for  a  complete  re-
    hearing, and it was on that basis that the  matter  came  before  Judge
    Bradshaw.  She noted  the  submissions  of  the  parties  including  Mr
    Karnik, who then as now appears on behalf of the claimant.   She  dealt
    in detail with the two reports before her of a Consultant Psychiatrist,
    Dr Ghosh, who had examined  the  claimant.   Having  gone  into  detail
    regarding those reports, Judge Bradshaw  accepted  that  there  was  no
    clear or definitive diagnosis of the claimant's mental health.  He had,
    however, variously been diagnosed with symptoms of  bipolar,  effective
    disorder, schizophrenia, PTSD and alcohol problems.

11. The claimant submitted before Judge Bradshaw that  there  had  not,  in
    fact, been a material improvement in his mental health since 2009.  His
    health had fluctuated and was currently in a more precarious state than
    in 2009 and he was at very serious risk of suicide.  He had developed a
    mistrust of the medical profession and there was nothing to suggest  he
    would have access to, or even be in a state to avail  himself  of,  the
    treatment he required.  His time in the United Kingdom  at  this  point
    had, of course, increased. By contrast his absence  from  Burundi,  his
    own nation, had lengthened.

12. At paragraph 41, Judge Bradshaw turned to her assessment of the Article
    3 risk.  She acknowledged and applied the very high test set out in the
    cases of N to which I have made reference.  She reminded  herself  that
    the question she had to ask was whether the  claimant's  condition  had
    reached a critical stage in terms of the  N  criteria.   She  concluded
    that the evidence overall "does suggest that his illness in  itself  is
    at a critical stage such as to trigger Article 3".  She said that  this
    was not a question of any disparity of  treatment  between  the  United
    Kingdom and Burundi.  She held:-

         "The 2009 determination addressed the inadequacy of the ability  to
         access proper treatment in Burundi and the respondent  has  adduced
         no evidence to undermine that  finding.   Indeed,  the  appellant's
         reluctance to access help and  his  mistrust  as  already  outlined
         might well mean that he would have a lack of access to treatment or
         would be unwilling to seek treatment and that his risk  of  suicide
         would increase."

13. In paragraph  42,  the  judge  returned  to  the  2009  decision  which
    concluded with an undisturbed finding that  the  claimant's  Article  3
    risk met the relevant threshold.  She attributed weight to  that.   She
    also attributed considerable weight to the reports of  Dr Ghosh.   She
    accepted that another doctor, Dr Raffi, in 2011 had reached a different
    conclusion but she considered that that conclusion had been  outweighed
    by the other evidence.  She then made reference to delay,  in  weighing
    the public interest considerations under section 117B.

14. In paragraph 43, Judge Bradshaw concluded that she  was  satisfied  the
    claimant had discharged the  burden  of  showing  that  Article  3  was
    engaged on medical grounds.  She accepted the risk of suicide was  real
    and must be taken seriously.  She found that he was  suffering  from  a
    severe mental illness and his circumstances reached the high Article  3
    threshold on the basis of his health problems, coupled with a very high
    risk of suicide.  She concluded by saying "The  appellant's  moral  and
    psychological integrity are at issue and his circumstances also  engage
    Article 8".

15. I have set out the Secretary of State's grounds of challenge.   I  have
    also had regard to Mr Bates' oral and written submissions.  In essence,
    Mr Bates submits that the most recent report made it evident  that  the
    removal of the claimant to Burundi  would  not  in  itself  affect  his
    mental health or the risk to suicide.  There was a high risk of suicide
    present in the United Kingdom; but this was due to the  fact  that  the
    claimant was not accessing appropriate medical treatment.  This message
    come through very clearly from the second of the reports of Dr Ghosh of
    April  2018.   This  report  indicated  that  the  claimant's  suicidal
    ideation had to do with his  decision  that  he  would  commit  suicide
    within  a  short  period  of  time  on  the  death  of  the  Queen  and
    alternatively that he was walking into traffic, intending or  at  least
    being reckless as to whether or not he  would  be  hit  by  a  vehicle.
    Unlike many cases involving suicidal ideation, there was, according  to
    Mr Bates, no suggestion that the claimant would be so in fear of  being
    removed to Burundi that he  would  seek  to  commit  suicide  for  that
    reason.

16. I have had careful regard to those submissions.  I have also had regard
    to the oral and written submissions of  Mr  Karnik  on  behalf  of  the
    claimant.  He submits that this  is  in  the  nature  of  a  perversity
    challenge by the Secretary of State to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
    decision, masquerading as such, but that in reality it is no more  than
    a disagreement with conclusions that were open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her.

17. This is, I consider, a highly unusual case.  It is striking and  cannot
    be ignored that there was a finding by a judicial fact-finder  as  long
    ago as 2009 that the claimant was then at  the  requisite  risk.   That
    finding was not challenged by the Secretary of State.  Accordingly,  Mr
    Karnik submits that Judge Bradshaw was  entitled,  indeed  obliged,  to
    regard that finding of the judge in 2009 as the starting point  and  to
    see what, if anything, had changed since that time.   I  consider  that
    there is force in that submission.

18. Nevertheless, Mr Bates is correct to say  that  it  was  necessary  for
    Judge Bradshaw to have regard to all the evidence, including  the  more
    recent evidence, in order to make up her own mind about this matter.

19. There are aspects of Judge Bradshaw's  decision  that  can  I  find  be
    criticised.  At paragraph 42, she seems to put into  the  equation,  in
    determining the Article 3 issue, the delay by the Secretary of State in
    responding to the out of time application made for leave on  behalf  of
    the claimant, when it is plain that, in determining Article  3  issues,
    "balancing" matters of that kind have no part to play.

20. However, the main thrust of the judge's findings are  in  my  view  not
    vitiated by legal error.  The judge had before her the two  reports  of
    Dr Ghosh.  Mr Karnik drew my specific attention to the earlier of those
    reports, dated 19 November 2016, the  last  four  paragraphs  of  which
    contain the following stark assessment:-

         "Any threat of removal will have a hugely detrimental impact on his
         mental health.  This has already  been  recognised  by  a  previous
         judge and is even more true at present.  He is quite  severely  ill
         with command hallucinations which makes his health and  his  safety
         at risk.  Any threat  of  deportation  will  lead  to  him  killing
         himself."

21. The paragraph then ends by referring  to  the  claimant  as  constantly
    ruminating in terms of suicidal thoughts  and  in  believing  that  his
    future is foreshortened and that he is receiving command hallucinations
    from God, who is telling him he is about to die.   The  paragraph  ends
    "Any threat of deportation therefore is going to lead to  deterioration
    in his mental health which will make him a serious risk in relation  to
    himself".

22. The more recent report of  Dr  Ghosh  does  not  contain  any  specific
    reiteration of that stark conclusion.  This report does, however,  make
    reference to the earlier report.  If Dr Ghosh had intended in  any  way
    to resile from the stark  conclusions  she  had  earlier  set  down,  I
    consider that one would have expected to find something to that  effect
    in her more recent report.  I cannot see anything of that kind in it.

23. The overall situation as it was before Judge Bradshaw  was,  therefore,
    that there was a set  of  stark  findings  in  the  earlier  report  of
    November 2016 which had not been qualified by the later report.   There
    was also the undisturbed judicial finding in 2009 that, as matters then
    stood, the claimant was at real risk of Article 3 harm, if removed.  It
    is clear from Judge Bradshaw's decision that she did not consider there
    had been any improvement in the claimant's state since that time.

24. Notwithstanding what I have said about delay in the context of  Article
    3 risk, it is clear from paragraph 41 that Judge Bradshaw  applied  the
    very high threshold set out in the cases of N.   I  therefore  conclude
    that there was material before the judge that supported her decision to
    allow the appeal on  Article  3  grounds.   I  consider  that  she  has
    sufficiently reasoned her conclusion. But even if  that  were  not  the
    case, on the basis of the reports of Dr Ghosh, I would have reached the
    same conclusion.

25. This is, in other words, not a case where the risk of suicide, properly
    interpreted, would in all respects be the same whether the claimant was
    removed from the United Kingdom or not.  In any event, it appears to me
    that by analogy with the so-called "deathbed" cases that fall within N,
    this case is closely  analogous.   We  have  a  claimant  who  is  very
    seriously ill indeed.  His life could end at any moment.

26. Although it is not strictly necessary for me to do so in  light  of  my
    conclusion regarding Article 3, I shall address the challenge  made  to
    Article 8.  Judge Bradshaw dealt with this  briefly.   She  did  so  in
    terms of the claimant's moral and physical integrity being at issue, if
    he were to be removed.  Looking at the matters through the lens of  the
    judgment of Laws LJ in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, the mental health
    of the claimant can become  properly  a  subject  of  consideration  in
    Article 8 terms, provided- importantly- that one reaches the  stage  of
    considering proportionality under Article 8(2).

27. I fully accept that because of the claimant's mental health, he has  no
    family life and that his private life in the United Kingdom is severely
    circumscribed, compared with that of others who do not suffer from  his
    problems.  Nevertheless, he has been here for a considerable period  of
    time and had  been  in  June  2018,  when  Judge  Bradshaw  signed  her
    decision.  He has a private life of a kind,  which  properly  fell  for
    consideration.

28. I emphasise, however, that the main conclusion of Judge Bradshaw and my
    main focus in these proceedings has been Article 3.  For the reasons  I
    have given, I  conclude  that  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  Judge
    Bradshaw's decision, such that  I  should  set  it  aside  pursuant  to
    section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007,  and  so
    her decision stands.

29. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date 11 December 2019




                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
