
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                   |Appeal Number: IA/00049/2019     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) |                                 |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Business                         |                                 |
|On 26 February 2021              | On 8 March 2021                 |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Harpreet Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akhter of Edward Marshall Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals, with permission
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Loke) against a decision made
    by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Skehan  on  8  January  2020.   By  that
    decision, Judge Skehan ("the judge") allowed an appeal which  had  been
    brought by Mr Singh against decisions  made  by  the  respondent  on  9
    August 2014 and 4 December 2014.


 2. To avoid confusion, I shall refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the FtT: Mr Singh as the appellant and the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department as the respondent.



Background

 3.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 26 October 2009.  He  held
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant which  was  valid
    from 15 October 2009 to 30 August 2013.


 4. Before the expiry of his leave to remain,  the  appellant  applied  for
    further leave in the same capacity.  The respondent made two  decisions
    in response to this  application.   The  first  is  contained  in  form
    IS151A, dated 9 August 2014, which  states  that  the  appellant  is  a
    person in respect of whom removal directions may be given in accordance
    with section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 because he is  a
    person who used deception in seeking  leave  to  remain.   The  reasons
    given for that decision were as follows:

         You are specifically considered a person who has  sought  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom  by  deception  following  information
         provided to us by Education Testing Service, that on 17  July  2013
         an anomaly with your speaking test  indicated  the  presence  of  a
         proxy test taker.

 5. Form IS151A Part 2, which  bore  the  same  date  and  accompanied  the
    IS151A, stated that the appellant was entitled to appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (IAC) after he had left the United  Kingdom.   Directions
    were to be given for his removal to India.


 6. I was told by Mr Akhter, on instructions from the appellant, that these
    notices were written on 30 June 2014 but were served on  the  appellant
    on 9 August 2014, hence the manuscript date on each.  A third  document
    was  similarly  dated.   This  was  a  two-page  letter  in  which  the
    respondent refused the appellant's  application  for  leave  to  remain
    under Tier 4 of the Points Based System.  There were three  grounds  of
    refusal under the Immigration Rules, although each  was  based  on  the
    allegation that the appellant had used  a  proxy  to  take  an  English
    language test and  ETS's  cancellation  of  his  certificate  for  that
    reason.  The decision described itself as a 'Refusal to Grant Leave  to
    Remain'.  The reason for that description is clear from  section  B  of
    the letter, which was in the following terms:

         This decision is not an  immigration  decision  under  section  82.
         Section 82(2)(d) concerns a "refusal to vary a  person's  leave  to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom if the result of the  refusal
         is that the person has no leave to enter or remain."  This  is  not
         the situation in this case, as the effect of the prior  section  10
         decision means that any existing leave to enter or  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom was invalidated under section 10(8) so you  have  no
         leave to enter or remain at the time the decision to refuse to vary
         leave to remain was notified.

 7. The appellant's former representatives attempted  to  lodge  an  appeal
    against these decisions.  It was submitted, as I  understand  it,  that
    the appellant was able to pursue an appeal against one or more  of  the
    decisions above on human rights grounds.  On 1 October 2014, First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Doyle decided that the appellant had no right of appeal.
     He noted that the appellant was only entitled to appeal whilst in  the
    United Kingdom if he could show that section  92  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied.  Having considered R  (Nirula)
    v FtT(IAC) [2012] EWCA Civ 1436,  Judge Doyle held that  the  appellant
    had not made a human rights claim before the refusal of his application
    for leave to remain, as a result of which his  right  of  appeal  could
    only be exercised from abroad.


 8. In the meantime, on 13 August 2014, the applicant had formally asserted
    that his removal to India would be in breach of his  rights  under  the
    ECHR.  The respondent refused that claim in a letter dated  4  December
    2014.  The respondent considered there to be no basis inside or outside
    the Immigration Rules to grant leave to remain.  Under the  sub-heading
    Certification - Designated State, the letter stated at [21]-[22]:

         In addition, your client's human  rights  claim  is  one  to  which
         section 94(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
         applies.  This requires the Secretary of State to certify that  the
         claim is clearly unfounded unless she is satisfied that it  is  not
         clearly  unfounded.   After  consideration  of  all  the   evidence
         available, it has been decided that your client's claim is  clearly
         unfounded.  Therefore, it is hereby certified under  section  94(2)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that your claim
         is clearly unfounded.


         As your client's human rights claim has been certified  as  clearly
         unfounded, he may not appeal while in the United Kingdom.

 9. The appellant also issued judicial review proceedings  challenging  the
    respondent's decisions.  Permission to proceed  was  refused  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Smith in a decision which was sent to the parties on  15
    January 2016.  Relying on what had been said by the Court of Appeal  in
    R (Mehmood & Ali) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 744; [2016] 1 WLR  461,  Judge
    Smith held that there were no exceptional circumstances which tended to
    suggest that an out of  country  right  of  appeal  was  an  inadequate
    remedy.  Judge Smith also certified that the claim was totally  without
    merit, thereby preventing the applicant from renewing  his  application
    to an oral hearing.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

10. On 17 May 2019, another firm of solicitors (SBM Solicitors of Hounslow)
    lodged form IAFT-5 with the  First-tier  Tribunal,  seeking  to  appeal
    against the decisions which were communicated on 9 August 2014.   There
    were lengthy grounds of appeal, the detail of which I do not propose to
    consider at this stage.  In the section of the form which permitted  an
    extension of time to be sought, however, the appellant's solicitors had
    written this:

         This appeal is filed in relevance of the  recent  decision  of  the
         Court of Appeal in Ahsan & Ors v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009  to  the
         instant application.


         In short  the  applicant  submits  that  Ahsan  confirms  that  the
         respondent was wrong to certify the applicant's human rights claim,
         by his decision by letter dated 19.12.2014, purportedly pursuant to
         s94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended
         ("the 2002 Act").  This is because the human rights claim  depended
         on  the  correctness  of  the  respondent's  allegation  that   the
         applicant was a TOEIC cheat, and the applicant's case  that  he  is
         not a cheat is not bound to fail.


         In light of the above facts, we request the tribunal to extend time
         for appealing in the interest of Justice and Fairness.

11. The First-tier Tribunal issued directions, requiring the  appellant  or
    his representatives to explain why there had been a delay  between  the
    handing down of the decision in  Ahsan  on  5  December  2017  and  the
    lodging of  the  appeal  in  May  2019.   That  direction  elicited  an
    uninformative statement from the appellant in which he stated  that  he
    had been told that he should be afforded an in-country right of  appeal
    as a result of the decision in Ahsan.  He stated that he had made human
    rights representations to the respondent on 22  January  2018  but  had
    received no response.


12. On 10 October 2019, the respondent filed and served a short  bundle  of
    documents.  The copy in the Tribunal's file contains some copied  pages
    from the appellant's passport, a  diploma  in  Business  Management  he
    obtained in April 2013, a copy of the certified refusal  from  December
    2014  and  the  IAFT-5  with  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  supporting
    documents.

13. The file was placed before a Duty Judge, just as it had been  in  2014.
    The judge decided not to make a ruling on the papers as to the validity
    of the appeal.  It was noted instead that

         Appeal is not out of time since no  ROA  was  given  in  the  first
         place.  As for validity, this can be argued as a preliminary  point
         before  the  Trial  Judge  (given  the  complexities  which  exist,
         inappropriate to be resolved at this stage).

14. The matter therefore came before the judge, sitting at Hatton Cross  on
    8 January 2020.  The appellant  was  represented  by  a  solicitor,  Mr
    Chohan.  The respondent was represented by  a  Presenting  Officer,  Mr
    Iqbal.   For reasons which are not altogether clear, the judge heard no
    argument on the validity of the appeal.  She  instead  heard  extensive
    argument on whether she should extend time  for  bringing  the  appeal.
    She decided that she should do so.  She then considered the  merits  of
    the appeal and found, in summary, that the  respondent  had  failed  to
    adduce any evidence in support of her decision that the  appellant  had
    cheated in his ETS test.  She concluded that  there  was  no  basis  to
    conclude that the appellant's presence was not conducive to the  public
    good and that the appellant met the Immigration Rules.  She allowed the
    appeal on that basis, and on the basis that the decision  was  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 with reference to  Article
    8 ECHR.








The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. The respondent advances a single ground of appeal against  the  judge's
    decision, which is that she misdirected herself in finding  that  there
    was a right of appeal (or an in-country right of appeal) against any of
    the decisions which had been made by the respondent.   That  ground  is
    advanced in the original notice of appeal and developed in  a  skeleton
    argument which was filed by a Senior Presenting Officer, Mr  Kotas,  on
    27 June 2020.

16. The appellant's response is set out  in  three  documents.   There  are
    'Submissions in Response' which were filed by the appellant himself  on
    3 July 2020.  There are Further Submissions, the date of which I cannot
    ascertain.  And there are written submissions settled by Mr  Gajjar  of
    counsel on 22 February 2021.  I  will  turn  to  the  detail  of  these
    documents in due course but it suffices for present purposes to set out
    the admirably concise summary of the appellant's position which appears
    at [23] of Mr Gajjar's submissions:

         There was  no  challenge  to  the  issue  of  jurisdiction  by  the
         Respondent at the hearing.  The  Appellant's  challenge  to  the  9
         August 2014 [decision] did attract  a  right  of  appeal  with  the
         consequence that the issue of jurisdiction must fall away.  The FTJ
         did not err on the question of timeliness.

17. I heard from Mr Akhter, who sought to develop the  written  submissions
    in oral argument.  I did not need to call on Mr Walker.

Legal Framework

18. Significant changes were made to Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 by the Immigration Act 2014.  Changes were made, in
    particular, to section 82 of the 2002 Act, which defines the  types  of
    decisions against which an appeal may  be  brought  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber).


19. Before I turn to the relevant provisions of  the  2002  Act,  I  should
    mention s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, which provides  for
    the removal of  certain  persons  unlawfully  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Between 10 February 2003 and 20 October 2014, s10(1)(b) provided that a
    person may be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
    directions given by an Immigration Officer  if  he  uses  deception  in
    seeking (whether successfully or not) leave to remain.  By  s10(8),  as
    in force until 20 October 2014,  the  notification  of  a  decision  to
    remove a person under s10 had the effect of invalidating any  leave  to
    enter or remain previously given to him.


20. Since 20 October 2014, s82 of the 2002 Act has provided that  a  person
    may appeal to the Tribunal in the following circumstances

         (1)  A person ("P") may appeal to the Tribunal where-
         (a)  the Secretary of State has decided  to  refuse  a  protection
         claim made by P,
         (b)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a  human  rights
         claim made by P, or
         (c)  the Secretary of State has decided to revoke  P's  protection
         status.

21. Between 1 August 2008 and 19  October  2014,  s82(1)  provided  that  a
    person might appeal to the Tribunal where an immigration  decision  had
    been in respect  of  him.   There  were  fourteen  different  types  of
    immigration decision, as defined in s82(2), of which  I  need  set  out
    only two:


         (d)  refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is that the person  has
         no leave to enter or remain,


         (...)


         (g)  a decision that a person is to be  removed  from  the  United
         Kingdom by way of directions under section 10(1)(a), (b),  (ba)  or
         (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  (c.  33)  (removal  of
         person unlawfully in United Kingdom),

22. Section 92 of the 2002 Act makes provision for the place from which  an
    appeal may be brought or continued.  Since 20 October 2014, s94(3)  has
    provided that an appeal against the refusal of  a  human  rights  claim
    must be brought from outside  the  United  Kingdom  if,  amongst  other
    things, the claim has been certified on the basis that  it  is  clearly
    unfounded.


23. Before the amendments which were brought about by the  Immigration  Act
    2014, s92 of the 2002 Act provided that a person was not  permitted  to
    appeal under s82(1) whilst he was in  the  United  Kingdom  unless  his
    appeal was of a kind to which the section related.  By s92(2),  one  of
    the kinds of appeal to which the section related was an appeal  against
    an immigration decision of the type identified in s82(2)(d) (as above).
     Section 92(4) provided that an  in-country  appeal  could  be  brought
    against an immigration decision if the appellant "has  made  an  asylum
    claim, or a human rights claim, while in the United Kingdom".

Analysis

24. As I understood the appellant's submissions, it is asserted that he had
    an in-country right of appeal against the decisions which  were  served
    upon him on 9 August 2014 and 4  December  2014.   In  respect  of  the
    latter decision, it cannot sensibly be suggested that the appellant was
    entitled to appeal before  leaving  the  country.   That  decision  was
    certified as clearly unfounded under section  94,  the  consequence  of
    which could not have been clearer from s92(3): the appellant  was  only
    permitted to appeal after he had left the United Kingdom.


25. In respect of the decisions of 9 August 2014, the position is a  little
    more complicated but the starting point is the uncontested statement at
    section B of the refusal letter of that date, which I  have  reproduced
    in full at [6] above.  It is correct to observe that the appellant  had
    made an application for further leave before the expiry of his existing
    leave under Tier 4 of the Points Based System.  All things being equal,
    the  timing  of  that  application  would  engage  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971,  with  the  result  that  the  appellant's  leave
    continued in force until the application was decided.   It  is  not  in
    issue between the parties, however, that his statutorily extended leave
    was brought to an end (or invalidated, to use the  statutory  language)
    when the respondent made a decision under s10 of the 1999 Act.


26. As a result of the fact that the appellant's leave was  invalidated  by
    s10(8) of the 1999 Act on or before 9 August 2014, the  result  of  the
    refusal of his application was not that he had no  leave  to  enter  or
    remain.  The refusal of his application  could  not  put  him  in  that
    position because the prior decision under s10 had already done so.  The
    refusal of his application was not, for  that  reason,  an  immigration
    decision as defined in s82(2)(d) as then in force.  By  virtue  of  The
    Immigration Act 2014  (Commencement  No.  3,  Transitional  and  Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014, these provisions  remained  applicable  to  the
    appellant's case despite the changes made by the Immigration Act 2014.


27. It is clear, therefore, that neither the  certified  decision  nor  the
    refusal of leave to remain could be the subject of  an  appeal,  or  at
    least an appeal brought in-country.  What of the decision under s10  of
    the 1999 Act, however?  That was an immigration decision as defined  by
    s82(2)(g) but that is not one of the decisions identified explicitly in
    s92 as carrying an in-country right of appeal.  The only way  in  which
    that particular decision might have  carried  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal was by the mechanism identified at s92(4); by the  making  of  a
    human rights claim.  As Judge Doyle correctly held in 2014, however, it
    was decided in R (Nirula) v FtT(IAC) [2012] EWCA Civ 1436; [2013] 1 WLR
    1090 that the human rights claim must precede the immigration  decision
    in question.  But the s10 decision in this case was made on or before 9
    August 2014, and the appellant only  asserted  that  his  human  rights
    would be breached by his removal after he had received  that  decision.
    The fact that he made that claim could not  convert  a  decision  which
    carried only an out of country appeal into a decision which carried  an
    in-country appeal.  (Nor,  for  the  same  reason,  does  it  make  any
    difference to this  question  that  the  appellant  made  human  rights
    representations to the respondent in 2018.)


28. It is therefore clear that the statutory  schemes  in  force  when  the
    decisions against the appellant were made in 2014 did not permit him  a
    right of appeal to the FtT.  Judge Doyle was correct so to hold, albeit
    for rather more concise reasons than I have set out above.  I turn  now
    to consider the submissions made by the  appellant  in  an  attempt  to
    overcome these obvious difficulties.  The first, as I have noted above,
    is that the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Ahsan  &  Ors  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2009; [2018] HRLR 5 has somehow altered the position.


29. There were four appellants before the Court of Appeal in Ahsan, each of
    whom was accused of using a proxy to take  a  TOEIC  test.   Three  had
    received s10 decisions which were, for  the  reasons  I  have  set  out
    above, only capable of being appealed after the appellants had left the
    country.  The fourth appellant had made a human rights claim which  had
    ben refused and would have attracted a right of appeal were it not  for
    the respondent's decision to certify the claim  as  clearly  unfounded.
    He too could only appeal after departure from the UK, therefore.   Each
    sought judicial review of the respondent's decision, contending that an
    out-of-country appeal was not an adequate remedy.

30. The Court of Appeal allowed each of the appeals, holding that an out of
    country appeal did not  satisfy  the  procedural  requirements  of  the
    common law or Article 8 ECHR in a case where the oral  evidence  of  an
    appellant was important to the  determination  of  the  appeal,  unless
    facilities for the giving of evidence by  video  link  were  available.
    Judicial review would  therefore  lie  against  such  a  decision.   In
    principle, however, permission to proceed in such a case might properly
    be refused if the person in question could achieve an  adequate  remedy
    by an in-country human rights appeal.  That would only  be  so  if  the
    court was  satisfied  that  such  an  appeal  would  provide  a  remedy
    equivalent to that provided by a direct challenge to  the  decision  in
    question.


31. As should be immediately apparent from that short summary of the  ratio
    of Ahsan, it does not create a right of appeal where none existed under
    statute.  It remains the position, as I sought to explain to Mr Akhter,
    that the First-tier Tribunal is a creature of statute  with  a  limited
    jurisdiction.  Where, as here, there was no conceivable route by  which
    an appeal could be pursued whilst the appellant remained in the  United
    Kingdom, Ahsan made no difference to the jurisdiction of the  Tribunal.
    The significance of Ahsan, instead, is that  it  rendered  rather  more
    arguable that which had been totally unarguable - on the state  of  the
    authorities at that time - before Upper Tribunal Judge Smith.   At  the
    time that she refused permission to  apply  for  judicial  review,  the
    Court of Appeal did not have the benefit of the decision in R (Kiarie &
    Byndloss) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 42; [2017]  1  WLR  2380  and  an  out  of
    country appeal was held generally to represent an adequate remedy in  a
    case such as this.  Subject to considerations of timeliness, therefore,
    the applicant could have sought judicial  review  of  the  respondent's
    decision to proceed as she did instead of taking a  route  which  would
    have permitted an in-country right of appeal.


32. If I understood Mr Akhter's written and oral submissions correctly, his
    principal point in reliance on Ahsan was this: given  that  an  out  of
    country right of  appeal  was  held  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  to  be
    inadequate, the First-tier Tribunal should ignore those actions on  the
    part of the respondent which stood in the way of an in-country  appeal.
    He submitted that the decision under  s10  was  unlawful,  as  was  the
    certificate under s94, and the  removal  of  either  would  permit  the
    appellant to litigate in-country that which he would otherwise have  to
    leave the UK to bring before the FtT.  As I have endeavoured to explain
    above, however, the FtT's jurisdiction is governed by  Part  5  of  the
    2002  Act  and  it  cannot  simply  overlook  the  specific   statutory
    consequences of decisions which remain in force.   The  fact  that  the
    order of events is as detailed above can only result  in  a  conclusion
    that the FtT had no jurisdiction to  consider  the  appeal,  and  Ahsan
    makes no difference to that conclusion, as submitted by  the  Secretary
    of State in her grounds of appeal and her skeleton argument.


33. Mr Akhter also sought to make a point in reliance on the fact  (and  it
    is  a  fact)  that  the  respondent  has  never  made  any  attempt  to
    substantiate the allegation that the appellant  cheated  in  his  TOEIC
    test.  But that is to confuse the merits of the appellant's claim  with
    the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and to put the cart before  the  horse
    in a very real sense.  The fact that a person has a good claim, or even
    an unanswerable claim, cannot create jurisdiction where none exists  in
    statute. In any event, the respondent has been entitled since  2014  to
    think that the appellant is a man with no in-country right  of  appeal.
    She has not been required to prove her case in the context of an appeal
    because she has always maintained that the  appellant  has  not  had  a
    right of appeal before leaving the country.  The  absence  of  evidence
    before Judge Smith or before Judge Skehan does not begin to demonstrate
    that the respondent has no evidence to show that the appellant cheated;
    it merely serves to show that there has not yet been a forum  in  which
    that allegation was properly to be tested.


34. In his written submissions for the appellant, Mr Gajjar of counsel does
    not seek to develop the submission that there was a statutory right  of
    appeal against the decisions made on 9 August 2014.  The only reference
    to that submission is in the summary at [23], which I  have  reproduced
    above.  I infer that he was mindful of his obligation  not  to  advance
    any contention which he did not consider to be properly arguable.

35. What Mr Gajjar does submit, at some  length,  is  that  the  respondent
    failed to take the jurisdictional issue before the FtT and  should  not
    be permitted to do so on appeal. He  places  particular  reliance  upon
    what was said by Sedley LJ (with whom Lloyd and Sullivan LJJ agreed) in
    Anwar, Adjo & Pengeyo [2010] EWCA Civ 1275; [2011] 1 WLR  2552  and  by
    Longmore LJ (with whom Sedley and Davis LJJ agreed) in Nirula.

36. In Anwar, the court held that the bar contained in s92 (that is to say,
    the bar to an in-country right of appeal) only bound the tribunal  once
    the Home Secretary had chosen to take the point.  In Nirula, the  court
    held that those dicta from Anwar were not obiter (as had  been  thought
    by the judge at first instance) but that  it  was  not  only  the  Home
    Secretary who was able to raise the jurisdictional bar; the point could
    also be taken by the Tribunal, of its own motion: [31].  At  [32],  the
    court echoed what had been said in Anwar,  that  the  respondent  could
    choose not to take any jurisdictional objection if she wished  to  take
    that course but that the decision  would  be  'precarious'  if  it  had
    proceeded without anyone considering the jurisdictional position.


37. The point made by Mr Gajjar in reliance on these authorities is  simply
    this: Mr Iqbal, the Presenting Officer, did not seek to submit that the
    FtT had no jurisdiction to consider the appellant's appeal.   He,  like
    the judge and the appellant's solicitor, instead dwelled for some  time
    on the question of timeliness.  In the absence of any attempt to  raise
    the jurisdictional bar considered in the  authorities,  the  judge  was
    correct to hear the appeal and it is too  late  for  the  point  to  be
    raised at this stage.

38. To make these submissions  is  to  overlook  the  plain  terms  of  the
    decisions made by the respondent.  The s10  decision  stated  in  terms
    that it only attracted an out of country right of appeal.  The  refusal
    of the application  for  leave  to  remain  stated  in  terms  that  it
    attracted  no  right  of  appeal.   And  the  certified  decision  also
    explained that the appellant had to leave the United Kingdom before  he
    could appeal.  Even if the Presenting Officer had voiced no  objection,
    that objection was plain on the face of all of the notices.  The  point
    had even been noted by the Duty Judge as  one  which  the  trial  judge
    would be required to consider.   It  would  have  been  better  if  the
    Presenting Officer  had  sought  to  navigate  the  judge  through  the
    provisions and the authorities but his failure to do so cannot be taken
    as a decision to waive the point taken squarely in the papers.

39. Even if I am wrong in so concluding, I doubt that Anwar and  Nirula  go
    as far as Mr Gajjar suggests.  I note that Longmore LJ  made  reference
    to the precariousness of a decision  made  by  a  judge  in  excess  of
    jurisdiction  where  the  point  was  not  raised.   Neither  authority
    suggests that the point cannot be raised on  appeal  when  it  was  not
    raised below, and the reference to such  a  decision  being  precarious
    tends to suggest precisely the  opposite.  That  is  immaterial  to  my
    conclusion, however, since the  jurisdictional  point  was  so  clearly
    taken in writing by the respondent in this case.  The  judge  erred  in
    law in failing to consider the point and, had she done  so,  there  was
    only  one  decision  she  could  lawfully   have   reached.    In   the
    circumstances, I shall set aside the judge's decision  as  it  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I substitute a  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal for want of  jurisdiction.   For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt, the result of that decision is that none of the findings in  the
    decision of Judge Skehan shall stand.

40. At Mr Akhter's request, I add this.  There is in the papers before me a
    document dated 11 January 2018.  It  is  addressed  to  a  Home  Office
    address in Sheffield and entitled 'This is a human  rights  application
    under section 120'.  It  contains  some  brief  submissions  about  the
    appellant's case and some  reference  to  Ahsan.   It  seems  that  the
    appellant's intention in writing this letter was  to  elicit  from  the
    respondent a decision which was capable of being appealed  to  the  FtT
    without his leaving the country.  He states, however, that he has never
    received any response to it.  It  appears  to  be  the  case  that  the
    document was indeed posted to the respondent on  22  January  2018,  as
    there is  a  certificate  of  posting  immediately  behind  it  in  the
    appellant's bundle.  If the document was sent to  the  respondent,  the
    appellant should receive some  response  so  that  he  knows  where  he
    stands.  What she cannot properly do is to ignore those representations
    when she is aware of what was decided by the Court of Appeal  in  Ahsan
    about the right to an effective remedy in the face of an allegation  of
    deception.

Notice of Decision

I allow the appeal brought by the Secretary of State.  The decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point  of  law  and
that decision is hereby set aside.  I substitute my own decision to  dismiss
the appellant's appeal for want of jurisdiction.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                                                               01 March 2021
