
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00436/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 March 2016                            |On 13 April 2016                 |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                           SIRANUSH HAMBARDZUMYAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MaDE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkins, Counsel, instructed by Arlington Crown
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Armenia,  born  on  29  July
    1973.  On 11 December 2014 the respondent refused a  request  that  the
    appellant be allowed to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.   The
    appellant appealed that refusal.  The appeal came before Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal J McMahon on 1 July 2015.  In a decision of 24 July
    2015 Judge McMahon dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on 25 January 2016 on the grounds that
    it was arguable that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
    appellant did not meet the suitability  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.
    Permission was granted on all grounds.  The appeal came before me.

Ground 1 and Ground 2

 3. The appellant's first two grounds were that the judge erred at [25] and
    [26] in considering the issue  of  whether  the  appellant  gave  false
    information in her Method of  Entry  questionnaire  as  the  judge  had
    proceeded on the basis that an individual who has  a  poor  immigration
    history is more likely to be dishonest.  It  was  submitted  that  this
    approach was wrong in principle.  It was also submitted that the  judge
    gave no reason for rejecting the appellant's  evidence  that  she  felt
    very stressed and under  pressure  to  complete  the  Method  of  Entry
    Questionnaire quickly.

 4. The judge at [24] directed himself correctly in relation to the  burden
    of proof being with the respondent to demonstrate  that  the  appellant
    had been dishonest.  At [25] of the Decision and Reasons the judge took
    into consideration that the appellant's poor  immigration  history  was
    relevant and the judge set this out at [25].  However it  is  incorrect
    to say that this was the only consideration by  the  judge.  The  judge
    also considered in the round that the appellant claimed  that  she  was
    feeling stressed at the time of the Method of Entry  questionnaire  and
    had stated she believed she was questioned quickly.  However the  judge
    made adequate findings for  not  accepting  this,  including  that  the
    appellant was not being questioned by an Immigration Officer but rather
    was completing this questionnaire in the office of her solicitor.

 5. The judge gave clear reasons at [25] and [26] as to why the  judge  did
    not accept the appellant's account.  There was nothing incorrect in the
    judge's approach. Mr Hawkins pointed me to  the  fact  that  there  was
    evidence  before  the  judge  as  to  the  appellant's  mental   health
    condition.  However, I note that the judge set this  out  at  [32]  (in
    relation to the judge's consideration of "very significant obstacles");
    it is clear from a  reading  of  the  Decision  and  Reasons  in  their
    entirety that the judge gave very  careful  consideration  to  all  the
    evidence before him and was clearly aware  of  the  appellant's  mental
    health difficulties.  I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for not accepting the appellant's assertion.

Ground 3

 6. This was the main thrust of Mr Hawkins' arguments both in  his  written
    grounds and orally before me. It was submitted that the judge erred  at
    [27] of the Decision and Reasons in relation to the information in  the
    Method of Entry questionnaire.  The judge at [27] found as follows:

         "It has been submitted  that  the  Method  of  Entry  questionnaire
         should not have been taken into account on the  basis  it  was  not
         submitted 'in relation to the application' but had  been  submitted
         after the  application  had  been  made.   I  do  not  accept  that
         submission.  It was submitted before the decision under appeal  and
         was submitted by the appellant as part of the  application  process
         and before that process became finalised by refusal."

 7. Mr Hawkins relied on the Court of Appeal case of Raju [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    754.   It  was  Mr  Hawkins'  contention  that  the  Method  of   Entry
    questionnaires are not sent out  in  every  case  and  are  not  always
    completed and returned, and are concerned with removal  decisions,  not
    decisions  on  the  substantive   application.   He   stated   it   was
    fundamentally wrong that this information should therefore be  regarded
    as having been provided in relation to the application.

 8. However, the judge at [23] of the Decision and Reasons  considered  the
    suitability requirements  under  Appendix  FM  and  correctly  directed
    himself that was in  issue  was  whether  or  not  to  the  appellant's
    knowledge false information had  been  provided  "in  relation  to  the
    application".

 9. I am satisfied that Raju should be  distinguished.    Raju  related  to
    paragraph 34G of the Immigration Rules and when an application  can  be
    said to be made, specifically in relation to what information could  be
    considered under a points-based system application.

10. Miss Fijiwala submitted a copy of a letter dated 17 October  2014  from
    the respondent to the appellant's representatives indicating that there
    was insufficient  information  provided  and  that  "in  reviewing  the
    information you have provided" the  respondent  required  a  Method  of
    Entry questionnaire to be filled in.  This was prior to the decision on
    the application. Indeed in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  dated  11
    December 2014 the respondent referred to the appellant's letters  dated
    12 August 2014 and 27 October 2014 (the letter relating to  the  Method
    of Entry  questionnaire).   This  was  a  case  where  the  appellant's
    original  application  had  been  made  on  28  March  2013  and   that
    application had been refused with no right of appeal.  However this was
    subsequently revised.  If what Mr Hawkins  says  is  correct  then  the
    logical conclusion would be that only the information submitted  as  of
    28 March 2013 was "in relation to the application".  That cannot be the
    case.

11. Paragraph S-LTR.2.2 provides as follows:

    'Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge-

    a) false information, representations or documents have been  submitted
       in relation to the  of the suitability requirements  under  Appendix
       FM

12. This does not  state  that  the  paragraph  only  relates  to  when  an
    application  is  made  but  rather  refers  specifically  to  documents
    submitted in relation to an  application.   The  fact  that  not  every
    application requires this information and that a decision may well have
    been taken without this information, does not change the fact that this
    appellant submitted this information in relation  to  her  application.
    There is no error of law disclosed.

Ground 4

13. It was contended that at [29] the judge erred in failing to  take  into
    account the positive factors in the appellant's favour  including  that
    she sought to regularise her status, her lack  of  criminal  offending,
    her relationship with a British citizen and the implications  for  that
    relationship, as well as her medical conditions in deciding whether  or
    not the appellant met the relevant requirements.  However the reasoning
    at [29] related to the  false  information  provided  which  meant  the
    suitability  requirements  were  not  met.    That  was  an  adequately
    reasoned finding open to the judge.

14. In the alternative if I am wrong  in  relation  to  any  of  the  above
    grounds, the judge at [30] went on  to  make  alternative  findings  in
    relation to the very significant  obstacles  test  at  276ADE  and  the
    insurmountable obstacles test at Section EX  of  Appendix  FM  (in  the
    event that the judge was wrong in  relation  to  his  findings  on  the
    suitability requirements).  The judge made clear findings from [31]  to
    [36] of the Decision and  Reasons  and  weighed  up  all  the  relevant
    factors.  Although Mr Hawkins  contended  that  the  alleged  error  in
    relation to the dishonest information (and for the avoidance of doubt I
    find there is none) infects the entirety of the judge's decision, I  do
    not accept this argument.  The judge made clear and  detailed  findings
    of fact in relation to the appellant's circumstances and those  of  her
    husband and was entitled to reach the subsequent  decision  that  these
    did not  amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles  to  their  family  life
    continuing in Armenia.  There was no assessment in  those  findings  of
    the appellant's  dishonesty,  which  did  not  come  into  the  judge's
    consideration on this part of the appeal.

Ground 5

15. Mr Hawkins submitted that the judge had accepted a number of  facts  in
    relation to the appellant and  her  husband  and  given  the  range  of
    difficulties which the judge  had  failed  to  explain  or  give  clear
    reasoning as to why the combination of these factors did not  meet  the
    requisite test.  However, as noted above, I am satisfied that the judge
    did give clear and adequate reasons as to why  these  factors  did  not
    amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles,  or  in  the  alternative   very
    significant obstacles.

16. The judge took into account at [36] that both  the  appellant  and  her
    husband have substantial experience of living in  Armenia.   The  judge
    took into account at [35] that the appellant's husband is  Armenian  by
    birth.   The judge also took into account that the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor have family living in Armenia  and  it  is  not  a  case  where
    children are expected to move to a country of which  they  have  little
    experience.  The judge also took  into  account  that  there  would  be
    difficulties including as set out in the decision (and summarised by Mr
    Hawkins) but made detailed and adequate findings as to  why  even  when
    aggregated [33] these  did  not  meet  the  test  of  very  significant
    obstacles.  The judge correctly directed himself, including at [34]  to
    the appropriate test.  Agyarko & Ors, R (on the application of) v  SSHD
    [2015] applied.  Mr Hawkins' submissions  amount  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's clear findings.

Ground 6

17. It was Mr Hawkins submission that the judge failed to properly consider
    Article 8. I am satisfied that the judge gave detailed consideration to
    Article 8 from [38] to [48] of the Decision and Reasons and  considered
    all the factors including but not limited  to  the  appellant's  mental
    health condition and that her husband is a British citizen.

18. The judge properly  directed  himself  in  relation  to  the  statutory
    requirements under Sections 117A and B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 which the judge had  to  take  into  consideration.
    There was no substantive challenge by Mr Hawkins to that consideration.



19. The judge also gave separate consideration to the issue of  whether  an
    entry clearance application could be made to return and  made  findings
    that no adequate  evidence  had  been  submitted  in  relation  to  the
    specified evidence to demonstrate the financial requirements  were  met
    and therefore the judge could not place much weight on the  "Chikwamba"
    point.

20. There was no evidence  to  support  Mr  Hawkin's  submission  that  the
    alleged error in relation to the  judge's  findings  on  the  appellant
    dishonestly completing the Method of Entry questionnaire  (and  I  have
    found no error) infected the judge's findings in their entirety

21. I am satisfied that the appellant's arguments amount to no more than  a
    disagreement with the  judge's  clearly  reasoned  consideration  under
    Article 8.

Conclusion

22. There has been no error of law disclosed.  The  decision  of  Judge  J.
    McMahon shall stand in its entirety.  The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
