




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00622/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2017                           |On 20 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                                    [A K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan of Universal Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as [ ] 1985.

 2. On 12 August 2014, he made application for extension of  his  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. In that regard Mr Khan for the  Appellant
    invited me to note that the application when made  had  placed  a  tick
    under Section 3 of the application form against:

         "Other purposes or reasons not covered by other application forms"

     In  other  words,  the  application  was  being  made  outside  of  the
Immigration Rules.

 3. On 18 January 2016, a decision was made to refuse the  application.  On
    that same date, an application which had been made by  the  Appellant's
    wife was also refused.

 4. The Appellant and his wife appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  Their
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese,  sitting
    at Taylor House on 20 March 2017. In a decision promulgated on 7  April
    2017 Judge Abebrese dismissed the appeals both of the Appellant and his
    wife having regard to the Immigration Rules and by  reference  to  what
    the judge described  as,  "exceptional  circumstances  outside  of  the
    Rules".

 5. Judge Abebrese clearly gave weight to the fact that in respect  of  the
    Appellant's wife, discretionary leave had been granted to  her  on  the
    basis of domestic violence inflicted on her by her ex-husband. However,
    more latterly she was relying not  on  domestic  violence  but  now  on
    medical grounds. In those circumstances, the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to refuse the application of the Appellant's wife was found by
    Judge Abebrese to be consistent with the Respondent's policy.

 6. Rather less consideration was given to the  Appellant's  appeal,  whose
    appeal has come before me, because Judge Abebrese found principally  by
    consideration of the Appellant's wife's appeal that both the  Appellant
    and his wife could together, with their child,  return  to  Bangladesh;
    there being, Judge Abebrese found, no insurmountable obstacles.

 7. Certain adverse findings were made by Judge Abebrese. He  rejected  the
    evidence of the Appellant that it was not  possible  for  his  wife  to
    return to Bangladesh because of her  medical  condition.  Significantly
    Judge Abebrese had regard to the fact that neither  the  Appellant  nor
    his wife had resided in the United Kingdom  for  a  minimum  continuous
    period of twenty years, though in fact the Appellant's wife had resided
    for ten years and lawfully so a matter to which I shall return  in  due
    course.

 8. Insofar as the Appellant had suggested that there  were  threats  which
    his wife would face from her ex-husband's family were she to return  to
    Bangladesh, Judge Abebrese did  not  find  that  aspect  of  the  claim
    proven; indeed, he went so far as to  say  that  he  did  not  find  it
    plausible given  that  she,  the  Appellant's  wife,  had  returned  to
    Bangladesh on a number of occasions.

 9. Not content with the Decision, by  Notice  dated  19  April  2017,  the
    Appellant and his wife made application for permission to appeal to the
    Upper  Tribunal.  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    granted permission in respect of both of them. In  granting  permission
    she said as follows:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has erred in law (a) by  failing  to
         give adequate reasons  as  to  why  the  transitional  arrangements
         covering individuals who are  granted  a  period  of  discretionary
         leave prior to 9 July 2012 do not  apply.  The  second  Appellant's
         previous marriage broke down [that is the Appellant's wife] and she
         developed  a  medical  condition  as  a  result  and  submitted  an
         application to the Respondent based on domestic violence. Given her
         medical condition  coupled  with  other  factors  she  was  granted
         discretionary leave and (b) by failing to into account in terms  of
         Article 8(i) the second  Appellant's  medical  condition  and  (ii)
         adequately taking into account the public interest  in  failing  to
         apply the statutory provision of Section 117  in  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 at all".

10. The grounds which gave rise to that grant of permission run to  twenty-
    one paragraphs. The  grounds  submitted  with  respect  to  the  second
    Appellant submit that the grant of discretionary leave was  not  solely
    as a result of domestic violence but was in  consequence  also  of  the
    medical condition. It was submitted that were the fear based only  upon
    the threats of her husband international protection as a refugee  would
    have been claimed.

11. As Judge Grant-Hutchison noted the  grounds  also  submitted  that  the
    Judge had erred in not considering the correct policy. The question  to
    be determined in consideration of the policy was whether  the  original
    grant of discretionary leave had  been  granted  by  reference  to  the
    medical condition affecting the Appellant's wife together with domestic
    violence rather than just  on  the  basis  of  domestic  violence.  The
    relevant policy as set out in the Respondent's Rule 24 notice states as
    follows:

         "Those granted leave under the DL Policy  enforced  before  9  July
         2012 will normally continue to be  dealt  with  under  that  policy
         through to settlement if they continue to qualify for further leave
         on the same basis as their original DL was granted  (normally  they
         will be eligible to apply for settlement after accruing  six  years
         continuous DL (or where appropriate a combination of DL  and  LOTR,
         see Section 8 above) unless at  the  date  of  decision  they  fall
         within the restricted leave policy.

         Caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances  prevailing  at
         the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date of the
         decision. If the circumstances remain the same, the individual does
         not fall within the restricted leave  policy  and  the  criminality
         thresholds do not apply, a further period of three years DL  should
         normally be granted. Caseworkers must consider  whether  there  are
         any circumstances that may  warrant  departure  from  the  standard
         period of leave. See Section 5.4

         If there had been significant changes that mean  the  applicant  no
         longer qualifies for leave under the DL  policy  or  the  applicant
         falls for refusal on the basis of criminality (see criminality  and
         exclusion section above), the further leave application  should  be
         refused".

12. Since the decision to grant permission there has been a material change
    in circumstances. The Appellant's wife withdrew her appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal on 13 June 2017 and within a week, 19 June 2017,  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residency  (ten  years)
    and the child of the first Appellant  and  his  wife  obtained  British
    citizenship.

13. Although the Appellant's wife has withdrawn her  appeal,  still  it  is
    necessary for me to look to any errors of law that might have been made
    by Judge Abebrese concerning her since any errors may impact  upon  the
    Appellant.

14. That the transitional arrangements applicable to those who come  before
    9 July 2012 for being  granted  leave  under  the  discretionary  leave
    policy in force at that time applied was not in issue. The  Appellant's
    wife had been granted discretionary leave on 6 July 2012.

15. I note that the witness statement of the  Appellant's  wife  which  was
    before Judge Abebrese states  at  paragraph  4  that  she  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain based on domestic violence. However, it  was
    during her relationship with her ex-husband that she  became  depressed
    and suffered from hallucinations until in 2012 she began to suffer from
    severe depression.  Since  2012  she  states  that  she  was  receiving
    psychological therapy.

16. In reading the Appellant's wife's statement I note also at paragraph 18
    that she specifically made reference to the fact that she had completed
    ten  years  continuous  lawful  residence   and   therefore   met   the
    requirements of Rule 276B of the Immigration Rules.

17. Ms Isherwood for the Secretary of State valiantly sought to persuade me
    that there was no error of law. Put simply, her submission was that the
    first application made by the Appellant's wife  was  on  the  basis  of
    domestic violence. The second was on the basis  of  mental  health  and
    there was an end to it. As to the refusal letter,  it  was  clear  that
    although the Secretary of State  had  considered  the  applications  by
    reference to the  Immigration  Rules,  that  there  was  a  sub-heading
    decision on "exceptional circumstances" demonstrated that  contrary  to
    the submission made on behalf of the Appellant, the Secretary of  State
    had considered the application not only by reference to  exceptions  to
    the Rules, but that  the  wider  application  of  Article  8  had  been
    considered and the Judge was therefore entitled to  come  to  the  view
    that he did.

18. In coming to my view as to whether or not there is an error of  law,  I
    bear in mind that the Judge at paragraph 15 of the Decision noted  that
    the  Appellant's  wife's  evidence  was  that  she  had  been   granted
    discretionary leave on the basis of domestic violence and that although
    mental illness had been apparent since 2011 and diagnosed in  2012  she
    did not recall if evidence in relation to mental illness  was  included
    in her application for discretionary leave.  She  had  been  unable  to
    retrieve that information which might have been held  by  her  previous
    solicitors. I would observe that since it was the  Secretary  of  State
    that was contending that the application was being made on a  different
    basis, one might have expected some evidence to have  been  forthcoming
    from her. Be that as it may, in my judgment the matter was not quite as
    black and white as Judge Abebrese or Ms Isherwood suggest.

19. If the mental illness was a direct consequence of the domestic violence
    then in my judgment it cannot be said  that  there  was  necessarily  a
    change of circumstances such as to take the second Appellant outside of
    the policy. There was not only a nexus between the two but in a sense a
    continuation since the mental illness arguably was a direct consequence
    of the domestic violence. In  fact,  no-one  has  suggested  otherwise.
    Certainly, Judge Abebrese has not made a finding that was not the  case
    and the evidence of the Appellant's wife was clearly  to  that  effect.
    The point was made by the Secretary of State that the Appellant's  wife
    had returned to Bangladesh  and  so  the  issue  of  domestic  violence
    insofar as she was affected by it,  had  abated.  But  the  reason  she
    returned was because of a bereavement in the family. She did  not  stay
    for long.  The reasoning is inadequate. On that basis alone I find that
    there was the error of law. The fact that the Appellant's wife arguably
    ought to have succeeded in her  appeal  was  clearly  material  to  the
    considerations as to whether or not  this  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    succeed in his appeal.

20. There is clearly  merit  in  the  ground  that  Section  117B  was  not
    considered when the same is mandatory.

21. However, there is a further basis upon which I find an  error  of  law.
    Although not expressly set out in the grounds, because  the  change  of
    circumstances came about after permission  was  granted,  it  would  be
    wrong of me not to allow the point to be taken.  The  Appellant's  wife
    has, as I have already said, been granted leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on the basis of long residency. There is now a British child of
    the marriage. The facts which entitled the Appellant's wife  and  child
    to the relief which they eventually obtained existed at the date of the
    hearing Judge Abebrese. He just did not know it. Whilst Judge  Abebrese
    cannot  be  said  to  be  in  error,  (save  for  not  giving  adequate
    consideration to the fact that the Appellant's wife had  been  lawfully
    in the United Kingdom for ten years and giving some  weight  to  that),
    that, with the benefit of  hindsight,  it  becomes  apparent  that  the
    Appellant's wife and child were entitled to relief, goes to the  weight
    which is to be given to this family as a whole,  when  considering  the
    appeal. I am assisted in this approach by the guidance in the case of E
    and R -v- Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    49.

22. For the avoidance of doubt, I find errors  of  law  for  the  following
    reasons:

     1.  That  the  Judge  did  not  adequately  reason  why  the   further
        application for discretionary  leave  to  remain  was  sufficiently
        dissimilar from the first application.

     2. The Judge failed to have regard at all to Section 117B of the  2002
        Act.

     3. Through no fault of his own, the factual matrix giving rise to  the
        relief which was eventually granted to  the  Appellant's  wife  and
        their child existed  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  but  was  not
        considered by Judge Abebrese save that he ought to have had  regard
        to the fact that the Appellant's wife  had  had  ten  years  lawful
        residence in the United Kingdom and whilst even then it  might  not
        be said that indefinite leave to remain would follow,  that  was  a
        factor  to  be  weighed  in  the  balance  in  the  proportionality
        assessment, all the more so  when  the  Judge  had  considered  the
        twenty year Rule.

23. Having found that there were errors of law it is necessary  for  me  to
    remake the decision.

24. I start, since I need to start somewhere,  with  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality Asylum and Immigration Act 2002. Given that  the  Appellant
    has family life in the United Kingdom, both with his wife who  now  has
    indefinite leave to remain, and their child a British citizen, this  is
    one of those cases in which I can move quickly through the five  Razgar
    questions to the issue of proportionality.

25. I begin by recognising in the Secretary  of  State's  favour  that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.
    That the Appellant speaks English is neutral in the sense  that  if  it
    were the case that he did not speak English that  would  count  against
    him. However, it can be said that the fact he  does  speak  English  at
    least does not aggravate his position. At the time when  the  Appellant
    and his wife formed their relationship neither of them  had  status  in
    the United Kingdom.

26. Significantly, however, section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act  makes  plain
    that the public interest does not require removal where a person has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,
    and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United
    Kingdom. In this case there is a British  national  child  and  so  the
    issue is whether it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
    the United Kingdom. On  the  fats  of  this  case,  it  would  only  be
    reasonable to expect this child to leave the United Kingdom if it would
    be reasonable to expect mother to leave, which in my judgment it  would
    not given the fact that she has now indefinite  leave  to  remain  with
    significant mental health issues which I  accept  would  be  aggravated
    significantly were she to be required to leave the jurisdiction. It  is
    clear from the report of the East London NHS Foundation Trust that  the
    Appellant's wife is very much affected by her past suffering, suffering
    as she does from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, which clearly,  having
    regard to the report of Dr  Kipler,  Consultant  Psychiatrist,  was  in
    consequence of the treatment of the hands of her ex-husband.

27. In all of this I remind myself that I have to have regard to  the  best
    interest of this child, a British citizen. I bear  in  mind  that  were
    this child to be obliged to leave the United Kingdom with the Appellant
    and her mother, she would be deprived of the opportunity of growing  up
    in the  country  of  her  nationality.  She  would  lose  the  loss  of
    educational opportunities.

28. I am assisted by the guidance in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705
    noting that my focus has to be on whether it  is  reasonable  for  this
    child to be expected to leave the United Kingdom. Of course, whether it
    is  reasonable  for  this   child   must   necessarily   include   some
    consideration of the parents. This is not a child,  I  appreciate,  who
    has been in the United Kingdom for seven years but rather  a  child  of
    tender years. I come to the view on  the  available  evidence  however,
    that it is not in  the  interests  of  this  child  to  be  removed  to
    Bangladesh which would be  the  effective  consequence  of  an  adverse
    decision if her mother, as I find, would be more debilitated  than  she
    is now in consequence of the additional  stress  that  she  would  find
    herself under by being deprived of the opportunity of remaining in  the
    United Kingdom.

29. There is only one family. It is clearly in the interests of  the  child
    to be brought up by  both  parents.  Having  regard  therefore  to  the
    totality of the evidence I resolve matters in the Appellant's favour.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and is set aside. I remake the Decision and allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 19 December 2017






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award that is because the Appellant's wife ought to have  made
her application for ten years  long  residency  at  an  earlier  stage.  The
complications which have arisen in this appeal would not  then  have  fallen
to be considered.



Signed                              Date: 19 December 2017





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker





