
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00165/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 October 2017                       |On 27 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Syed Sohaib Ahmed Hashmi
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Parkin, instructed by Rayan Adams Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).

 2. The appellant, Syed Sohaib Ahmed Hashmi, was born on 8 March  1977  and
    is a male citizen of Pakistan.  In September 2014, having  remained  in
    the United Kingdom for some time with immigration status in a number of
    different categories, the appellant applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his length of residence in the  United  Kingdom.
    On 23 March 2015, he was served with a  notice  as  a  person  who  had
    sought leave to remain by deception.  Pursuant to paragraph  322(2)  of
    HC 395 (as amended) the respondent  asserts  that  the  appellant  made
    false representations in his application  for  leave  to  remain.   The
    appellant had  submitted  TOEIC  certificates  in  respect  of  a  test
    undertaken on 1 August 2012 in support of his application.  Ultimately,
    on 21 December 2015, the respondent refused the appellant's application
    under paragraph 276B by reference to paragraph 322(2).   The  appellant
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shimmin)  which,  in  a
    decision which was promulgated on 13 January 2017, allowed the  appeal.
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3.  In  allowing  the  appeal,  the  judge  had  taken  into  account  the
    appellant's apparent lack of  motive  (he  has  a  'strong  command  of
    English' in any event).  Significantly, this was a case in which  there
    had been no "look-up tool" for test results available to the  Secretary
    of State.  There was no evidence to show whether the  appellant's  test
    result had been flagged as "invalid" as opposed to "questionable".   In
    essence,  the  respondent  had  relied  upon  the  so-called  "generic"
    evidence of Mr Millington and Ms Collings.

 4. I have read the judge's decision carefully.  He has sought to deal with
    the evidence of Mr Millington and Ms Collings in some detail.   He  has
    not rejected it out of hand.  He has, quite reasonably,  observed  that
    there was nothing in the evidence of Professor French [32] which  would
    lead him inevitably to find that the appellant had cheated in his test.
     The  judge  was  also  correct  to  note  that  the  evidence  of  the
    respondent's witnesses had not been tested by cross-examination and, in
    consequence, only limited weight could be attached to those  statements
    [33].  The judge recorded that the appellant gave his evidence in "very
    competent English" at [37] and only one month after the disputed  test,
    had passed a qualification for the Chartered Management Institute which
    had been taught entirely in English.

 5. I find that the judge's decision is sound in law.   It  is  significant
    that there was no "look-up tool" in the appellant's  case.   The  judge
    heard evidence from the appellant which he accepted as truthful; t  was
    open to him to do so.  Indeed, I can do  no  better  in  concluding  my
    decision than to quote from Mr Parkin's Rule 24 statement at [8]:

         The fact remains that any examination of  an  allegation  of  TOEIC
         fraud is fact-sensitive.  On the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, the Tribunal believed the appellant.  That conclusion was
         open to it.  This appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 23 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
