
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00223/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On : 5 January 2016                  |On : 26 January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Ms naomi muthoni githaiga
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Rotherham & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal  of
    Ms Githaiga against the respondent's decision to refuse her application
    for a residence card under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations).

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent and Ms Githaiga as  the  appellant,  reflecting
    their positions as they  were  in  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born  on  15  December  1975.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the
    Secretary of State, dated 10 December 2014 to  refuse  her  application
    for  a  derivative  residence  card  under  Regulation  15(A)  of   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006   (the   EEA
    Regulations).

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju dismissed the appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The Judge then went on to allow the appeal under  Article
    8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) on the  basis  that
    the appellant enjoyed family  and  private  life  in  the  UK  and  the
    decision was not proportionate to the respondent's aims of  maintaining
    the economic well-being of the country.

 5. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that  the  decision
    showed a material misdirection in law; given that it was conceded  that
    the appellant did not have an  EEA  identity  document  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge erred as under Regulation  26  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal.  The second ground argued  alternatively  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  was  not  entitled  to  conduct  a  substantive   Article   8
    assessment; removal was not imminent or likely and Article  8  was  not
    arguable.  In the third alternate it was argued that removal would  not
    be a disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's  Article  8
    rights.

 6. In the Rule 24 Response and before me,  Mr  Sellwood  referred  to  the
    Upper Tribunal decision in Amirteymour and others (EEA  appeals;  human
    rights) [2015] UKUT 00455 (IAC) which considered the issue  of  whether
    Article 8 can be relied upon in an appeal against a refusal to issue an
    EEA residence card and concluded as follows:

    "74. Drawing these observations together, we conclude that not only  is
         the claimants' case possible only on a  contorted  reading  of  the
         statutory provisions and the decision letters, there is no need for
         it to be. If they believe that they are entitled under  EU  law  to
         confirmation of that, the EEA appeal allows them to say so. If they
         are not so entitled, they are no different from anyone else in  the
         same  position  -  an  overstayer  who  can  make  a  human  rights
         application which may or may not be successful. The  making  of  an
         unsuccessful EEA  application  cannot  rationally  put  them  in  a
         different position. The refusal of the application leaves  them  in
         the  same  position  as  before  the  application,  that   is,   an
         overstayer.  The removal, if it occurs, is not  in  consequence  of
         the decision: it is as a result of overstaying.

    75.  For these reasons, we conclude that, where no notice under section
         120 of the 2002 Act has been served and where no  EEA  decision  to
         remove has been made, an appellant cannot in an  appeal  under  the
         EEA Regulations bring a Human Rights challenge to removal."

 7. It was Mr Sellwood's contention however that the position is yet to  be
    definitively settled and he noted that  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal has been granted in Amirteymour.  Mr  Sellwood  invited
    me therefore to stay the proceedings pending the outcome of  the  Court
    of Appeal consideration. I indicated to Mr Sellwood that my preliminary
    view was that I was not minded to adjourn.  I reserved my decision.

 8. Although not raised before  me  I  indicated  to  the  parties  that  I
    considered the Court of Appeal decision in of  TY  (Sri  Lanka)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1233 to have resolved this matter.  I remain of that view.

 9. Lord Justice Jackson in TY (Sri Lanka) found as follows:

    "35. It is impossible to say that the Secretary of State's decision  to
         withhold a residence card (a decision which is  correct  under  the
         EEA Regulations) will or could cause the UK to be in breach of  the
         Refugee Convention or ECHR. The UK will only be in breach of  those
         Conventions if in the future the appellant makes an asylum or human
         rights claim, which the Secretary of  State  and/or  the  tribunals
         incorrectly reject.

     36. In the result therefore I reach a similar decision  on  the  issues
         before us  to  the  decision  reached  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Amirteymour v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2015]
         UKUT 00466 (IAC). The Upper Tribunal in  Amirteymour  distinguished
         JM  (Liberia)  on  a  different  basis  from  that  which  I   have
         identified. See Amirteymour at [50]. Nevertheless in  the  end  the
         Upper Tribunal has come to the same decision as myself.  The  Upper
         Tribunal in Amirteymour has analysed the statutory  provisions  and
         the authorities in formidable detail. I shall not seek to  traverse
         all that material. Nor will I seek to plant yet more trees  in  the
         impenetrable jungle referred to  by  Lord  Carnwath  in  the  first
         paragraph of Patel. I reach my decision by the simple route set out
         in paragraphs 27 to 35 above."

10.  Although  Mr  Sellwood  sought  to  distinguish  TY  (Sri  Lanka)  and
    Amirteymour that is misconceived.  The Court of Appeal could  not  have
    been clearer: it is impossible to say a correct decision to withhold  a
    residence card (which is the position in the appeal before me) 'will or
    could cause the UK to be in breach of the Refugee Convention or ECHR.'

11. In the appeal before me, as in  TY  (Sri  Lanka)  and  Amirteymour  the
    Secretary  of  State  refused  to  issue  documentation  to  confirm  a
    derivative right of residence under the EEA  Regulations.   No  removal
    action has been taken and the refusal letter notes that such a decision
    does not require the appellant to leave the UK  if  she  can  otherwise
    demonstrate that she has a right to reside under the  Regulations.   No
    notice  has  been  issued  under  section  120  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Ace 2002.  The  respondent  has  also  indicated
    (with almost identical wording to that used in the refusal letter in TY
    (Sri Lanka)):

      'Please note that your entitlement to remain in the UK has solely been
      assessed on the basis of  the  immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006.  If you consider that you are entitled to remain  in
      the UK on the basis of other Immigration legislation then please visit
      the Home Office website at www.gov.uk/uk-visas-immigration and  submit
      an appropriate application.'

12. It is evident therefore from the relevant  legislative  provisions  and
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) that the Tribunal
    does not have jurisdiction to consider a claim for leave to  remain  on
    human rights grounds (or a claim for asylum although that  was  not  in
    issue in this appeal).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  the  case
    before  me  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to   consider   whether   the
    respondent's decision was contrary to  the  appellant's  human  rights.
    Any error in relation to jurisdiction in respect of Regulation  26  and
    the Judge's consideration of Article 8 is not material.

13. I am satisfied therefore that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    material error of law in allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds and I
    set it aside.  There was  no  challenge  to  the  Judge's  decision  in
    relation to the appeal under the EEA Regulations and  that  stands.   I
    remake the decision on human rights grounds by dismissing it  for  lack
    of jurisdiction for the reasons set out above.

DECISION

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law. The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is  accordingly
    allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  I re-
    make the decision by dismissing Ms Githaiga's appeal.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  order  but  although
    the appellant has children there is nothing in this decision that might
    require anonymity, pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed:  Dated: 22 January 2016

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hutchinson
