
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00001/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th October 2018                          |On 9th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mrs Sobia Malik
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, Counsel instructed by S.Z. Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of Judge Lucas who allowed  the  appeal  of  Sobia
    Malik against refusal of her application for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 1 Migrant.

 2. For the sake of clarity, I shall hereafter  refer  to  the  parties  in
    accordance with their status before the First-tier Tribunal; that is to
    say, I shall refer to Sobia Malik as the Appellant and the Secretary of
    State as the Respondent.

 3. Before turning to the reasons that the  judge  gave  for  allowing  the
    appeal and the Secretary of State's criticism of those reasons,  it  is
    first necessary to set out the background to these proceedings.

 4. The application was made as long ago as 2013, and so the appeal  rights
    remained those  that  were  available  to  Appellants  prior  to  their
    amendment by the Immigration Act 2014.

 5. The initial refusal of her  application  was  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant did not attract the requisite number of  points  because  she
    had failed to submit all the documents that were required to gain those
    points.  She appealed that decision and, in a decision  promulgated  on
    22nd November 2013, Judge White held that the Secretary  of  State  had
    failed to apply her own evidential flexibility  policy  by  giving  the
    Appellant  an  opportunity  to  provide  the  missing  documents.    He
    therefore allowed  the  appeal  on  the  ground  that  refusal  of  the
    application had not been in accordance with the law. That decision  was
    made in the expectation that the Respondent  would  thereafter  make  a
    fresh decision taking account  of  the  documents  that  had  now  been
    supplied.

 6. It appears not to be in dispute that when the  Appellant's  application
    was originally refused in 2013, the Secretary of State had been unaware
    of evidence that the Appellant  may  have  employed  deception  in  her
    application  by  submitting  an  English  language   proficiency   test
    certificate which had been obtained by use of a proxy.   However,  that
    evidence had come to light by the time the Secretary of State  reviewed
    the decision in 2016. She therefore refused it on  this  occasion  upon
    the alternative ground that deception had been used in connection  with
    the application.

 7. Thus it was that the Appellant appealed once again. On  this  occasion,
    the matter came before Judge  Lucas.  He  allowed  the  appeal  on  two
    grounds, which I  treat  as  being  in  the  alternative.  Firstly,  he
    concluded that the Secretary of State had not discharged the burden  of
    proving that the Appellant had used deception.  Secondly, even  if  she
    had used deception, he concluded that it was unfair for  the  Secretary
    of State  now  to  raise  the  matter  having  previously  refused  the
    application on a ground that was held to be unlawful.

 8. The kernel of the judge's findings is to be found within paragraphs  14
    to 19 of his decision -

         14.  The Tribunal has read and considered the decision in Nawaz and
             Uddin/Begum which have been submitted by Ms Lambert on  behalf
             of  the  Respondent.   These  establish  and   underline   the
             principle  that  this  Tribunal  is  not  able  to   determine
             deception, or lack of it,  in  ETS  cases  as  a  question  of
             precedent fact.  Reliance is therefore placed upon the generic
             bundle provided by the Respondent with regard to the issue  of
             IELTS.

         15.  The Tribunal  therefore  sees  no  reason  to  go  behind  the
             conclusion with regard to ETS generally with  regards  to  the
             issues of deception.

         16.  However that is not the end of the  matter  and  the  Tribunal
             must consider all of the evidence presented by this Appellant.



         17.  It has to be  noted  the  Appellant  has  denied  the  use  of
             deception and given  her  academic  background,  that  is  not
             perhaps a surprise.  She is educated to a  high  standard  and
             most notably, holds a masters degree  in  English  literature.
             She also successfully passed IETLS in 2011 prior to her  entry
             into the UK (with an overall score of 6.0) in 2013.  Why,  the
             Tribunal asks rhetorically, would she wish to employ deception
             with regard to TES in the exam said to have been taken on 28th
             November 2012.  The answer seems to be  that  it  is  unlikely
             applying the civil standard of proof.

         18.  In any event, it is of note that the Appellant proceed to make
             a Tier 1 claim to remain in the UK which was refused  on  17th
             May 2013.  However  the  decision  was  deemed  to  have  been
             unlawful by the Tribunal on 14th October 2013  and  her  claim
             was sent back to the Respondent for reconsideration.   It  was
             then in December 2016 - some three years after her arrival in
             the UK in 2013 - that the Appellant's claim was then  refused
             on an entirely different basis to the  refusal  of  May  2013.
             The Tribunal can quite see how the issue of unfairness to  the
             Appellant may arise in such circumstances.  However,  no  part
             of that conclusion is critical of the Respondent for generally
             as opposed to specifically reviewing the  grounds  upon  which
             the Appellant was granted leave to remain in the UK.

          19.    In all the circumstances of this case the Tribunal  is  not
             satisfied - on balance - that the Appellant would have or did
             use deception with regard to TES in 2011.  Further, it regards
             it as unfair to her that having successfully appealed  against
             the previous refusal  in  2013  she  is  now  placed  in  this
             invidious position.  It is of note that she has  been  awarded
             full points in every other category of the requirements of her
             current status, apart from that of English language.  She  has
             now set up a business in the UK and is, no doubt, contributing
             her time and resources to life here".

 9. I take the two Grounds of Appeal in turn.

10. The first ground is that the judge was wrong to consider the likelihood
    of someone with  the  Appellant's  educational  background  finding  it
    necessary to cheat in her English language test.   This  ground  relies
    upon the observations of this Tribunal in  the  case  of  MA  (Nigeria)
    [2016] UKUT 450 at paragraph 57 -

         Second we acknowledge the suggestion  that  the  Appellant  had  no
         reason to engage in deception which we have found proven.   However
         this has not deflected us in any way from reaching our main finding
         and conclusion.  In the abstract, of course, there is  a  range  of
         reasons why persons proficient  in  English  may  engage  in  TOEIC
         fraud.  These include, inexhaustively, lack of confidence, fear  of
         failure,  lack  of  time  and  commitment  and  contempt  for   the
         immigration system.  These reasons  could  conceivably  overlap  in
         individual cases and there is  scope  for  other  explanations  for
         deceitful conduct in this sphere.  We are not required to make  the
         further finding of why the Appellant engaged in  deception  and  to
         this we add that this issue was not explored  during  the  hearing.
         We resist any temptation to speculate about this discrete matter.

11. The first ground is expressed in the following way at paragraph 4: "The
    FtT has materially erred  by  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    holding that a person who may speak English would  have  no  reason  to
    secure a test certificate by deception".  However,  and  with  all  due
    respect, that is not what the judge found.   What  the  judge  in  fact
    found was that, given the particular  educational  background  of  this
    Appellant and the fact that she had passed an IETLS  in  2012,  it  was
    unlikely to be the case that she had cheated in  her  test.  The  judge
    thus reached a conclusion that was reasonably open to him  by  applying
    the correct burden and standard of proof to established facts. This  is
    not at all the same thing as making a finding that  the  Appellant  had
    "no reason" to secure a test certificate by deception.

12. It is moreover clear from the wording of the passage I have cited  from
    paragraph 57 of MA (above) that it does not  purport  to  set  out  any
    statement of general legal principle. On the contrary,  the  only  such
    principle is that which appears in the headnote  to  the  report:  "The
    question of whether a person engaged in  fraud  in  procuring  a  TOEIC
    English  language  proficiency   qualification   will   invariably   be
    intrinsically fact sensitive" [my emphasis]. Paragraph 57 of MA is thus
    nothing more or less than the Tribunal's analysis of  the  evidence  in
    that particular case, and accordingly does not have the force  of  law.
    I also note, in passing, that the Tribunal appears to have adopted  the
    somewhat surprising approach of finding the case of  the  Secretary  of
    State proved prior to considering the Appellant's explanation  for  why
    it should not do so (see the first sentence of the  passage  quoted  at
    paragraph 10, above). Moreover, if paragraph 57 were to be taken  as  a
    statement of general legal principle,  it  could  potentially  lead  to
    bizarre results.  Suppose, for example, that a person had won the Nobel
    Prize for literature in respect of a novel that had been written in the
    English  language.   Could  it   seriously   be   suggested   in   such
    circumstances that the Tribunal was unable to take this into account in
    deciding whether it had been proved that the person had  later  cheated
    in a rudimentary English language proficiency test? Such  a  suggestion
    would be an affront to common sense. What the judge did, therefore, was
    to take what was in my view the entirely appropriate course of  looking
    at matters in the round  and  thereafter  applying  the  correct  legal
    burden  and  standard  of  proof  to  the  Appellant's  particular  and
    individual circumstances. The first ground is not therefore  made  out.



13. So far as the second ground is concerned, I accept that the  judge  was
    wrong to hold that it was unfair for the  Respondent  to  question  the
    validity of the English language proficiency test certificate  for  the
    first time upon a review of the original decision, given that  (a)  the
    evidence of possible fraud only came to light after the  Appellant  had
    succeeded in her first appeal, and (b)  she  was  in  any  event  given
    reasonable notice of the allegation prior to the hearing of her  second
    appeal. This error was not however  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal given that  I  have  upheld  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    Respondent had failed to discharge the allegation of fraud that  formed
    the sole basis of  the  Respondent's  second  decision  to  refuse  the
    application.



Notice of Decision

14. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 30th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
