
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00194/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2019                            |On 08 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                               Mr umer junaid
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Chohan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                        REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR LAW

 1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  He  appeals  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman  following  a  hearing
    that took place on 22 August 2018. The  determination  was  promulgated
    some three weeks later on 13 September 2018.

 2. It is apparent from paragraph 13 of the determination that, during  the
    course of the hearing  on  22  August  2018,  the  appellant's  counsel
    explained that there had been a change in circumstances  following  the
    grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain  to   his   partner   in   the
    entrepreneurial team. This resulted in the appellant now being the sole
    director of the company.

 3. In paragraph 14 of the determination, the judge appears to have treated
    Counsel's request as an application that the appeal be remitted to  the
    Secretary of State to consider the matter again. The  inference  arises
    from the judge's use of the word 'remitted'. She refused that  request.
    This was unsurprising since there is no power,  on  the  basis  of  the
    change of circumstances, to remit an appeal to the Secretary  of  State
    for a fresh decision.

 4. The judge went on to consider the documentary evidence  before  her  at
    the hearing  before  dismissing  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had not  submitted  relevant  information  to  the  requisite
    standard.

 5. The appellant has now produced the attendance note of  the  appellant's
    counsel, Mr J. Waithe.  I am satisfied that this accurately  represents
    a discussion that took place during the course of  the  hearing.  There
    was no attendance on the  part  of  a  Presenting  Officer.  The  judge
    questioned the  appellant  about  his  failure  to  provide  up-to-date
    information and indicated that the appellant should provide the missing
    information by Friday (24  August  2018)  of  that  week.  Counsel  was
    present when the judge's clerk advised the appellant how  to  send  the
    relevant information for  the  attention  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

 6. There is now on the file a letter from SBM solicitors dated  24  August
    2018 recording that they had tried to fax the documents on  Friday  but
    the fax was  not  going  through.   On  account  of  the  bank  holiday
    intervening, the letter went on to assert a further  attempt  would  be
    made on the next working day, 28 August 2018.  This  was  the  date  on
    which the letter and its enclosures were  submitted  to  the  Tribunal.
    The fax enclosed some 131 pages of material.

 7. The determination was promulgated on 13 September 2018, well after  the
    material was supplied to the Tribunal. The solicitor's covering  letter
    clearly evidenced Counsel's understanding of what had  taken  place  at
    the hearing. Unfortunately, it is not as  recorded  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings which merely recites 'Not prepared to  accept  application.
    Need to proceed.'

 8. In her determination, the judge  made  no  reference  to  the  material
    submitted after the hearing. In any event, it  is  plainly  unfortunate
    that a suggestion is made to submit fresh material,  all  the  more  so
    when it is of so voluminous, when the judge has no opportunity to  hear
    submissions as to its contents and relevance and the Secretary of State
    is not afforded an opportunity to consider it or make submissions  upon
    its relevance, authenticity or adequacy. This is particularly  apparent
    when the Immigration Rules themselves may be complex and challenging.

 9. I am satisfied that the circumstances as  I  have  recited  above  have
    resulted in a determination flawed by an error of law. I set  it  aside
    and direct the re-making of the decision.





Directions

      i) The appellant is to file and serve a skeleton argument by 23  April
         2019  identifying  the  requirements  that  the  appellant  has  to
         establish by reference to the  applicable  Immigration  Rules,  the
         relevant parts of which are to be set out.

     ii) The skeleton argument is to identify in narrative form by reference
         to a paginated bundle of documents how those requirements have been
         met. Each requirement is to be referenced by a  numbered  page  (or
         pages) in the bundle.

    iii) If necessary, the  skeleton  argument  should  be  supported  by  a
         witness statement which will  stand  as  the  maker's  evidence  in
         chief.

     iv)  The  skeleton  argument  is  to  make  express  reference  to  the
         requirement that the appellant did not intend  to  take  employment
         other than under the terms of paragraph 245DE.

      v) The respondent is to reply  21  days  thereafter  setting  out  the
         reasons (if any) for the failure  of  the  appellant  to  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules and/or why the appeal should fail.

     vi) The appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross on the First Available  Date
         after 42 days.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                1 April 2019
