
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00380/2014
     IA/00381/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 22 October 2015                            | On 2 November 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

             mrs GEORGINA CASELY HAYFORD AWUKU (first appellant)
              mr ROBERT CASELY HAYFORD AWUKU (second appellant)
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Khan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Bristoe, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Ghana.  They were born  respectively  on
    11 May 1977 and 25 May 1970.

 2. They appealed against the respondent's decisions dated 12 December 2013
    to refuse to vary leave to remain and to give directions under  Section
    47 for their removal to Ghana.

 3. Judge Flynn (the judge) allowed the appeals under the Immigration Rules
    and on human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on  6  May  2015.
    The judge was satisfied that Mr Awuku had  completed  over  ten  years'
    continuous  lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  therefore
    satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276B.  The  judge  went  on  to
    consider the wider aspects of Article 8, took into  account  s.117B  of
    the 2002 Act and the relevant case law and found that  the  appellants'
    removal would be disproportionate.

 4. The grounds claimed the judge materially erred in law in  allowing  the
    appeal under paragraph 276B.  That was because  the  judge  could  only
    have allowed the appeal  to  the  extent  that  the  SSHD  consider  an
    exercise of discretion in respect of paragraph 276B(ii).

 5. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Pirotta considered the  grounds
    disclosed an arguable error of law  in  allowing  the  appeal  outright
    under paragraph 276B as the judge had power only to remit the  decision
    to the Secretary of State for further consideration.  That was  because
    the Secretary of State had a discretion which she was entitled to carry
    out.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Ms  Willocks-Bristoe  relied  upon  the  grounds.   Whilst  the  second
    appellant had over ten years' continuous lawful  residence,  his  wife,
    the first appellant, did not satisfy paragraph  276B  in  that  regard.
    For that reason alone, the judge had erred.  In addition, the extent of
    the judge's jurisdiction was to allow the appeal to the extent that the
    Secretary of State consider her discretion under paragraph 276B(ii).

 7. Mr Khan  did  not  take  issue  in  terms  with  Ms  Willocks-Bristoe's
    submissions.  He accepted that the  first  appellant  did  not  satisfy
    paragraph 276B and that the judge had erred in that  regard.   He  also
    accepted that  the  respondent  had  a  discretion  to  exercise  under
    paragraph 276B(ii) however, he submitted that she had  been  given  the
    opportunity to do so (see the account of the judge at [28]-[39]),  such
    that the judge did not err.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. At [39] of the decision the judge  recorded  the  Presenting  Officer's
    submission that the respondent  would  need  to  carry  out  additional
    checks such that the appeal should be allowed only  to  the  extent  of
    remitting the case to the  respondent.   Whilst  the  judge  made  that
    recording of the submission, she went on to allow  both  appeals  under
    the Immigration Rules in error.  I set aside the judge's  decision.   I
    must treat the  two  appellants  separately.   As  regards  the  second
    appellant, I remake the decision by allowing the appeal to  the  extent
    only of remitting the  circumstances  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    exercise her discretion under paragraph 276B(ii).  With regard  to  the
    first appellant, I remake the decision by dismissing her  appeal  under
    the  Immigration  Rules  because  she  had  not  completed  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

 9. The circumstances are also remitted to the Secretary of State in  light
    of my decision, to consider afresh the appellants' family circumstances
    under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

First appellant

10. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

Second appellant

11. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal to  the  extent  that  the
    Secretary of State exercise her discretion  with  regard  to  paragraph
    276B(ii).

First and Second appellant

12. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal to  the  extent  that  the
    Secretary of State consider afresh the appellants' family circumstances
    under Article 8, in light of my decisions at [10] and [11] above.

Anonymity direction not made.






Signed                              Date 22 October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart




