
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00069/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2019 & 5 August 2019      |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                           MR MOHAMMED ABDUL JALIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders (instructed by MQ Hassan Solicitors) on
12 July 2019
     No attendance or representation on 5 August 2019
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
on both days


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons of Judge  Ripley  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    promulgated on 30 April 2019. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge
    Ford of the First-tier Tribunal on 5 June 2019.

 2. The appellant is a national Bangladesh born on 15 August 1974.  He  had
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision, taken on 8 March 2018, to refuse his application for leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 General student migrant pursuant  to  paragraph  322
    (1A) and paragraph 245 ZX (a) and (c) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK in April 2010 with entry clearance as a
    Tier 4 general student, valid until May 2011. An application to  extend
    that leave made in May 2011 was refused on  16  December  2014  on  the
    basis that the Secretary of  State  was  satisfied  the  appellant  had
    submitted a false International English Language Testing System (IELTS)
    certificate and because his application was not supported  by  a  valid
    Certificate of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).

 4. The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was allowed on  the
    basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  establish  the
    certificate was false. The appeal in relation to the absence of  a  CAS
    was allowed on the basis that it was not in accordance with the law  as
    the appellant had not been provided with the 60 days that was  required
    to obtain an alternative sponsor.

 5. Thereafter the respondent provided the appellant with 60 days to find a
    sponsor and thereafter a further 60 days until 6  September  2017.  The
    appellant did not obtain an alternative CAS and so the respondent  made
    the decision under appeal on 8 March 2018.

 6. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the respondent provided a bundle  which
    included the appellant's application form from 2011 and a copy  of  the
    previous Judge's decision  of  28  August  2015.  It  also  included  a
    Temporary Migration Verification Referral form dated 13 February 2018.

 7. Judge Ripley dealt with the application on the papers. She  did  so  on
    the basis that the appeal had initially been listed for hearing  on  11
    February 2019 but adjourned because the appellant had sent  in  a  text
    saying that he was  unwell.  The  appellant  was  directed  to  provide
    medical evidence within five days but failed to do so. The  matter  was
    therefore relisted for hearing on 27 February 2019  which  prompted  an
    email from the appellant's representatives on 13 February  2019  asking
    that the appeal be determined on the papers.

 8. Judge Ripley noted that she had been provided  with  a  bundle  by  the
    respondent and nothing from the appellant.

 9. The judge referred herself to the relevant  Immigration  Rules,  namely
    paragraphs 322(1A) and paragraph 245 ZX. She noted that the application
    had been refused on the basis of the submission of a false  IELTS  test
    certificate and the absence of a CAS.

10. The Temporary  Migration  Verification  Referral  form  indicated  that
    nobody with the appellant's name and date of birth had  ever  taken  an
    IELTS test and the test date shown on the certificate was not an  IELTS
    test date in 2011. She noted the appellant had provided no evidence  to
    dispute that information rather, he simply denied  having  submitted  a
    false  IELTS  certificate  saying  that  an  agent  had  processed  his
    application.  However,  the  judge  noted  the  appellant's   signature
    appeared on the application form and that he would have known that,  in
    order to obtain further leave as a  student,  he  would  have  to  have
    submitted an English language test certificate.

11. The judge noted that the verification document had not been before  the
    previous judge who had allowed the appeal.

12. Judge Ripley,  satisfied  the  appellant  was  guilty  of  fraudulently
    submitting a false test certificate and also that he was without a CAS,
    dismissed the appeal.

13. Permission to appeal was sought claiming that the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision resulted from an unfairness in that the verification  referral
    form referred to and relied  upon  by  the  judge  had  not  been  made
    available to the appellant or his representatives.

14. At the hearing on 12 July the appellant was present himself and he  was
    represented by Ms Sanders of Counsel.  It  was  Ms  Sanders'  case,  as
    instructed by her instructing solicitors that  they  had  not  been  in
    possession of the respondent's bundle which contained the  verification
    document. I queried why, if they  had  not  received  the  respondent's
    bundle, they did not point that fact out to the tribunal or request one
    and I also queried why, in that situation, they would have  asked  that
    his appeal be determined on the papers. She was unable  to  provide  an
    explanation for that.

15. In an abundance of fairness to the appellant, on the basis I  was  told
    by solicitors that they had not received the respondent's bundle, I set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the basis that it had  been
    made in reliance on documents not made available to the appellant.

16. At that hearing I caused the  respondent's  bundle  to  be  copied  and
    handed to Ms Sanders. Mr Tufan had handed up  some  further  documents,
    which included an email from IELTS Verification at British  Council.org
    confirming that the test report form in question was not  authentic.  I
    also caused those to be copied and provided to Ms Sanders.

17. I indicated that I would redecide the appeal at a resumed hearing  and,
    in the presence of the appellant and Counsel we agreed a date  suitable
    for Ms Sanders and the appellant of 5 August  2019.   I  also  directed
    that any further evidence should be filed no later than 5  days  before
    the resumed hearing.

18. Later that same day the representatives contacted the  tribunal  saying
    that the appellant would be unable to attend on 5 August as it was Eid.
    In fact, 5 August is not Eid, Eid is the following week and  they  were
    informed that the matter remained listed on 5 August.  Notices to  that
    effect were sent to both the appellant and his solicitors

19. Then, on 2 August 2019 the  representatives  again  emailed  the  Upper
    Tribunal, this time indicating that the appellant wished to raise a new
    article 8 matter and needed time to provide further evidence. Curiously
    that email  also  suggested  that  the  clerk  told  them  that  I  was
    unavailable in any event on 5 August and the case would not proceed  on
    that date. That was wholly erroneous.

20. That adjournment request was refused by an Upper Tribunal Judge and the
    refusal communicated to the appellant and his representatives.

21. On 5 August neither the  appellant  nor  his  representatives,  nor  Ms
    Sanders attended. My clerk telephoned MQ Hassan solicitors who informed
    him that they had been unable to obtain  any  instructions  from  their
    client and that he was not answering the telephone. They were  informed
    that I would proceed to deal with the case in the appellant's absence.

22. The appellant has provided no evidence whatsoever in  this  appeal.  He
    produced no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and he has produced
    no evidence to the Upper Tribunal. He was fully aware that  the  matter
    was going to be decided on 5 August and has done nothing to advance his
    case.

23. I have been provided with the Temporary Verification Referral form  and
    also an email confirming the certificate was not authentic. Given  that
    no one of the appellant's identity has ever sat in IELTS test, I am led
    to the inevitable conclusion that the certificate was indeed false.  In
    the absence of any explanation from the appellant, other  than  to  say
    that he did not submit it, I find that he is guilty of  dishonesty.  He
    would know that such a certificate was a prerequisite in an application
    for further leave to remain as a student and his signature  appears  on
    the application.

24. I find therefore that the appellant did indeed practice dishonesty  and
    his appeal is dismissed on that basis. Furthermore, he remains  without
    a CAS and could not succeed under the substantive rule either.

Decision

25. Having found that the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law  on  the
    basis of deciding the matter in reliance on documents not  provided  to
    the appellant and having set aside that decision,  in  re-deciding  the
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal it is dismissed.

Signed [pic]                            Date 5 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

