
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00922/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th June 2016                             |On 18th October 2016          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                KANTHIAH RAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT  MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Allen, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of the USA born on  29th  October  1930.  He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Row,  dated
    9th November 2016, dismissing his appeal against the refusal  of  leave
    to remain on compassionate grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
    on 27th April 2016 on the following grounds that the refusal  to  grant
    an adjournment was arguably unfair and the judge failed  to  take  into
    account relevant matters in his assessment of Article 8.

3.   Ms Allen submitted that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  attend  the
    hearing of his appeal and had been denied the opportunity to do so. The
    judge concluded that the Appellant and his witnesses were not credible.
    The Appellant was denied the opportunity to explain  the  discrepancies
    in the evidence in relation to where he was  living  in  the  USA.  The
    judge found that it was in the interest of justice to  proceed  on  the
    basis that there were other witnesses who could give  evidence  on  the
    Appellant's behalf. The  judge  misapplied  Rule  28  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014. The judge proceeded in  the  Appellant's  absence
    and rejected his account.

4.   Having rejected the Appellant's evidence the judge did not accept  that
    the Appellant would be living alone if he returned  to  the  USA.  This
    affected the judge's assessment of the medical evidence.  Further,  the
    judge failed to take into account the evidence of the social worker.

5.   Mr Bramble submitted  that  the  refusal  of  an  adjournment  was  not
    procedurally  unfair  and  there  was  no  medical  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was unable to attend. The judge was  entitled  to  take  into
    account that the matter had been adjourned before and to  consider  the
    future conduct of the appeal. The judge  had  taken  into  account  all
    relevant evidence from the Appellant and his family and  found  against
    the Appellant. This did not amount to procedural unfairness.

6.   I find that the judge's refusal to adjourn the hearing  was  unfair  in
    the particular circumstances of this case. The Appellant  had  attended
    the previous hearing which was adjourned  because  of  his  failure  to
    comply with directions. He was unable to attend this hearing because he
    was ill. Although he was elderly and frail, it did not follow  that  he
    could not attend in the future. I find that it was unfair of the  judge
    to reject the Appellant's account without giving him the opportunity to
    give evidence and explain any discrepancies. The  Appellant's  evidence
    was consistent with the evidence of his eldest son in the USA  and  his
    son in the UK. The evidence of his daughter in law in the UK and  other
    son in the USA was contrary to this account.

7.   The judge's finding that the Appellant would not have to live alone  in
    the USA was based on his rejection of the Appellant's  account  and  it
    affected his assessment of the medical evidence and social worker.  The
    refusal to grant an adjournment was material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

8.   I have decided  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements of 25th September 2012 that the decision dated 9th  November
    2015 should be set aside and the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

                                 DIRECTIONS


    (i)  The  Tribunal  is  directed  pursuant  to  section  12(3)  of  the
         Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal
         at a hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Row.


    (ii) I direct that the  Appellant  serve  on  the  Respondent  and  the
         Tribunal not less than 14  days  before  the  hearing  any  further
         evidence upon which they intend to rely.


    (iii)    No interpreter is required. Time estimate two hours.


           J Frances
Signed                                  Date 8th June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
