
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00046/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 October 2014                            |On 24 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR ERIC ARMAHKODWO ASSABIEH
                          (NO anonymity order MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Ms D Ofei-Kwatia (Counsel instructed by Danbar
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the determination before First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Woolley) promulgated on 9 December 2013.  The  Tribunal
    determined the appeal on the papers and allowed the  appeal  against  a
    refusal of a residence card as an EEA national.
2.   For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as follows - to  the
    appellant as the  Secretary  of  State  and  to  the  respondent,  Eric
    Assabieh, as "the claimant".

3.   The claimant's date of birth is 4 November 1972 and  is  a  citizen  of
    Ghana.

Background

4.   The Secretary of State refused the appellant's application as a  family
    member of an EEA national applying for  a  residence  card,  Regulation
    17(1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.
    This was on the grounds that the claimant failed to show that he was  a
    "spouse" as defined in Regulation 7 (EEA)  Regulations.   The  claimant
    provided a marriage certificate dated 13 June 2013 as evidence  of  his
    marriage on 16 May 2013 in Accra, Ghana.  In  addition  he  produced  a
    Ghanaian passport and ID card covering the  period  from  2006  to  the
    present date.  No stamps were shown in the passport for entry  or  exit
    from Ghana or from the UK consistent with a visit to Ghana at the  time
    of  the marriage. The Secretary of State  considered  the  marriage  to
    have taken place by proxy.  There was no evidence that the  spouse  was
    of Ghanaian descent.  The Secretary of State was not satisfied that the
    marriage had been properly executed to satisfy the law of  the  country
    in which it took place.

5.   Consideration was given to Regulation 8(5) and the Secretary  of  State
    found no evidence  to show a durable relationship.

6.   In a determination [18] the Tribunal accepted the  parties  married  by
    way of a customary  marriage   and  that  it  was  valid  according  to
    Ghanaian law.  The Tribunal did not consider it necessary to go further
    to consider the French law to determine whether or not the marriage was
    legally recognised  in  France,  the  relevant  EU  State  pursuant  to
    guidance in  Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24.  At [20]
    the Tribunal also considered it unnecessary to consider if the claimant
    could show that he was  an  extended  family  member  under  Regulation
    8(5)(EEA Regulations 2006).

Grounds for Permission

7.   The Secretary of State  maintained  that  the  determination  showed  a
    fundamental misunderstanding of the Upper Tribunal decision of  Kareem.
    This amounted to an error of law.

Permission to Appeal

8.   Permission to appeal was renewed before Upper Tribunal Judge Craig  who
    granted permission for the following  reasons:

         "It is arguable that in the  light  of  the  Tribunal  decision  in
         Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24,  as  subsequently
         explained in TA and Others (Kareem  explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
         316, it was incumbent on the appellant in this  case  to  establish
         that his marriage would be regarded as valid  in  France  and  that
         accordingly it was a  material  error  of  law  for  the  judge  to
         consider (at paragraph 18) that 'I do not need, under  Kareem,  ...
         to examine French law to determine if the  marriage  was  conducted
         according to French law'."

Hearing re Error of Law

9.   I heard submissions from Mr Kandola and Ms Ofei-Kwatia.  At the end  of
    the hearing I announced my decision that there was a material error  of
    law by the Tribunal's failure to  correctly  interpret  the  principles
    established  in Kareem.

10.  I am satisfied that in determining the appeal the Tribunal limited  its
    focus to the validity and lawfulness of the marriage in Ghana  and  did
    not go  on  to  consider  whether  or  not  the  marriage  was  legally
    recognised in France.  The guidance in Kareem establishes  that  it  is
    always necessary for the appellant to establish that  the  marriage  is
    lawful in the EU Member State, in this instance, France.  This approach
    has been confirmed by the Upper  Tribunal  in  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).

Submissions - re making the decision
11.   Ms  Ofei-Kwatia  submitted  that  the  claimant  was  seeking  further
    evidence from the French Embassy in order to satisfy  the  requirements
    under Kareem.  In the event of an error of law being found  she  argued
    that the claimant required the opportunity  for  consideration  of  the
    issue of a durable relationship under Regulation 8(5) .

12.  Mr Kandola submitted that the claimant had  had  every  opportunity  in
    which to prepare for  the  hearing  today  and  provide  the  necessary
    evidence.  There was no evidence relied on and  it  was  apparent  that
    following standard directions the Tribunal would proceed to remake  the
    decision.  Further the claimant had  requested a paper case.

Notice of Decision

13.  I find a material error of law in the judge's decision.
    I set aside the determination.


Re making decision

14.  There was  no  evidence  before  me  to  show  that  the  marriage  was
    recognised as lawful in France following Kareem  or  that  the  parties
    were  in  a  durable   relationship.    The   claimant    requested   a
    determination of the appeal on papers at the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    claimant was aware that the Upper Tribunal would proceed to remake  the
    decision. He did not attend.  The claimant was aware that in the  event
    of the Upper Tribunal deciding to set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination any further  evidence  including  supplementary  or  oral
    evidence that needed to be considered to remake the  appeal  should  be
    available for the present hearing.

15.  I remake the decision by substituting a decision to dismiss the  appeal
    on immigration grounds.


No request for or order for anonymity was made.

Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008




Signed                                  Date 22.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there is no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 22.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
