

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA003962016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 3rd August 2017                       |on 7th August 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                              MR. ZAHEER KHALID
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:      Mr Brown of Counsel, instructed by Equity Law
Chambers (Oldham)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals against a determination by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ransley promulgated on 7 November 2016. For convenience,  I  will
    continue to refer to the  parties  as  they  where  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who applied for leave to remain
    on the basis of his family life with his wife, a British national,  and
    their child born in October 2014.

 3. His application was refused on suitability grounds. He had submitted an
    English-language test certificate in a Tier 4 student application dated
    28 March 2013. The test was taken on 24 April 2012 at the Synergy  Test
    Centre, London. The test certificate was subsequently withdrawn by  ETS
    on discovering widespread fraud at the test centre.

 4. The appellant and his wife attended a marriage interview on 11 February
    2015. On 26 October 2015 he attended a further interview to assess  his
    credibility. The respondent concluded he had obtained  his  certificate
    by deception. This was on the premise the appellant  arranged  to  have
    someone else take the test in his place and such conduct  was  relevant
    to the suitability grounds.

The First tier Tribunal

 5. Both parties were represented at the hearing. The judge stated that  it
    was for the respondent to establish on  the  balance  of  probabilities
    that the English language test certificate had been obtained by  fraud.
    The presenting officer had  relied  on  Annex  E  of  the  respondent's
    bundle. This is a document stating that the appellant's certificate was
    questionable. The judge accepted the  point  made  by  the  appellant's
    representative that the certificate had not been classified as invalid.
    The generic statements normally contained in such cases had not  relied
    upon by the respondent.

 6. The presenting officer relied upon the content of  the  two  interviews
    referred to. The  appellant's  representative  said  that  the  refusal
    letter did  not  make  it  clear  what  issues  were  taken  about  the
    interview. The judge accepted this submission.

 7.  The appellant gave details about sitting  the  test,  stating  he  had
    travelled from Oldham to London to do so. The judge also noted that the
    appellant was able to give his evidence in English.

 8. There was no  issue  at  hearing  in  relation  to  why  the  appellant
    travelled from Oldham to London to take the test at  the  centre  which
    subsequently was found to have been the site of widespread abuse.

 9. The judge concluded by  finding  that  the  respondent  has  failed  to
    discharge the  burden  of  proof  to  substantiate  the  allegation  of
    deception. Consequently, this being the  only  issue,  the  appeal  was
    allowed.

The Upper Tribunal

10. Permission was granted on the basis that it was arguable that the judge
    failed to carry out a proper assessment of suitability issues  in  line
    with the guidance in SM and Qadir (ETS - evidence -  burden  of  proof)
    [2016] UKUT 229.

11. At hearing I was referred  to  the  two  interviews  of  the  appellant
    contained in the bundle. It was accepted that no specific parts of  the
    interview were highlighted as showing a lack of ability in English.  It
    was pointed out that the English language certificate was classified as
    questionable rather than invalid.

Consideration

12. In SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal
    referred to the evidential burden upon the respondent  to  support  the
    allegation made and the need to satisfy  the  legal  burden.  There  is
    reference in the decision to switching burdens of proof. A large number
    of decisions had been taken following the outcry over the  college  and
    generic statements have been used  to  explain  the  voice  recognition
    technology. Subsequently expert evidence was heard about flaws  in  the
    technology.

13. In the present appeal the judge was not faced with having to assess the
    generic  evidence  typical  in  such  cases.  The  evidence  from   the
    respondent in support of the assertion of impersonation  was  different
    from that used in the earlier cases. It included the typical  printout,
    only in this case the test result was questionable rather than invalid.
    The cited cases indicate that a questionable outcome is more to do with
    the testing centre's reputation. The  other  evidence  related  to  the
    marriage and subsequent interview. However, the refusal letter did  not
    make clear which aspects of the interview provided evidence of  a  lack
    of ability in English on  the  part  of  the  appellant.  The  marriage
    interview simply records as a footnote that  the  appellant  had  basic
    English language skills but was evasive about where he  did  the  test.
    The other interview simply records at the  end  that  he  was  able  to
    answer the questions in basic English.

14. The judge's conclusion at paragraph 22  was  that  the  respondent  had
    failed to discharge the burden of proof. In this  scenario  I  find  no
    material error of law in the judge's approach  given  the  evidence  or
    perhaps more accurately the lack of evidence specific to the appellant.
    The judge also had the benefit of hearing the appellant give  evidence.
    The complications of  switching  burdens  did  not  arise  because  the
    evidence  to  support  the  respondent's  claim  was  so  limited.   In
    conclusion therefore the decision allowing the appeal shall stand.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated  by  the  respondent  in  the
decision of Judge of the First-tier  Ransely.  Consequently,  that  decision
allowing the appellant's appeal under the immigration rules shall stand.



3rd August 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


