
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number: IA/00269/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
             Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 20th December 2017
          On 31st January 2018


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                              MIKHAIL NEKRASOV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Norman (counsel, instructed by Sterling & Law
Associates LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a Russian national, had sought variation of his leave to
    remain in the UK but that was refused by the Secretary of State for the
    reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 9th of  December  2015.  The
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot at Hendon  on  the
    23rd of January 2017  and  dismissed  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    decision promulgated on the 9th of February 2017. The Appellant  sought
    permission  to  appeal  in  grounds  of  the  23rd  of  February  2017,
    permission was granted on the 5th of October  2017  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer.

 2. In the decision the Judge found, as was  conceded  by  the  Appellant's
    representative, that the Appellant could not  meet  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.  Accordingly
    the Judge went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  any  compelling
    circumstances that would justify a  grant  of  leave  under  article  8
    outside the rules. Whilst impressive the Appellant's circumstances  did
    not qualify in this regard, paragraph 18. The situation he  would  face
    in Russia was  discussed  in  the  following  paragraphs  but  although
    sympathetic the Judge found that the circumstances were not  such  that
    the Appellant had shown they were compelling.

 3. The renewed grounds to the Upper  Tribunal  argue  the  Judge  did  not
    engage with the prohibition on the Appellant switching from Tier  4  to
    Tier 5, this was arbitrary and could be ignored and was relevant to the
    proportionality assessment. Also that as the Appellant was accepted  to
    meet the criteria for Tier 5 and relied on the Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40
    principle to the effect that given an out of  country  application  was
    bound to succeed in the context of the  situation  in  Russia  and  the
    possible delays in his being able to re-apply. The failure to  meet  an
    administrative requirement could constitute a near  miss.  It  is  also
    argued that the Judge artificially separated  the  Appellant's  private
    and family life aspects from the consequences of his return to  Russia,
    that was not how the case was put  and  the  circumstances  had  to  be
    considered overall.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer granted permission on the  basis  that  it
    was arguable that the Judge erred in requiring compelling circumstances
    to address article  8,  irrationally  finding  that  the  circumstances
    discussed  in  paragraphs  18  to  21  did  not  constitute  compelling
    circumstances and failing to adequately reason that there would  be  no
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's article 8 rights.

 5. The submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings  and  referred
    to where relevant below. For  the  Appellant  reliance  was  placed  on
    Chikwamba and Hayat (nature of Chikwamba  principle)  [2011]  UKUT  444
    (IAC) and that there was no sensible reason for requiring the Appellant
    to re-apply from abroad  and  there  was  no  finding  on  that  point.
    Secondly the Judge should have considered the effect on the Appellant's
    private and family life holistically.

 6. For the Home Office it was submitted that the question was whether  the
    Appellant had shown that a temporary separation  from  his  family  was
    disproportionate. In addition to Hayat the case of Chen [2015] UKUT 189
    (IAC) was also relevant. Paragraph 18 was referred to and in  paragraph
    22 the Judge found that  taken  together  the  circumstances  were  not
    sufficient.

 7. The fact that the Appellant meets the terms of Tier 2 which would  only
    see leave granted for a 2 year period. As  drafted  the  rules  do  not
    permit someone in the Appellant's position to change, that is a  matter
    for the Secretary of State and not a ground which can  be  impugned  in
    the First-tier Tribunal. The suggestion that  the  circumstances  could
    amount to near miss is misconceived and does not assist the  Appellant,
    the fact is that the rules do not permit a change of status  under  the
    rules relating to Tier 5 and the Judge had to proceed on that basis.

 8. That the Appellant was not keen on returning to Russia where  he  would
    have to fulfil his civil obligations was a  matter  considered  by  the
    Judge along with the alternatives that could be open  to  him.  It  was
    inevitable that the Appellant's circumstances in the UK would  have  to
    be set out separately from  those  he  would  face  in  Russia  in  the
    decision as that is the nature of decision writing. The complaint  that
    the Judge did not consider the case holistically is unfair on the Judge
    given the nature of the need to set out the issues in order and then to
    balance them which is what was done in paragraph 22 of the decision.

 9. It was not an error for the Judge to consider that  compelling  reasons
    would be required to justify a grant of leave outside  the  Immigration
    Rules under article 8. For the reasons given,  and  reluctantly  as  he
    stated, he found that the circumstances which he had set out fairly and
    fully, did to amount to such circumstances. Those findings were open to
    him and the decision cannot be said to be erroneous legally.

10. The Judge did not name either Chen or Hayat but that is not  an  error,
    the question is whether the Judge had regard to  relevant  factors  and
    the decision shows that he did and summed the overall findings  in  the
    concluding paragraphs. Decisions have to be read sensibly and not in  a
    manner that descends to narrow textual analysis, if the decision can be
    read in a manner that is sustainable  then  that  is  the  approach  to
    follow and that is the position with the decision in this appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 12th January 2018

























