
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00386/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2013 and 28 October 2013         |On 3 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                              Steven UBi Omini

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, instructed by Peter Otto and Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer (22
August 2013)
     Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer (28 October 2013)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 20 June 2013 dismissing his appeal  both  under
    the immigration rules and under article 8 against the decision made  by
    the respondent on 18 December 2012 to refuse his application for  leave
    to remain and to give directions for his removal.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria,  born  on  6  June  1976.   He
    entered the UK on 22 July 1997 with leave to enter as a visitor for six
    months and, according to the respondent's records, he  embarked  on  28
    August 1997 and then re-entered on 24 July 2000 with entry clearance as
    a visitor.  He did not leave and made no applications for further leave
    until 6 January 2012 when  he  applied  for  indefinite  leave  on  the
    grounds of long residence.

3.   The appellant asserted in his application form  that  he  last  entered
    the UK in July 1997 and  he  declared  no  absences  since  that  date.
    However, in the light of her records, the respondent was not  satisfied
    that the appellant was  able  to  show  ten  years'  lawful  continuous
    residence or fourteen years' continuous residence.  The application was
    also considered under the provisions of the amended  immigration  rules
    but the respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant  was  able  to
    meet those requirements.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    on 10 June 2013.  It was accepted on  his  behalf  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the  requirements  of  the  rules  in  respect  of  long
    residence and that the appeal was based solely on article 8 in  respect
    of both family and private life [8].  The  appellant  based  his  claim
    that there was family life within article 8(1) on his relationship with
    his girlfriend,  his mother and his nephew, his late sister's son,  who
    had been adopted by his mother and was living with her.

5.    When  considering  whether  the  claimed  relationship   between   the
    appellant and his girlfriend amounted to family life, the  judge  noted
    that they claimed that they had known each other for four years and met
    about once a week. They were not  living  together  as  a  couple:  the
    appellant was living at his address in  Peckham  with  his  mother  and
    nephew whereas she was living with her parents  in  Ilford.  The  judge
    said that there was no evidence before him to show that the couple  had
    undertaken joint activities  in  life  and  she  was  not  prepared  to
    relocate to Nigeria with him if removed.  There was no evidence of  any
    joint bank accounts or any other documents  in  their  joint  names  to
    corroborate  their  claim  that  they  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship as partners as opposed to having known each other only  as
    boyfriend and girlfriend.

6.   The judge said that having considered the evidence he was  left  in  no
    doubt whatsoever that any relationship between them did not amount to a
    genuine and subsisting relationship as partners to satisfy EX.1(ii)  of
    Appendix FM.   He found  that  there  was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship to amount to family life within article 8.

7.   The judge then went on to consider the  appellant's  relationship  with
    his mother. He had claimed that  she  depended  on  him  for  household
    chores such as cleaning and cooking.  She was in receipt of  disability
    living allowance but he was not aware of the level of the benefit.   He
    found that there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  she  had  mobility
    problems although there was evidence of some health problems.  He  said
    that there was insufficient evidence before  him  such  as  a  detailed
    medical report to establish that she was dependent upon  the  appellant
    by necessity on account of her health as opposed to choice such  as  to
    give rise to family life between  them.   He  was  not  satisfied  that
    article 8 was engaged on this basis.

8.   The judge went on to consider the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and his nephew, a British citizen born on 24 September  1998.   He  did
    not accept that there was family life, although he did accept that they
    lived in the same house and that the appellant had been  doing  certain
    things for his nephew such as taking him to school  or  even  attending
    parents' meetings,  but  that  was  purely  a  matter  of  choice.   He
    commented that his nephew had been living with his  grandmother  before
    the appellant had moved into the house some five years previously.   He
    also noted that the appellant's sister was living in the same area  and
    she was no doubt involved in his care.  In any event, there was nothing
    to suggest that the appellant was solely responsible for  his  nephew's
    care and the judge did not accept that article 8 was  engaged  or  that
    the nephew's welfare rights under s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 would be breached if the appellant were removed.

9.    In  summary,  the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant   had
    established family life in the UK with anyone  or  that  removal  would
    interfere with his rights in that respect. However, he  did  accept  in
    the light of the length of residence that private life was engaged.  It
    did not meet the requirements of para 276ADE.  He went on  to  consider
    the issue outside the immigration rules but found that the appellant as
    an IT professional with no health problems would have no difficulty  in
    resettling in Nigeria.  For these  reasons  the  appeal  was  dismissed
    under article 8.

Grounds

10.  In the grounds of appeal it is argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of the relationship between the appellant and his girlfriend
    by failing to take into account the nature of that relationship and  by
    assuming that there was a requirement for the couple to  live  together
    to engage article 8.  It is further argued that he  did  not  make  any
    adverse credibility findings in relation to the appellant's partner and
    that his assessment of the evidence was flawed.  It is then argued that
    he failed to take into account all the relevant circumstances  relating
    to the care provided for the appellant's mother and the fact  that  the
    appellant now had responsibility for his nephew.



11.  Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:


         "...  Having  apparently  accepted  that  the  appellant  and   his
         girlfriend have known each other for four years, despite  the  fact
         that they each state in their prepared statements that they  intend
         to spend the rest of their  lives  together,  the   judge  made  no
         finding of fact on that issue.  It is arguable that  a  finding  of
         fact on that issue may have assisted the judge in reaching  a  more
         adequately considered decision upon whether the relationship of the
         appellant and his girlfriend amounted to a family life for  article
         8 purposes. In all the circumstances it is at least  arguable  that
         the  judge's  consideration  of  and  approach  to  article  8  was
         inadequate which led him to a finding which amounts to an  arguable
         error of law."

Submissions

12.  Mr Coleman adopted his grounds.  He submitted that the judge had  erred
    in law in  his assessment of the relationship between the appellant and
    his girlfriend.  It was difficult, so he argued, to see what  he  meant
    by saying that there was no  evidence  to  show  that  the  couple  had
    undertaken joint activities  in  the  light  of  their  evidence  that,
    although not living together as a couple, they  met  at  least  once  a
    week.  There was no requirement to show joint bank accounts but, in any
    event, the fact that for personal reasons they had chosen not  to  live
    together did not mean that there was no family  life.   The  judge  had
    failed to take into account the documentary evidence  which  tended  to
    show that theirs was a close and affectionate relationship: see A26.

13.  He further argued that when considering  the  appellant's  relationship
    with his mother no adequate consideration was given to her statement at
    A11 or to his sister's statement at A8-10.  The medical evidence  (A17)
    provided support for the evidence  about  her  medical  condition.  The
    judge had also erred by apparently requiring a dependency of  necessity
    as opposed to choice.

14.  The appellant's nephew had  been  adopted  by  the  appellant's  mother
    following the death of his own mother.   The  appellant  had  now  been
    living in the same household for five years. The fact that he was found
    not to be solely responsible for his nephew's care did not without more
    mean that there was no family life.  No adequate consideration had been
    given to his nephew's best interests as a  minor.  When  these  factors
    were looked as a whole, Mr Coleman submitted that the judge had  failed
    to make a proper assessment of whether there  was  family  life  within
    article 8.

15.  Mr Tarlow relied on the rule 24 reply to the effect that the judge  had
    made a series of  clear  and  reasoned  adverse  findings  against  the
    appellant and when the determination was read as a whole, it was  clear
    that he was not satisfied that the appellant's  relationship  with  his
    girlfriend was as significant as claimed or that  his  mother  required
    the help as asserted. He submitted that the judge  had  considered  the
    evidence and taking into account the fact that the  appellant  and  his
    girlfriend were living at separate addresses and saw each other once  a
    week, he was entitled to conclude that there was no family  life.   His
    findings  could  not  be  categorised  as  perverse.   So  far  as  the
    appellant's relationship with his mother was concerned, the  judge  was
    entitled to take the view that there was  no  reason  to  believe  that
    anything other than normal emotional ties were engaged.  Similarly,  in
    respect of his nephew, again it was open to  the  judge  to  find  that
    there would be no more than the normal emotional ties  to  be  expected
    from the fact that the appellant had been living in the same  household
    for a number of years.

The Error of Law

16.  The issue for me at this stage of the appeal is whether the  judge  has
    erred in law in such a way that the determination should be set  aside.
    The appellant's grounds and the submissions made on  his  behalf  argue
    that the judge erred in his assessment of the nature and extent of  the
    family life between the appellant and his girlfriend,  his  mother  and
    nephew.   In  so  far  as  his  relationship  with  his  girlfriend  is
    concerned, the thrust of the evidence was that they had  been  together
    for four years but they had not lived together.  They were not  engaged
    to be married and they had no plans to marry until the appellant sorted
    out his immigration status.  However, his girlfriend had said that  she
    hoped he would be able to come back as a fianc� if removed to  Nigeria:
    see [22].  She had accepted that she had not asked the appellant  about
    his immigration status when they met and had only discovered  about  it
    two years into the relationship and that he had not  been  honest  with
    her about that: [23].

17.  The judge said that he  was  left  in  no  doubt  whatsoever  that  any
    relationship between them did  not  amount  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship as partners to satisfy para EX.1(ii) within  Appendix  FM.
    However, the fact that they did not live  together  and  did  not  have
    joint bank accounts does not necessarily mean that there is  no  family
    life within article 8 and it is not  entirely  clear  what  the   judge
    meant when he said that there was no evidence before him to  show  that
    the couple had undertaken  joint activities in life.

18.  So far as the appellant's relationship with his mother is concerned,  I
    accept that there is force in the submission that the  judge  may  have
    given undue weight to his  finding  that  any  dependency  was  not  of
    necessity rather than choice, although it  is  difficult  to  say  this
    would not be a relevant factor to take into account.    However,  I  am
    not satisfied that it is clear that the judge  took  into  account  the
    evidence as a whole from the appellant's mother, his sister  or  indeed
    the medical evidence relating to her health problems.

19.  So far as his relationship with his  nephew  is  concerned,  the  judge
    attached weight to the fact that there was nothing to suggest that  the
    appellant was solely responsible for his care whilst accepting that  he
    may have been doing certain things for  him,  such  as  taking  him  to
    school and attending parents' meetings. Taking into  account  the  fact
    that the appellant has been living in his mother's household since  his
    nephew was 9, some five years ago, I am  not  satisfied  that  adequate
    consideration has been given to his nephew's best interests as required
    by s.55 of the 2009 Act.

20.   In  summary,  when  the  question  of  family  life   is   looked   at
    cumulatively, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by failing  to
    take all relevant matters into account or by failing to  give  adequate
    reasons for his decision.  I am satisfied that these errors are capable
    of affecting the assessment of proportionality even  though  there  are
    weighty  factors  on  the  public  interest  side   of   the   balance.
    Accordingly, the decision should be set aside and re-made.

21.  After hearing submissions from the parties, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    proper course is for this appeal to remain in the Upper  Tribunal.   Mr
    Tarlow indicated that he was not in a position through lack  of  papers
    to deal with the re-making of the decision and Mr Coleman said that  he
    wished to call further  oral  evidence.   This  hearing  was  therefore
    adjourned to be relisted on 28 October 2013 at 2 p.m.

22.  I made further directions permitting  the  appellant  to  call  further
    oral evidence on the issue of family life and for  the  filing  of  any
    further witness statements and documentary evidence,  which is now  set
    out in bundle 1A, indexed and paginated 1-164 with  further  documents,
    2A, annexed to a  letter  dated  11  October  2013   including  further
    witness statements from the appellant, his mother, his sister  and  his
    nephew and girlfriend and evidence  of  his  mother's  eligibility  for
    community care and assessed community care needs dated 15 May 2008.

Further Evidence

(i)  The appellant


23.  In his further witness  statement  dated  7  October  2013  in  2A  the
    appellant confirmed that he was a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  6  June
    1976.  He  was  born  in  Calabar  in  Nigeria.   He  has  been  living
    continuously in the UK since 2000.  His  mother,  sister,  nephews  and
    nieces all reside in the UK  and  are  British  citizens.   His  mother
    suffered from ill-health and has been treated for cancer which  is  now
    in  remission  but  she  requires  hospital  appointments  for  regular
    checkups.  She has had a stroke and is diabetic.  He  has  been  caring
    for her for many years, living with her and ensuring that she takes her
    medicine,  attends  her  hospital  appointments  and  meets  her  daily
    requirements including personal hygiene, cooking and shopping.

24.  His nephew lives in the same household.  She is his  sister's  son  and
    following her death he was adopted by his grandmother (the  appellant's
    mother). He is now 15 years old.  He  ensures  that  his  physical  and
    emotional needs are met.  He does not think this nephew would  be  able
    to survive without him.  He is like his best friend,  his  father,  his
    mentor and, as a growing boy, needs him around.  He  tried  to  do  the
    best by him, supporting his hobbies and studies and going out with  him
    to the cinema and football matches.

25.  The appellant is also in a committed relationship with  his  girlfriend
    and has been for five  years.   She  is  a  British  citizen  born  and
    resident in the UK.  She is  of  Asian  origin  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for her to relocate to Nigeria.  He says he  has  never  had
    recourse to public funds and has adapted to the British  way  of  life.
    He does not have any family in Nigeria  or  social  or  financial  ties
    here.

26.  In cross-examination he confirmed that he first left  Nigeria  in  1993
    when he came to England with his mother.  He did not remember what visa
    he had but thought it might be a visit visa.  He left in 1977  when  he
    went to study computer engineering for  three  years  in  Ukraine.   He
    returned in 2000 with a visit visa and accepted that he had  overstayed
    since then.  His family knew that he had been here illegally.   He  had
    worked; he had not been in a hospital but had been to  the  doctor  and
    had prescriptions; he had not driven a car and had not been in  trouble
    with the police.  When he was working, his tax was deducted.  He used a
    temporary national insurance number, his date of birth.  He had a  bank
    account which had not been used for anyone else.  He  had  no  children
    and no immediate relatives in Nigeria or Ukraine.  He was referred to a
    letter from his nephew's school confirming that it had his number as an
    emergency contact number.  His nephew did not know  that  he  was  here
    illegally, nor did the school.

27.  He said that he had tried not to  contemplate  having  to  go  back  to
    Nigeria.  His family life was here and he would be very  worried  about
    his mother  and  his  nephew  and  did  not  want  to  be  without  his
    girlfriend.  His sister had three children, was not "100%" and had  her
    own worries.  He confirmed that the family did not  know  his  nephew's
    father: his sister had been a single parent.


(ii)     The appellant's mother

28.  She adopted her witness statement in the form of  the  letter  dated  2
    March 2013 at 1A13 and her statement in 2A dated 10 October 2013.   She
    is the appellant's mother.  She has a daughter  in  this  country  who,
    because of her own medical condition, is unable to look after her.  The
    only family member who is able to is the appellant.  There is a  strong
    emotional attachment between  them  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's
    deformity (a hunchback) since childhood.  As a result of his  condition
    he was very weak and vulnerable and required extra care and  protection
    from her.  She has been residing in the UK  since  1989.   She  suffers
    from a number of illness including sleep apnoea, diabetes, and has  had
    cancer and a stroke.  The appellant has lived with her and been  caring
    for her for the  past  ten  years.   He  ensures  that  she  takes  her
    medicine,  attends  her  hospital  appointments  and  meets  her  daily
    requirements.  She does not think that she  can  survive,  particularly
    emotionally,  without  him  because  he  is  the  only  one  who  knows
    everything about her.  She is now 75 and depends heavily on  him.   Her
    husband died ten years ago.  The appellant has no  one  in  Nigeria  to
    stay with and she cannot think of any close  family  in  Nigeria.   The
    appellant also looks after her grandson whom she adopted following  the
    death of his mother.

29.  In her oral evidence she confirmed  that  her  daughter  suffered  from
    epilepsy.  She has three children and lives in a two bedroom flat.  The
    appellant took complete responsibility providing for  his  nephew.   He
    played the role of father,  looking  out  for  him,  advising  him  and
    checking things like whether he had done his homework.

30.   In  cross-examination  she  said  that  she  had  been  a  staff   and
    psychiatric nurse.  She had had indefinite leave to  remain  and  later
    took British citizenship.  She was asked about a visit  to  the  United
    States and remembered going on a church visit but was unsure about  the
    date.  She had last returned  to  Nigeria  in  2009  for  her  mother's
    burial.  Her grandson was a minor and needed to be looked  after.   She
    used to receive help from social services and had someone to clean  the
    house, but after a while she thought this was a waste because  her  son
    was living with her and doing most things and so she told them that she
    did not need them anymore.

(iii)    The appellant's nephew

31.  The appellant's nephew confirmed  that  his  witness  statement  of  10
    October 2013 in 2A was true.  He was born on 24 September 1998 and  his
    mother had died on 31 January 2000.  His grandmother  formally  adopted
    him and has looked after and  been  responsible  for  him  since  then.
    However, now she is old and suffers from some medical problems  and  it
    is the appellant who in fact looks after  his  physical  and  emotional
    needs.  He lives with them, attends his school meetings and  takes  him
    to the doctor.  He said that although the appellant is  his  uncle,  he
    regards him as his father as he has no memories of his own father.  The
    appellant attends his school functions and keeps up with  his  academic
    progress.  He is in the top set at school due to his  uncle's  support.
    They went together to his football matches and his uncle  is  there  to
    cheer and support him.  He said that it took him a lot to cope with the
    loss of his mother thirteen years ago and he cannot afford to lose  the
    only father he has known.

32.  He confirmed that the appellant was always there  at  their  home.   He
    described him as like a father.  In cross-examination he confirmed that
    he was a British citizen and that his grandmother had formally  adopted
    him.  He had never had any contact  with  his  natural  father  or  any
    member of his family.  He had seen his birth certificate and his father
    was not named.

(iv) The appellant's sister

33.  She confirmed that her statement dated 7 October 2013 in  2A  was  true
    and that she was the real sister of the appellant.  Their elder  sister
    died thirteen years ago in Nigeria, leaving  behind  her  son  who  was
    currently looked after by the appellant and her mother.

34.  She has been living in the UK since 1989  and  suffers  from  epilepsy.
    Her mother suffers from sleep apnoea and has just recovered from cancer
    and a stroke.  She described the appellant as an integral part of their
    lives, keeping them going.  He was the rock that  held  them  together.
    He was hardworking and would never be  a  burden  on  the  state.   She
    confirmed that she had three children and her  home  was  crowded.   It
    would not be safe for her mother to be there.  She had  never  met  her
    nephew's natural father and described the appellant  as  being  like  a
    father figure to him.  She worked at St. Thomas's Hospital as a nursing
    assistant.  She took tablets for her epilepsy and  knew  when  she  was
    going to get a fit.  Her condition was reasonably  well  managed.   She
    had two sons and one daughter and lived with her partner  who  was  not
    working at present but was studying.  She has no other siblings in this
    country.  She became British through her  mother.   She  accepted  that
    people like her mother could get help from the state and  in  the  past
    she had had a lady to do the hoovering, but there were problems as  she
    was not always punctual and the appellant was not satisfied  with  her.
    There were problems looking after their mother, as  she  had  sometimes
    locked herself out and there had been occasions when she had  tried  to
    cook something but had then fallen asleep.

(v)  The evidence of the appellant's girlfriend

35.  She confirmed that her witness statements of 13 March 2013 (IA6-7)  and
    20 October 2013 (2A) were true.  She is a British  citizen,  a  trainee
    dispensing option and a final year student at university.  She met  the
    appellant in 2008 and they have been together  for  four  years.   They
    intend to spend the rest  of  their  lives  together.   Their  families
    approved of the relationship  and  supported  their  intention  to  get
    married when his immigration status was  resolved.  She  described  the
    appellant as an honest  and  sincere  person  loved  and  respected  by
    everyone.  In her oral evidence  she  confirmed  that  she  was  deeply
    committed to the relationship and looked to the time  when  they  would
    get married and have their own place.  He was someone who cared for his
    family, and in particular tended to the needs of his mother.

36.  In cross-examination she confirmed  that  the  appellant  was  working.
    She first knew that he did not have the right to live here a couple  of
    years ago when he made this application.  So far as she was  aware  had
    no other nationalities; her mother was born  here  and  her  father  in
    India but had left the family when she was one or two.  She  had  never
    lived abroad and she confirmed that her father had come over from India
    to join her mother here.

Submissions

37.   Mr  Hopkins  submitted  that  the  public  interest   outweighed   the
    interference with the appellant's private  and  family  life.   He  had
    remained unlawfully in the UK since about 1990 when  he  returned  from
    the Ukraine.  He had been working unlawfully and  the  public  interest
    required an element of deterrence in these circumstances.  He  accepted
    that the impact of removing  the  appellant  on  other  family  members
    should be taken into account but the appellant's mother would  be  able
    to receive help from the state and from the appellant's sister.  So far
    as the appellant's relationship  with  his  girlfriend  was  concerned,
    there was no reason why, when they decided  to  get  married,  that  an
    application could not  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  rules.   He
    accepted that if the account of the relationship between the  appellant
    and his nephew was correct then there would be an interference with his
    nephew's right to family life but not such as to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control.

38.  Mr Coleman submitted that the appellant was a de facto  father  to  his
    nephew.  He had not been able to meet the fourteen year requirement  in
    the pre-July 2012 rules  but  nonetheless  he  had  a  long  period  of
    residence in the UK which should be taken into account.  He  had  lived
    in the UK for seventeen out of the last twenty  years  and  continually
    for the last thirteen years.  He now  had  no  family  connection  with
    Nigeria and removing him would lead to a disproportionate  interference
    with the family life of his mother, girlfriend and  in  particular  his
    nephew.  He submitted that this was a case, when the circumstances were
    looked at as a whole, where removal would be  disproportionate  to  the
    impact it would have on the lives of the appellant and  his  family  in
    the UK, and in particular his nephew.

Assessment of the Issues

39.   This  appeal  has  been  argued  on  article  8  grounds  only.    The
    application was made on 6 January 2012 and the respondent's decision on
    18 December 2012.  Mr Hopkin did not concede that the  matter  was  not
    covered by the rules in force since June 2012 but in any event, it  was
    not  argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  he  could  meet  the
    requirements of  the  rules  either  before  or  after  the  June  2012
    amendments.  Although I have not heard full argument on this point,  as
    the  appellant  did  not  have  extant  leave  when  the  human  rights
    application was made, my view is that no question arises of this  being
    a transitional case and the application was covered by the rules.   The
    proper approach should be to consider the rules first and only go on to
    consider article 8 if there appear to be compelling  circumstances  not
    recognised by them rather than simply undertaking an article 8 analysis
    separately from the rules.

40.  I will deal firstly with  my  assessment  of  the  witnesses  who  gave
    evidence.  There is no real dispute about the chronology of events.   I
    am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  immigration  history  is  as  he
    describes.  He first came to the UK in 1997 when  he  overstayed  after
    being granted leave to enter but there is no clear evidence  about  the
    capacity in which he was granted leave but in all probability it was as
    a visitor.  He left the UK and  went  to  study  in  Ukraine  but  then
    returned as a visitor.  Again he overstayed and has continued  to  live
    and work in this country with his family.  He has lived for a number of
    years with his mother and his nephew in one household.   I  accept  the
    evidence that the appellant's nephew lost his mother in 2000 and  since
    then has been brought up by his grandmother who adopted  him  and  that
    she now has a number of medical conditions which require her to receive
    help and support.  She is 75 and has become increasingly  dependent  on
    the appellant.

41.  More significantly, I accept that the appellant  has  been  playing  an
    increasingly significant role in his nephew's life.  The appellant  has
    also entered into a relationship with his girlfriend,  but  this  is  a
    boyfriend/girlfriend relationship.  They are not engaged but  I  accept
    their evidence that they do see their life as being together, and  when
    and if the appellant's immigration status and other family matters  are
    resolved, they intend to marry.

42.  Removing the appellant would be  an  interference  with  his  right  to
    respect for his private and family life and would impact on  the  lives
    of his mother, his girlfriend and his nephew.   The  interference  with
    their respective family lives is of  such  significance  as  to  engage
    article 8(1).  The interference would be in accordance with the law and
    would be for a legitimate aim, the maintenance of an efficient and fair
    system of immigration control.

43.   The  issue  is  whether  the  appellant's  removal  is  necessary  and
    proportionate to that legitimate aim.  When making  this  assessment  I
    must take into account the best interests of the appellant's nephew  as
    a primary consideration in accordance with the provisions of s55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The impact  of  removal
    on the appellant and his family must be  balanced  against  the  public
    interest in maintaining an effective system of immigration control.  Mr
    Hopkin was right to emphasise the  importance  of  removing  those  who
    deliberately overstay in breach of  the  immigration  rules.   However,
    there comes a point at which long residence,  even  when  unlawful,  is
    capable of making removal disproportionate.  The rules in force until 9
    July 2012, provided that indefinite leave to remain could,  subject  to
    there being no contrary public interest factors, be granted to  someone
    who had fourteen years' continuous residence.   These  provisions  have
    been replaced by para 276ADE, which sets out a more nuanced approach to
    the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of private life based on residence.

44.  I do not find that the length of the appellant's  residence  by  itself
    would make his removal disproportionate.  I accept  that  he  is  in  a
    relationship with his girlfriend, but this is not  a  case  where  they
    have yet made a firm commitment to marriage,  although  I  accept  that
    this is their current intention.  I also accept that there is  a  close
    relationship between the appellant and his mother.  I am not  satisfied
    this by itself amounts to family life within article 8, but it  clearly
    counts as private life.  The appellant's  mother  does  need  help  and
    support which is being provided by  the  appellant,  but  some  support
    could be provided by the local authority and some limited support  from
    her daughter, the appellant's  sister.   These  further  factors  taken
    together would not satisfy me that removal would  be  disproportionate.
    However, I must give  proper  weight  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's nephew.  Having seen the appellant's mother  give  evidence
    and considered the medical evidence relating to her state of health,  I
    am satisfied that she is increasingly unable to provide the  care  that
    her nephew needs, and she has become increasingly  dependent  upon  the
    appellant to carry out the role of parent.

45.  The appellant has now become the main carer and  can  now  properly  be
    regarded as his primary carer.  The appellant says in his statement  he
    regards his uncle as his father and that he has no memories of his  own
    father.  He sets out what the appellant does for him and says that  due
    to his grandmother's age and health the burden of the family  rests  on
    his shoulders.  On the evidence before me, I believe  this  to  be  the
    case.

46.  It has not been argued that the provisions of Appendix FM  EX.1  apply.
    This is an exception applying in circumstances where some of the  rules
    for leave  to  remain  as  a  partner  are  not  met.   They  apply  in
    circumstances  where  "the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a child who is under the age of  18,  is  in
    the UK and is a British citizen and  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK".  I am satisfied that the appellant's
    relationship with his nephew is in substance a  parental  relationship:
    he does not have legal parental responsibility  for  his  nephew,  that
    rests with his grandmother but the phraseology used in EX.1  refers  to
    the nature of the relationship.  The appellant has satisfied me that he
    has been in effect in a parental  relationship  which  is  genuine  and
    subsisting with his nephew for a number of years, having lived  in  the
    same household.  His nephew is under the age of 18, is in the UK and is
    a British citizen, and it would clearly not be reasonable to expect him
    to  leave  the  UK.   I  am  satisfied  that   there   are   compelling
    circumstances not covered by the rules.

47.  I also remind myself of the guidance of Lord Bingham in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27 that the number of applicants  not  covered  by  the  rules  or
    supplementary directions who were otherwise entitled to  succeed  under
    article 8 would be a very small minority.  However, I am satisfied that
    there are exceptional  circumstances  in  the  present  appeal  arising
    primarily from the appellant's relationship with and responsibility for
    his nephew.  The requirement to  treat  his  nephew's  interests  as  a
    primary consideration means that on the facts of this  particular  case
    the  public  interest  is  outweighed   by   the   exceptional   family
    circumstances  I   have   described   and   that   removal   would   be
    disproportionate to a legitimate aim.

Decision

48.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  the  decision  has  been  set
    aside.  I re-make the decision by allowing  the  appeal  on  article  8
    grounds.






Signed                                  Date: 28 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


