
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00483/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st July 2015                    |On 10th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                             mr Mostofa-Al galib
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mahmoud, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  19th  October  1987.
    The Appellant made a  combined  application  for  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student for a biometric  residence  permit  on  29th  October
    2013.  That application was refused by the  UK  Border  Agency  on  the
    grounds that the Appellant did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph
    245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal P-JS White sitting at Richmond on 19th December 2014.  In
    a determination promulgated on 26th January 2015 the Appellant's appeal
    was dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. On 4th February 2015 the Appellant lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 11th March 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Colyer  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that as the Appellant's course of study was ACCA and that this
    is a professional development course which exempts him  from  the  five
    year rule that the  judge  erred  in  law  by  following  an  incorrect
    approach.  In addition the grounds refer to the Appellant's request for
    an adjournment at the hearing that was refused.  Judge Colyer noted the
    contention  that  the  correct  test  was  not  applied  and  that  the
    Appellant's representatives submit that the judge had failed to  follow
    the  test  of  fairness  in  accordance  with  the  case   of   Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC).

 4. On 27th March 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That response  highlights  the  issues.   Whilst
    contending that no material error arises the Respondent states that the
    ACCA course is a NQF level 7 and  pursuant  to  Rule  245ZX(ha)  it  is
    therefore a course "at degree level or above."  Further it is submitted
    that there was no conflict of fact in the case, the  sole  issue  being
    whether the leave to study NQF level 7 would take  the  Appellant  over
    the five year limit specified in paragraph 245ZX(ha).   The  Respondent
    avers that the Appellant suffered no prejudice as he  would  have  been
    able to add nothing to a factual application of  the  law  and  in  any
    event the First-tier Tribunal Judge had at paragraph 9 made  a  finding
    that the evidence before him did not demonstrate that the Appellant was
    unable to attend.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law.  The Appellant appears by his
    instructed solicitor Mr Mahmoud.  The Secretary of State appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Ms Everett.

Submissions/Discussions

Preliminary Issue

 6. Mr Mahmoud points out that  the  college  concerned  has  now  had  its
    licence revoked and he would like 60 days on  his  client's  behalf  to
    obtain a new college.  Ms Everett points out that this is not an  issue
    that is extant before the Tribunal.  I agreed and I did not  allow  any
    adjournment.  If there is to be a new and fresh application made by the
    Appellant then that is  one  that  he  must  consider  with  his  legal
    advisors.  It was not pertinent to the issue  outstanding before me.

Submission/Discussion - The Authority of Hussain  and  Akhter  Unreported  -
28th July 2014

 7. Mr Mahmoud seeks to rely on this decision as being  supportive  of  his
    appeal.  This decision was one of my own sitting as a Deputy  Judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal.  It was the contention  of  Mr  Mahmoud  that  that
    decision is supportive of his appeal.

 8. I make the following findings thereunder firstly that decision  is  not
    binding on me and can be easily distinguished on the  facts.   Secondly
    this appeal was allowed with the consent of the Secretary of State  and
    the sole purpose of allowing  that  appeal  was  to  enable  the  first
    Appellant to obtain an extension of his visa in order  for  him  to  be
    awarded his degree under paragraph  245(zy)  Immigration  Rules.   Such
    circumstances have no bearing  on  the  present  case  and  I  conclude
    firstly that the facts can be distinguished in the present  appeal  and
    secondly that the decision in Hussain and Akhter is of no assistance to
    the Appellant in this appeal.

General Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Mahmoud states that the Appellant has passed five out of fourteen of
    his required exams on the course for which he  was  originally  granted
    leave but he did not pass all necessary examinations when he took  them
    because it was necessary to pass nine exams.  As a  result  he  applied
    for a diploma in management, a course that would not finish until  2016
    and this would have led to him  exceeding  his  five  year  limit.   He
    contends that the Appellant merely wants to complete his education  and
    that he came here in 2011.  He acknowledges because the Appellant  only
    passed five out of his nine exams he  was  not  able  to  stay  at  his
    original college but contends that he will now ask if  it  is  possible
    for him to return to his original college.  Alternatively he  seeks  to
    rely on a claim pursuant to Article 8 within the Rules contending  that
    this is a case of exceptional circumstances.

10. Ms Everett in response points out that Article 8 is not appealed.   She
    takes me to the guidance and as to what is indicative therein and  that
    the ACCA leads to a professional qualification, it is not  professional
    development and that any reliance  on  the  authority  of  Mirza  (ACCA
    fundamental level qualification not a recognised  degree)  [2013]  UKUT
    00041 (IAC) is ill-conceived and that the judge did not err in  finding
    that the Appellant would go above a degree level course.   She  submits
    it is disingenuous to go on a complementary course insofar as it is the
    same course.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. Submissions in this matter do not particularly assist the Appellant.  I
    am not retrying this matter, the question is whether or not there was a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     It has to be noted that since the Appellant was first asked  to  leave
    his college he has attempted  to  take  his  exams  on  two  subsequent
    occasions in June 2013 and 2014.  He has failed them on both  occasions
    and he now seeks to contend that he has  been  held  at  a  significant
    disadvantage because he could not attend college.

14. The correct and proper method of approaching this matter is to give due
    consideration to the approach that has been adopted by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Firstly he has given full and proper consideration  to
    the application for an adjournment and has  set  out  his  reasons  for
    refusal at paragraph 9.  It  is  merely  contended  that  there  is  an
    inherent unfairness to  the  Appellant.   That  is  not  a  sustainable
    argument.  The judge was  fully  aware  of  the  circumstances  and  at
    paragraph 9 has indicated that he was satisfied  there  were  no  facts
    that the Appellant was unable to attend the appeal, that the appeal had
    previously been adjourned on another occasion and that it would not  be
    just to proceed to adjourn again.  These were findings that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled to make.

15. Thereafter he has gone on to give his full findings  and  reasons.   He
    has analysed the basis of the Appellant's application  under  paragraph
    245ZX and has gone on to  give  full  and  detailed  reasons  and  made
    findings which he was entitled to under the Rules that  if  the  appeal
    was allowed the Appellant would be studying at degree  level  or  above
    for a period in excess of five years and  therefore  the  appeal  fails
    under the Immigration Rules.   Such  contention  is  supported  by  the
    Secretary of State's guidance issued on 6th May 2015.

16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has then gone on to consider the position
    under Article 8.  It is made very clear to me by Ms Everett that  there
    is no appeal extant under Article 8.  I agree with that contention  but
    point out that even if it were allowed the facts  of  this  matter  are
    against him.  This was an Appellant who failed his initial  exams.   He
    appears to have made virtually no  effort  to  have  obtained  suitable
    alternative college tuition having merely attended on his own  to  take
    the re-sits over a twelve month period.   The  Appellant's  failure  to
    assist himself speaks  volumes  and  even  now  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives merely state that  he  would  seek  to  attend  college
    rather than there being any guaranteed certainty that he would be in  a
    position to proceed.  It therefore is inconceivable that even if I  had
    been prepared to allow (which I am not) the Appellant to bring  a  late
    appeal under Article 8 that he would succeed.

17. This appeal amounts to little more than disagreement with the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  That decision was one  that  he  was
    perfectly entitled to make.  In such circumstances I find that there is
    no material error of law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

