
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00557/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th January 2018                     |On 09th March 2018                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr alban hoxha
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Gillard, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, instructed by Metro Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appellant's  appeal  against  her
    decision to refuse  an  EEA  residence  card  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had previously obtained the right  to  reside  by  fraudulent
    means contrary to Regulation 21B(1)(d) and (2) of the 2006 Regulations.
     The only reasoning relating to Regulation 21B appears at paragraphs 49
    and 50 of the determination.

         "49. The appellant was deported from the UK in 2003, following  his
             conviction.  He took no action to seek to have the deportation
             order set aside and returned illegally to the UK in 2006.  His
             conduct in that regard is to be strongly deprecated.   He  has
             also in the past used aliases and claimed to be a Kosovan,  an
             Italian and a Bulgarian national.


         50.  The appellant has shown himself in the past  to  be  a  person
             willing to attempt to deceive the immigration authorities, but
             since 2013, after meeting [his partner] and their relationship
             developing, he has taken steps to regularise  his  immigration
             status on the basis of that relationship which I have found to
             be genuine.  I am not  satisfied  that  he  has  attempted  to
             obtain a right  to  reside  by  fraudulent  means  (Regulation
             21B(1)(d)."

 2. The  respondent  in  her  grounds  of  appeal  sets  out  the  relevant
    provisions of Regulation 21B - Abuse of rights or fraud.

         "21B (1) The abuse of a right to reside includes ...


                  (d)  fraudulently obtaining or attempting  to  obtain,  or
                     assisting another to obtain or  attempt  to  obtain  a
                     right to reside.


              (2) The Secretary of State may take an EEA  decision  on  the
                  grounds of abuse of  rights  where  there  are  reasonable
                  grounds to suspect the abuse of a right to reside  and  it
                  is proportionate to do so."

 3. Not only are there clear reasons to assert abuse in  the  determination
    and in the letter of refusal but there  is  no  attempt  to  deal  with
    proportionality in the decision.  Mr Gillard has attempted to  persuade
    me that the reference to the genuineness of the marriage is  sufficient
    to deal with the proportionality question,  but  it  is  not  and  that
    assertion is unarguable.

 4. Accordingly, there is no alternative but to set this decision aside and
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh on a date to  be
    fixed.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

The decision in this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  a
date to be fixed.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date:         8 March 2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson






