

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00830/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 16 August 2017                     |On 17 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAID AITJILAL




                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. O. Akindele, counsel instructed by Defank,
solicitors

                                  DECISION

   1. The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  ("SSHD")  has  been
      granted permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Phull who, by a determination promulgated on  21  April
      2017, allowed Mr Aitjilal's appeal against a  decision  of  the  SSHD,
      made on 25 January 2016, to revoke the residence card  that  had  been
      issued to him as the spouse of an EEA  national.  The  SSHD  gave  two
      reasons for the revocation decision. First, it was concluded  that  Mr
      Aitjilal's marriage was one of convenience and second, in view of  his
      criminal convictions, it was considered that  he  was  a  professional
      criminal who represented a genuine and sufficient threat to one of the
      fundamental interests of society. Mr Aitjilal had previously been made
      subject to a deportation order and his appeal against  the  making  of
      that deportation order was dismissed in August  2013.  Therefore,  the
      residence card was revoked with reference both to Regulation 21(5) and
      21B(1)(d) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


   2. The relevant facts are, of course, well known to both parties and  for
      present purposes the following summary will suffice. Mr Aitjilal is  a
      citizen of Morocco. On 17 September 2003, he was married to  a  French
      national by the name of Ms Baaziz and on that basis he was issued with
      a residence card. He was issued with a  permanent  residence  card  in
      June 2010. However, in 2006 he had entered into a relationship with  a
      partner of Moroccan nationality, Ms Boutarf, who was  present  on  the
      basis of a marriage to a Portuguese national. Together they  had  four
      children, two of whom were born during the currency of the appellant's
      marriage to Ms Baaziz, from whom he is now divorced. That led the SSHD
      to conclude that the marriage to Ms Baaziz was one of  convenience  to
      enable Mr Aitjilal to remain in the United Kingdom when  otherwise  he
      would have no basis of stay.


   3. As for Mr Aitjilal's criminal offending, the SSHD had referred to what
      had been said in  the  determination  dismissing  the  earlier  appeal
      against deportation. There, it  was  observed  that  Mr  Aitjilal  had
      committed 36  offences.  These  included  12  for  fraud  and  kindred
      offences and  12  for  theft  and  kindred  offences.  Those  offences
      included possession and misuse of identity documents.


   4. The judge allowed the appeal  because  he  found  that  Mr  Aitjilal's
      marriage to Ms Baaziz, the French national,  was  not  a  marriage  of
      convenience. But, in allowing the appeal, the judge made no  reference
      whatever to Mr Aitjilal's offending and there is nothing  to  indicate
      that he engaged at all with the fact that the decision was taken  also
      on  the  basis  of  his  propensity  to  commit   criminal   offences.
      Realistically, Mr Akindele conceded that it was a  material  error  of
      law for the judge  to  have  failed  to  address  that  issue  and  he
      recognises and accepts, correctly, that the appeal  will  have  to  be
      determined afresh. To that extent, there is a  consensus  between  the
      parties and I need say no more about it.


   5. However, Mr Akindele submits that the finding  of  fact  made  by  the
      judge that the Mr Aitjilal's  marriage  was  not  one  of  convenience
      should be preserved, as that is a distinct  matter  unrelated  to  the
      question of his propensity to  commit  criminal  offences  and  so  to
      represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting
      one of the fundamental interests of society.


   6. Mr Staunton submitted that the decision of the  judge  should  be  set
      aside in its entirety. The matters overlooked  by  the  judge  of  the
      significant record of offending for offences  of  dishonesty  are,  he
      submits,  highly  relevant  to  any  assessment  of  the  honesty  and
      integrity of Mr Aitjilal's decision to be married to an  EEA  national
      and his reasons for choosing  to  do  so.  Therefore,  he  argues,  in
      ignoring altogether the fact and nature of that  offending  the  judge
      has left out of account a material consideration and  so  has  made  a
      material error of law.


   7. I have no doubt at all that Mr Staunton is correct. The decision under
      challenge was one founded upon both issues and it  is  artificial  and
      inappropriate to seek to divide it up into two separate decisions that
      can be assessed independently of  the  other.  Therefore,  it  is  not
      appropriate to preserve any finding of fact made  by  the  judge.  His
      decision will be set aside and the appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.


   Summary of decision:
   8. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull is set aside  in  its
      entirety. No findings of fact are  to  be  preserved.  The  appeal  is
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh
   Signed         [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 16 August 2017

