
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00173/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th January 2015                            |On 22nd January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          MRS JULIET YEBOAH AGYARKO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dineen, promulgated on 17th October 2014, following a hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 6th June 2014.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of Mrs Juliet Yeboah Agyarko.  The Respondent  Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born  on  7th  April  1975.
    She had entered the UK on a family visit visa on 5th May 2007  and  the
    visa was to expire on 29th June 2007.  She  overstayed.   She  did  not
    leave the UK in accordance with the requirements of her visa.   In  May
    2010, she met Joseph  Buckman,  a  Ghanaian  national,  with  whom  she
    started living  together  in  June  2010.   Mr  Buckman  then  on  18th
    September 2001 joined the British Army and he was posted to Germany  in
    2012.  A child was born to them on 24th July 2012, by the name of Ethan-
    Joseph Buckman, and he is a  British  citizen.   This  is  because  the
    father, Mr Joseph Buckman, is subject to  the  exemption  Rules,  as  a
    serving British Army soldier.  On 11th  February  2013,  the  Appellant
    applied for a derivative residence card under  Regulation  18A  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 alleging that she
    was the primary carer of Ethan-Joseph, who would be unable to reside in
    the EEA, if the Appellant was required to leave the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge considered the case for the  Respondent,  but  there  was  no
    sufficient evidence to show that Mr Buckman does  not  have  a  primary
    care of Ethan-Joseph; that it was not credible that  Mr  Buckman  would
    not assume care of Ethan-Joseph if the Appellant were to leave the  UK;
    and that the Appellant had a bad immigration history,  having  been  in
    the UK since 2007 unlawfully.

 4. The judge held that the Appellant was a "truthful witness, because  her
    evidence was consistent, and clearly in accordance with  the  realities
    of service life, particularly where it  involves  service  outside  the
    UK."  The judge held that this was borne out by  a  letter  dated  23rd
    January 2013,  from  Mr  Buckman's  unit  welfare  officer,  which  was
    contained in the Respondent's bundle (see  paragraph  20).   The  judge
    held that the Appellant has remained in the UK with Ethan-Joseph  while
    the  father,  Mr  Buckman,  has  been  committed  to  service   abroad.
    Accordingly, "she is and always has been the primary  carer  of  Ethan-
    Joseph" (paragraph 21).  Since, "Ethan-Joseph has no  other  family  in
    the UK, he would have to accompany the Appellant if she  were  removed"
    (paragraph 22).  The judge held that  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    15A(4A) were satisfied and the appeal must be allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge was wrong to rely  upon
    the letter of 23rd January 2013  from  the  Sponsor's  welfare  officer
    because this was about a year old before the hearing and it  could  not
    be said at the date of the hearing that the father of the  child  would
    not be present in the United Kingdom to look after the child.

 6. On 2nd December 2014, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.



Submissions

 7. At the  hearing  before  me  on  14th  January  2015,  Miss  Isherwood,
    appearing on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State,  stated  that
    one had to start with the refusal letter because this set out the  lack
    of evidence which  had  led  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  the
    application.  This was exactly the same position before  the  judge  at
    the time of the hearing.  The following points had been made.

 8. First, that any unwillingness to assume  care  responsibility  (in  the
    case for example, of the father, Mr Buckman, here) is not,  by  itself,
    sufficient for the claimed primary carer to assert that another  direct
    relative or guardian is unable to care for the British citizen.

 9. Second, to be considered the primary carer would require submission  of
    evidence to show that the child lives with the primary carer or  spends
    the majority of the time with the primary carer and  that  the  primary
    carer is financially responsible for  the  child.   The  Appellant  had
    provided a letter from the Queen's Road Partnership  to  indicate  that
    she was registered at that surgery, but this did not show that she  was
    financially responsible for the child.

10. Third, if the Appellant wished for  the  Home  Office  to  consider  an
    application on the basis of paragraph 276ADE of Appendix  FM,  and  the
    right to family life, a separate child application should be made using
    the appropriate specified application form (FLRM).

11. Fourth, the Appellant had not made a valid application  for  Article  8
    consideration and so consideration had not been given  to  whether  her
    removal from the UK would breach Article 8.  In addition to this,  Miss
    Isherwood submitted that the hearing was  in  June  2014  and  yet  the
    Appellant's own witness statement had made the point  that  Mr  Buckman
    was going to be back from Germany within the jurisdiction by June 2014.
     If that was the case then she could not point to "primary care"  being
    with her.  Miss Isherwood accepted that the Immigration  Act  2014  did
    not come into effect until 28th July  2014.   Given  that  the  hearing
    before the judge was on  5th  June  2014,  arguments  with  respect  to
    Section 117B could not be made before the judge.

12.  For  his  part,  Mr  Akohene  submitted  that  paragraph  20  of   the
    determination sees a reference by the  judge  to  the  letter  of  23rd
    January 2013 from Mr Buckman's  unit  welfare  officer.   There  is  no
    logical reason why this letter could not be relied upon.  It is not  as
    if one could say that circumstances had changed and  a  further  letter
    was required from the  unit  welfare  officer  addressing  the  changed
    circumstances.  The Appellant's circumstances remained the  same.   The
    letter remained good.  The judge properly took  it  into  account.   He
    made his findings on that basis.  The judge then heard  oral  evidence.
    He concluded that, "I am satisfied that the  Appellant  is  a  truthful
    witness ..."  As a serving army soldier the Sponsor,  Mr  Buckman,  was
    liable to be posted anywhere in the world, and if  he  were  to  be  so
    posted, he would  clearly  be  outside  the  jurisdiction,  and  in  no
    position to look after the child.

13. In reply, Miss Isherwood submitted that there was no evidence presented
    that the child's father would be posted elsewhere at short notice.   If
    one looked at B1, it is clear from this that  the  army  policy  is  to
    protect the right to family life and to acknowledge that soldiers  have
    a right to such life.  The army would have been sensitive to this.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should set aside the  decision.   There  is  a
    fundamental misconception about this appeal.  It is one  thing  to  say
    that a family member has "primary care" (as the  Rules  require  to  be
    demonstrated in Regulation 14A(4A) of  the  EEA  Regulations).   It  is
    quite another to say that one or the other parent  has  legal  custody.
    It is also quite another thing to say that the parents enjoy a  "shared
    responsibility."  The arguments put forward by the  Respondent  confuse
    this distinction.

15. The child's father, Mr Buckman, may well be in a legal position of loco
    parentis with Ethan-Joseph Buckman.  This is not say, however, that  Mr
    Buckman has "primary care" of  this  child.   The  child,  Ethan-Joseph
    Buckman, is 2 years of age.  There is no  evidence  that  he  has  been
    living anywhere other than with his mother.  In the ordinary course  of
    things, such a child would be given "primary care" by the  mother,  and
    this was the evidence before the judge, who found the Appellant to be a
    "truthful witness."  Whether or not Mr Buckman was able  to  come  into
    and go out of the United Kingdom as a serving British Army soldier  has
    nothing to do with where "primary care" lies.  The judge  found  it  to
    lie with the Appellant.

16. On  the  evidence,  he  was  plainly  entitled  to  so  conclude.   The
    Respondent's case, as highlighted by the judge in the determination all
    too clearly, "it was submitted that there was no sufficient evidence to
    show that Mr Buckman does not have primary care  of  Ethan-Joseph"  is,
    accordingly, misconceived.  The judge was entitled to reject it  as  he
    did.  His conclusion was  that,  "because  Ethan-Joseph  has  no  other
    family in the UK, he would have to accompany the Appellant if she  were
    removed"  (paragraph  22).   It  is  not  possible  to  say  that  that
    conclusion was not open to the judge.

Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        21st January 2015
