
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/00836/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 January 2018                     |On 30 January 2018             |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                              LUAN BRACAJ YMERI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr O Ryan counsel instructed by Heath and Power
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Appellant was born on 1  January  1964  and  is  a  national  of  the
   Republic of Serbia.

3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 13  April  2017  which  allowed  the
   Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  25
   January 2016 to refuse an application for leave to remain  based  on  his
   family and private life.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge  was  in  error  in
   that he provided insufficient reasons for his finding  that  family  life
   existed between the Appellant and his two adult British citizen children;
   that his reason for finding that the removal of the  Appellant  would  be
   disproportionate  were  inadequate;  the  reasons  given  for   why   the
   Appellants and his wife would be unable to live together in Serbia.

6. On 31 October 2017 Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Woodcraft gave permission to appeal.

7. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  McVitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) He had the  benefit  of  the  attendance  notes  of  the  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer  Mr  Dillon  who  appeared  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and conceded that these showed that Mr  Dillon  had  conceded
      that family life existed between the Appellant and his adult children.

   b) He noted that the Judge in making his decision had taken into  account
      the length of the Appellants residence, the lack of ties to Serbia  in
      coming to his conclusion.

8. On behalf of the Appellant Mr O Ryan submitted that :

   a) He relied on his Rule 24 reply and skeleton argument.

   b) At paragraph 6-13 he addressed the issue of family life and relied  on
      Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 160  (IAC).
      The Judge accepted that the Appellant and his wife lived as  a  family
      unit in that an adult son aged 29 lived at home and their 18 year  old
      daughter was at University but otherwise at home.

   c) In relation to the argument that the reasons were inadequate the Judge
      gave a number of reasons for finding the refusal  disproportionate  in
      addition to the Appellants fear of returning  to  Serbia;  he  had  no
      family, could not speak the language and had no connections. His  wife
      and children were British citizens and she had a brother  with  mental
      health problems for whom she was the carer.

Finding on Material Error

9. Having  heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

10. Mr McVitie quite properly conceded  that  the  Respondent  had  accepted
   before the First-tier Tribunal  that  family  life  existed  between  the
   Appellant his wife and two adult children and indeed this is noted by the
   Judge at paragraph 35 and 37 of the decision. In  Ghising  it  was  found
   that a young adult living with his parents  or  siblings  would  normally
   have a family life to be respected under Article 8. That was clearly  the
   factual basis of the finding of family life in this case in that  the  29
   year old son lived at the family home with his girlfriend and son and the
   18 year old daughter lived at  the  family  home  when  she  was  not  at
   University. That challenge is therefore misconceived.

11. The grounds also argue that the Judge focused too much on the  Appellant
   and his wife's 'animosity and fear' at being returned  to  Serbia  as  it
   suggested there was a protection claim when no such claim had been  made.
   In a well structured decision the Judge  sets  out  the  'proportionality
   balancing exercise' at paragraph 61-63 taking into account those  factors
   that he was obliged to assess under s 117B of the Nationality Immigration
   and Asylum Act 2002.  While noting that the Appellants private and family
   life were established when his status was  precarious  and  that  he  had
   previously lied to the UK  authorities  he  was  entitled  to  take  into
   account and give weight to the fact that he accepted that  the  Appellant
   had no family in Serbia, and had no connections or ties  to  the  country
   and could not speak the language and had been in the UK  since  2000.  He
   also accepted that the Appellants wife and children were British citizens
   and that she had cared for her British citizen bother since  2004  as  he
   had mental health problems. He accepted that his wife also had no ties or
   family in Serbia. He also accepted that the Appellant had fled to the  UK
   in fear but any fair reading of the decision makes clear  that  this  was
   not the focus of his finding on proportionality it was simply one  factor
   among many which entitled the Judge to conclude at paragraph 62  9f)  and
   (g) that there would be very significant obstacles to the  Appellant  and
   his family continuing their family life in Serbia.

12. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out  findings  that  were  sustainable:  he  properly  directed
   himself as to the law, took all relevant matters into  account  including
   the weight of the public interest in maintaining immigration control  and
   reached conclusions that were sufficiently detailed and based  on  cogent
   reasoning.

CONCLUSION

13. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

14. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
28.1.2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

