
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00399/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 13 August 2013                             |On 16 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           MICHAEL CHINEDU JONATHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by J R Rahman,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria,  born  on  5  February  1969.   He
   arrived in the UK as a visitor on 22 September 2006 and  overstayed.   He
   sought to remain in the UK with his wife and 2 children (twins, a boy and
   a girl, born on 31 May 1999), relying on Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
   other family members are  all  also  citizens  of  Nigeria.   It  is  not
   contended that the case might succeed under the Immigration Rules.

2) The respondent refused the appellant's application (along with  those  of
   the other family members, who do not appear to have appealed  separately)
   for reasons explained in various letters, the latest of which is dated 12
   December 2012.

3) First-tier Tribunal Judge  Burns  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
   determination promulgated on 4 March 2013.

4) The appellant made the following application, which  now  stands  as  the
   grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

   1.   The appellant respectfully seeks to make an application to the First-
      tier Tribunal for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  a
      point of law, arising from Immigration Judge Burns' determination of 4
      March 2013.


   2.   The applicant seeks  the  points  which  have  been  raised  in  the
      application to the First-tier Tribunal for Permission to Appeal to  be
      revisited as it is maintained that the  decision  of  the  Immigration
      Judge in relation  to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  ground  is  arguably
      inadequate, and his consideration of Article  8  does  not  adequately
      address the best interest of the children, and  as  a  result  he  has
      materially erred in law.

   3.   It is submitted that on paragraph  43  of  the  determination,  that
      Immigration  Judge  Burns  has  failed  to  give  due  weight  to  Mrs
      Jonathan's testimony, and failed to consider her evidence whereby  she
      submitted that the appellant was in charge of the  family's  financial
      affairs.  Therefore it is plausible that the amount  allegedly  to  be
      taken from Nigeria.  This material error of fact has led to a material
      error of law.

   4.   It is further submitted that at the appeal hearing, the  appellant's
      representative confirmed that she is able to provide evidence  to  the
      effect that the appellant and his family are being supported by friend
      and  church  members,  and  regardless  of  the  provision   of   this
      information, Immigration Judge Burns has opted to make  a  finding  to
      the contrary without requesting the  necessary  evidence  to  make  an
      informed decision.

   5.   The  appellant  takes  great  issue  with  Immigration  Judge  Burns
      comments  in  paragraph  45  of  this  determination,  namely  "I  was
      satisfied that it was a scam put up by the  appellant"  and  that  the
      appellant "has remained here as an overstayer ever since, ducking  and
      weaving, frustrating immigration law, and being cynical and  dishonest
      in doing so."  Said observations are deemed as damning, and equate  to
      assumptions, but crucially important his comments are made without the
      basis of disputed evidence.  Judge Burns has thus materially erred  in
      law.

   6.   Paragraph 46 of the determination is based on gross assumptions  and
      negates that children can hold  their  own  opinions  on  issues  that
      affect them, and be intellectually capable.  It is  evident  that  the
      children have been in the UK  for  7  years  and  therefore  the  best
      interests of the children must prevail.

   7.    It  is  further  submitted  that  the  test  of  reasonableness  as
      determined in WV (Uganda) and AB (Somalia) v Secretary of State,  2009
      EWCA (Civ) 5 and the test in relation to the  best  interests  of  the
      child as determined in Uner v The Netherlands [2006] 3FCR340  has  not
      been applied  correctly.   The  test  has  been  applied  unreasonably
      leading to a material error of law.

   8.   The Immigration Judge has materially erred in the balancing exercise
      as he has not taken  the  above  issues  into  consideration.   It  is
      unreasonable to expect the appellant  and  his  family  to  return  to
      Nigeria especially since he concludes the existence of family life and
      private life.  Matters therefore merit further consideration.

   9.   If the Immigration Judge had taken the above concerns  into  account
      appropriately, it is more than possible that he  may  have  reached  a
      different  conclusion,  and  so  when  considered  separately   and/or
      cumulatively, it is submitted that these alleged errors all amount  to
      material errors of law.  It is submitted that Immigration Judge Burns'
      reasoning is perverse and extremely irrational and amounts to an error
      of law.

5) On 21 March 2013 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes  granted  permission,
   thinking it arguable that  the  judge  erred  in  relation  to  the  best
   interests of the children, who are  aged  13  and  have  lived  and  been
   educated in the UK for 7 years.  Judge Landes thought the  other  grounds
   appeared thin, Judge Burns having given reasons for all  his  credibility
   findings, but the grant of permission was not restricted.

Submissions for appellant.

6) Mr Winter said that  the  first  ground  of  appeal  could  be  taken  as
   expressed in paragraphs 2, 6, 7 and 8, all going to the best interests of
   the children.  They arrived in the UK with their parents at  age  6,  and
   were aged 13 by the time of the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr
   Winter referred to a skeleton argument for the appellant, prepared by his
   solicitors, for the history set out there of the  children's  educational
   and general progress.  (He did not refer to that  skeleton  argument  for
   any other purpose.)  He pointed to the judge's conclusions at  paragraphs
   43-50 of the determination.  He said that at paragraph 46 the judge erred
   by failing to consider  the  children's  private  lives,  and  failed  to
   consider whether their length of  residence  tipped  the  proportionality
   balance in favour of the appellant.  The same criticism could be made  of
   paragraph 48.

7) The judge referred at paragraph 49 to the very substantial weight  to  be
   given to the Immigration Rules.  Mr Winter said this is an expression  of
   Lord Brodie's since overtaken by the Inner House - MS v SSHD [2013]  CSIH
   52.

8) On the correct approach to the best interests of the children, Mr  Winter
   referred to LD [2011] IMM AR99, in particular at paragraphs 26 and  30(a)
   on the very weighty reasons required for separation of children from  the
   community in which they have grown  up  and  lived,  and  on  educational
   welfare as part of the UK educational system possibly  pointing  strongly
   to continued residence here to promote these interests; to EA [2011] UKUT
   315 on the weight to be given to a period of substantial residence  as  a
   child; to MK [2011] UKUT 00475, [2011] WL  6329683,  again  on  the  very
   weighty reasons required; to Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT  00197  at  (1)(i),
   "as a starting point it is in the best interests of children to  be  with
   both their parents and  if  both  parents  are  being  removed  then  the
   starting point suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
   of the household unless there are reasons to the contrary";  and  finally
   to SC [2012] UKUT 00056, "in the absence of strong countervailing factors
   residence of 8 years in the UK with a child is likely to make removal  at
   the end of that period not proportionate to the legitimate  aims  in  the
   case".

9) Mr Winter submitted that the judge's approach had not  been  set  out  in
   logical  order.   He  had  not  plainly  separated  the  children's  best
   interests from the conduct of the parents.  It was  therefore  not  clear
   that the judge's ultimate assessment was not tainted by his views of  the
   adverse immigration history.  That led to error  of  law  such  that  the
   determination should be set aside.  There  was  no  application  to  lead
   further evidence, and  there  has  been  no  significant  change  in  the
   situation of the children.   Mr  Winter  was  ready  to  argue  that  the
   decision should be remade in favour of the appellant, but  would  welcome
   the opportunity to submit a note of  argument  on  the  remaking  of  the
   decision.

10) Mr Winter turned  to  the  other  paragraphs  of  the  application.   In
   relation to paragraph 43 of the  determination,  he  submitted  that  the
   judge said there was a discrepancy between evidence from the husband  and
   evidence from his wife, but did not specify clearly what the  discrepancy
   was.  (I observed that such a complaint was not to be seen at paragraph 3
   of the grounds, which appear to be framed only as an  insistence  on  the
   appellant's case and not so as to bring out any  arguable  legal  error.)
   Mr Winter said that paragraph 4 was  intended  to  express  an  issue  of
   procedural fairness, and that a letter containing  further  evidence  had
   been produced with the application for permission.  He accepted  that  no
   application has been made to introduce  further  evidence  in  accordance
   with the Procedure Rules and Practice Directions, but he  suggested  that
   if error of law based on unfairness were to be made  out,  then  such  an
   application might follow.  As to paragraph 5,  Mr  Winter  conceded  that
   this  amounted  only  to  disagreement,  and  that  the   assessment   of
   credibility was a matter for the judge.  As to  paragraph  6,  Mr  Winter
   said that this was an attack on the judge's  finding  that  the  evidence
   from the children  had  been  produced  partly  by  coaching,  which  was
   speculative.  The matter had not  been  put  to  the  children  or  other
   witnesses in cross-examination and the judge had  not  been  entitled  to
   reach that inference based on the letters the children had written or  on
   their oral evidence.  The children were evidently doing  well  at  school
   and so would have been capable of answering questions put to them.

11) At the end of Mr Winter's submissions  I  drew  attention  to  the  last
   sentence of the grounds,  and  observed  that  none  of  the  submissions
   appeared to aim at the legal error of perversity, a high test,  and  that
   the wording "extremely irrational" seemed  to  go  too  far.   Mr  Winter
   stated that he did not say that part of the  grounds  could  properly  be
   supported.  He suggested that the wording might reflect the  inexperience
   of the drafter (the grounds were prepared  by  his  instructing  firm  of
   solicitors, not by Mr Winter) and that he would give  appropriate  advice
   for the future.

12) I also pointed out that in the skeleton argument prepared by  solicitors
   and referred to above the appellant's immigration history is described in
   glowing terms as if factual but which do not reflect the  truth,  or  the
   findings reached in the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Winter accepted this was
   also erroneous, and (as noted above)  he  had  not  sought  to  associate
   himself with that part of the skeleton argument.

Submissions for respondent.

13) Mr Mullen said that reading the determination fairly and as a whole  the
   judge had taken into account the private lives of the children and  their
   educational history  separately  from  their  parents'  poor  immigration
   history.  He accepted the principles set out  in  the  well  known  cases
   referred to by Mr Winter, and observed that while each case turns on  its
   own acts, the present case was closer to MK, where the appellant  failed,
   than to any  of  the  cases  where  appellants  had  succeeded.   In  the
   successful cases the parents had generally been in the  UK  lawfully  for
   most of the relevant period.  Seven or even eight years residence did not
   automatically render removal of children disproportionate.  The appellant
   and his family have known they had no right to be here since around March
   2006, and were served with formal notice to that effect in  2007.   Their
   residence had been built up without a shred of lawful basis and  although
   the best interests of the children had to be separately  viewed,  in  the
   proportionality assessment their length of  residence  and  its  lack  of
   basis could not be divorced from the adverse  immigration  factors.   The
   judge had to carry out a difficult assessment but he  made  no  error  in
   doing so and his decision should  not  be  interfered  with.   This  case
   required seriously weighty  factors  in  favour  of  removal,  but  those
   factors were present.  The children's interests in gaining a UK education
   were relevant but not determinative.  The judge was entitled to find that
   education would be available in Nigeria, where the appellant was educated
   to a very high standard.  The case did  not  involve  any  suggestion  of
   splitting up the family, the only reasonable expectation being that  they
   would leave as a unit.  This was not a case where the appellant  and  his
   family had rights to remain in the UK, irrespective of their inability to
   meet the Immigration Rules.

14) As to the credibility criticisms, Mr Mullen said that the weight  to  be
   given to any aspect of the evidence was very much a matter for the judge.
    I indicated that I did not need to hear any further from  Mr  Mullen  on
   the credibility points.

Discussion and conclusions.

15) As to credibility, the judge was plainly entitled to  make  the  adverse
   findings which he did.  His reasons are adequately explained.  No part of
   the reasoning has been undermined in this appeal.

16) While it is not necessary to go any further for  present  purposes,  the
   appellant's version of events was so far from the  truth,  including  the
   immigration history on record, that no other conclusion could  reasonably
   have been expected.  His rosy version should not have  been  repeated  in
   the skeleton argument for the Upper Tribunal as if  it  were  fact.   The
   judge's view of the appellant's credibility, describing  him  as  cynical
   and dishonest, is expressed in trenchant terms, particularly at paragraph
   45, but is no more than is justified.

17) The facts regarding the children's residence and education  were  before
   the judge and plainly taken into  account.   His  conclusion  that  their
   evidence had to some extent been coached was also open to him.  There are
   reasonable findings that it is highly unlikely that  the  children  would
   have no interest in their country of origin and citizenship and that  the
   confluence of their letters suggested pre-preparation.  At paragraph  46,
   the judge goes straight on to remind himself of the need  to  stand  back
   and to look at the overarching interests of the children.  His conclusion
   that they would quickly adapt and prosper in Nigeria  was  also  properly
   open to him and not capable of any real criticism.

18) The judge's overall conclusion on proportionality, including  evaluation
   of the children's best interests,  has  not  been  shown  to  be  legally
   flawed.

19) The skeleton argument  and  the  grounds  prepared  by  the  appellant's
   solicitors went beyond what was justifiable in presentation of  his  case
   at its legitimate highest.  It is to be hoped that  his  solicitors  will
   learn for the future to confine their enthusiasm  within  the  limits  of
   factual and legal accuracy.

20) The  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The
   determination of the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing his  appeal  on  all
   grounds, shall stand.

21) No order for anonymity has been requested or made.





                               [pic]
                                15 August 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
