
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00919/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11th June, 2013                            |On 2nd July 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                 AHLA KILIC
                          (No anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett instructed by Ozoran Turkan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Turkey, who was  born  on  27th  August,
    1968.  She made an application to the respondent to vary her  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her self-employment  under
    the EU Turkish Association Agreement ,but on 27th December,  2012,  the
    respondent refused to vary leave.  She gave Notice of  Appeal  and  her
    appeal was heard at Taylor House by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callow
    who, in a determination promulgated on 9th April, 2013,  dismissed  her
    appeal.   Dissatisfied  with  the  judge's  decision,   the   appellant
    challenged the determination and Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McDonald granted permission to appeal on the basis of the lack of clear
    factual findings made by the judge.

2.   Before  me  this  afternoon  Mr  Burrett  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant and Mr L Tarlow, a  senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    appeared on behalf of the respondent.  Mr Burrett took me to  paragraph
    12 of the  judges' determination and suggested that the judge had found
    that the appellant was a self-employed person, at least during part  of
    the period in question.  Paragraph 12 says this:

         "In broad terms it is accepted that  the  appellant  has  told  the
         truth about some matters but exaggerated others. In the absence  of
         any invoices for work done for  Dry  Cleaning  Tailors  and  noting
         their very recent letter that '... we will be able to work with her
         once she sets up her own business in the UK'  she  has  exaggerated
         her claim to additionally provide services to Dry Cleaning Tailors.
         However it has been established that up until  3rd  July  2012  the
         date of her last invoice for services rendered to De' Atelier,  she
         was, viewing all the evidence  in the round, a self-employed person
         and not a person in the employment of De' Atelier.  Whilst  not  in
         itself decisive it is accepted that the services  provided  to  De'
         Atelier, the appellant's sole customer, were not controlled by  De'
         Atlerier. They simply instructed her to carry out certain work  for
         them from time to time.  In establishing her business the appellant
         has advertised her business and personally accounts for it  by  way
         of business balance  sheets  and  the  payment  of  tax,  including
         National Insurance contributions as a self-employed person."

3.    I  pointed  out  to  Mr  Burrett  that  I  had  some   difficulty   in
    understanding what it was that the judge meant by use of the words  "in
    broad terms" and I was slightly concerned that  the  judge  appears  to
    have accepted that the appellant and told the truth about some matters,
    but exaggerated others without explaining what they  were.   The  judge
    has not explained what he meant by "exaggerated others."  I formed  the
    view that there was a clear lack of clear, well  reasoned  findings  in
    the determination and Mr Tarlow, entirely properly,  told  me  that  he
    agreed.

4.   Both representatives  having  agreed  that  the  judge's  determination
    cannot  stand,  I  set  it  aside.  I  drew  the   attention   of   the
    representatives  to  Section  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement.  This provides


         "7.  Disposals of Appeal in the Upper Tribunal


         7.1  Where under Section 12.1 of  the  2002  Act   (Proceedings  on
             Appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of a decision involved the making of an error on  a
             point of law the Upper Tribunal may set aside the decision and
             if it does so must either remit the  case  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal under Section 12.2(b)(i)  or  proceed  in  accordance
             with the relevant Practice Directions to remake  the  decision
             under Section 12.2(b)(ii).


         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each occasion  to  proceed  to
             remake the decision instead of remitting the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that  (a)
             the effect of the error has been to deprive the  party  before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal or (b) the nature and  extent  of  any  judicial
             fact finding which is necessary in order for the  decision  in
             the appeal to be remade is such  that  having  regard  to  the
             overriding objective in Rule ... it is  more  appropriate  for
             the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal."


     Both representatives agreed and neither sought to persuade me to  adopt
    another course.

5.   I am satisfied  that  this  is  a  case  which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  given  that
    witnesses are not present today  and  given  the  length  of  time  the
    parties would have to wait for the matter to be relisted before  me  at
    Field House and that it could  conversely be heard relatively  speedily
    by the First-tier Tribunal, and in view of the overriding objective  in
    forming the onward conduct of this  appeal  I  have  decided  that  the
    appeal be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing  afresh
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Callow.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

