
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00502/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 February 2018                      |On 28 March 2018                    |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                  iram rasheed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S K Abbas, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 1 October 2014, the  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  made  an
    application for further leave to remain, as a  Tier  4  Student.   That
    application was refused in a decision dated  8  January  2016,  with  a
    concomitant decision to remove  her  pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
    a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal ("the  FtJ")  at  a  hearing  on  22
    February 2017.  The FtJ dismissed the appeal.

 3. The basis of the respondent's decision to refuse leave  to  remain  was
    that the appellant had not provided a valid Confirmation of  Acceptance
    for  Studies  ("CAS")  because  that  which  she  provided   with   her
    application related to a college that  was  not  listed  as  a  Tier  4
    sponsor as at the date the sponsor register was checked  on  8  January
    2016.  Accordingly, the appellant was not awarded the requisite  number
    of points for having a valid CAS.  Her  application  was  refused  with
    reference to paragraph 245ZX(c) and paragraph  116(a)  of  Appendix  A.
    Because  no  valid  CAS  was  provided,  no  points  were  awarded  for
    Maintenance (Funds).

 4. The appellant's grounds of appeal in relation  to  the  FtJ's  decision
    relate firstly to what is said to have been an erroneous assessment  on
    his part in terms of whether the appellant had varied  the  application
    made to the respondent, the  purported  variation  being  in  terms  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Secondly, complaint is  made  about  the  FtJ's
    consideration of documentary evidence provided after the hearing by the
    respondent's representative.  It is argued that the FtJ should not have
    taken that evidence into account or if he did, should  have  given  the
    appellant the opportunity to respond to it.

    The FtJ's reasons

 5. It is necessary to set out in a little more detail the events that took
    place before the FtJ, and the FtJ's reasons for dismissing the  appeal.



 6. The FtJ set out the basis of the respondent's decision  and  summarised
    the appellant's grounds of appeal.  Referring to the appellant's bundle
    of documents, he noted that that bundle did not  include  the  '60-day'
    letter sent  to  the  appellant  by  the  respondent  (giving  her  the
    opportunity to obtain new sponsorship), the application which  is  said
    in the grounds to have been made on 22 December 2015  under  Article  8
    (the 'variation' application), or any correspondence either in relation
    to the 60-day letter or in relation to the  application  said  to  have
    been made on 22 December 2015.  He noted that the  respondent's  bundle
    did not contain those documents either.

 7. Having heard the appellant's evidence, and referring to  what  he  said
    was inconsistency in certain respects with her witness  statement,  the
    FtJ said that although no curtailment letter had been produced  by  the
    respondent, the appellant accepts receiving such a document towards the
    end of October 2015.

 8. In relation to the appellant's contention in her witness statement that
    she had asked the respondent to provide her with a  certified  copy  of
    her passport so that she could find another sponsor, the  FtJ  referred
    to the fact that that was a matter  that  was  only  mentioned  in  her
    witness statement for the appeal hearing.  On that issue, he found that
    she had  not  given  credible  evidence  because  there  was  a  "plain
    contradiction" between what she said in oral evidence and what she said
    in her witness statement on this issue.  To summarise, in  her  witness
    statement she said that she had repeatedly telephoned the  Home  Office
    to complain about not being provided  with  a  certified  copy  of  her
    passport, whereas in her  oral  evidence  she  said  that  it  was  her
    solicitor that had contacted the Home Office and she did not make  such
    phone calls.  Earlier in his decision the FtJ quoted from  her  witness
    statement in this respect.

 9. The FtJ also found it incredible that the lack of a certified  copy  of
    her passport was a genuine reason for not being able to  obtain  a  CAS
    given that it was not raised  by  the  appellant's  representatives  in
    correspondence with the Home Office,  or  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    That, he concluded, was a matter that would have been at the  forefront
    of an argument that the appellant had been the  victim  of  common  law
    unfairness.

10. At [30] the FtJ said  that  it  was  "possible"  that  the  appellant's
    representatives had made "written representations" to the  Home  Office
    on 22 December 2015 to the effect that the appellant  should  be  given
    more time to obtain a new CAS (that having a bearing on Article 8).  At
    [31] he concluded that if that was what  had  happened,  that  did  not
    constitute a variation of the original  application  as  distinct  from
    simply asking the Secretary of State to delay making a decision on  the
    original application which was still pending.

11. The FtJ went on to consider Article 8  of  the  ECHR,  both  under  the
    Rules, and under Article 8 proper. In that context,  at  [37]  he  said
    that the appellant had not given an account of what she  was  doing  at
    the time when she received the curtailment letter, and her account  was
    completely silent on elementary questions such as when she came to  the
    UK as a student, what she came to study, and  what  qualifications,  if
    any, she had obtained thus far.  He found that she had fallen far short
    of showing that the private life which she has established  in  the  UK
    has a special and compelling character such as to justify  a  departure
    from the general proposition that little weight should be attached to a
    private  life  established  while  a  person's  status  in  the  UK  is
    precarious.

12. Under a subheading "New Evidence received after the  hearing"  the  FtJ
    said at [39] as follows:

         "After dictating this decision, I received new evidence  from  [the
         Presenting Officer].  She produced a copy of the 60 day letter sent
         to the Appellant.  The letter said that a  certified  copy  of  her
         passport was enclosed.   [The  Presenting  Officer]  also  produced
         evidence that the application of 22 December 2015 had been rejected
         as invalid.  If so, this torpedoes the claim that  the  application
         of 22 December 2015 remains outstanding.  But this is academic,  as
         the Appellant failed to raise a prima facie case that it was, and I
         have already found against her on this issue.  In summary, the  new
         evidence does not change the outcome of this appeal, and so I  make
         no further comment on it".

    Submissions

13. Mr Abbas relied on the grounds.  It was submitted  that  the  appellant
    had varied the application that  was  before  the  respondent  and  the
    respondent's decision was therefore not in accordance with the law.  It
    was submitted that the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made it clear that there was an application to the respondent which was
    a variation application, and not simply written representations as  the
    FtJ had suggested.  S.3C of the Immigration Act 1971 ("the  1971  Act")
    does not preclude such an application.

14. I did enquire of the parties as to whether  the  appellant  would  have
    been entitled to vary her application, having regard to s.3C(4) and (5)
    of the 1971 Act,  and  whether  that  would  have  been  a  permissible
    variation of the application for leave to remain whilst her  leave  was
    extended by virtue of s.3C.   Mr  Jarvis  accepted  the  contention  on
    behalf of the  appellant  that  that  would  have  been  a  permissible
    application to vary  leave.   Having  considered  the  decision  in  JH
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ
    78, to which Mr Jarvis referred, I accept that this is so.

15. It was conceded on behalf of the appellant that the appellant  had  not
    produced before the  FtJ  a  copy  of  that  application,  but  it  was
    submitted that nevertheless the  FtJ  needed  to  have  regard  to  the
    express words of the grounds of appeal before him.

16. In relation  to  the  evidence  provided  after  the  hearing,  it  was
    submitted that it was not possible to judge the  extent  to  which  the
    FtJ's decision was  affected  by  anything  in  those  documents.   The
    appellant in that regard had been deprived  of  the  right  to  a  fair
    hearing.

17. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis said that the Home  Office  file
    which he had, did not contain a copy of the documents submitted to  the
    FtJ in terms of what was actually sent, although there is a note as  to
    what was in fact sent.  No copies of the documents sent  were  kept  by
    the Presenting Officer.  Mr Jarvis did however,  say  that  there  were
    documents on the file which indicated that the 60-day letter  had  been
    sent, and that the appellant had been notified that her application  of
    22 December 2015 was invalid.  He referred to a letter dated  22  March
    2016 from  the  appellant's  solicitors  requesting  a  refund  of  the
    application and the immigration health surcharge fee.  It appears  from
    what I was told by Mr Jarvis that the appellant's  representatives  (or
    the appellant) had been asked to rectify the application  otherwise  it
    would be finally invalidated.

18. Mr Jarvis indicated that he had not seen any letter showing that a copy
    of the appellant's passport had been sent  to  her  and  there  was  no
    indication of such on the Home Office 'system'.

19.  I  was  referred  to  two  decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,   SH
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1284 in relation to procedural fairness and the need  to  establish
    materiality, and EK (Ivory Coast) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 in relation to the  need  to  establish
    that any unfairness arose as a  result  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    actions.

20. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that in  principle  it  was
    good practice for a judge to indicate to the other party that  evidence
    or information had been received after the hearing.   However,  it  was
    submitted that  the  60-day  letter  was  not  a  matter  that  was  in
    contention, and the  appellant  knew  that  her  application  had  been
    rejected as invalid.  The appellant's grounds do not  take  issue  with
    that and do not say that the appellant's solicitors were  unaware  that
    those documents were sent to them.

21. Therefore, it was submitted that even if there was an error of  law  in
    the decision of the FtJ, it was not material.

22. In any event, the FtJ considered the issue of common law  fairness  and
    Article 8  of  the  ECHR.   Even  if  there  was  a  variation  of  the
    application, there was  no  material  consequence  in  the  FtJ  having
    determined the appeal as it was before  him.   The  appellant  had  the
    opportunity to argue Article 8  and  that  was  done.   The  Article  8
    conclusions have not been challenged.

23. In relation to the  purported  absence  of  a  certified  copy  of  the
    appellant's passport, the FtJ had rejected the inconsistent evidence of
    the appellant on this issue.  Furthermore, the lack of a  passport  was
    not material to the appellant not having  been  able  to  find  another
    sponsor because her evidence was that no college  would  allow  her  to
    start half way through a term.  Therefore, the lack of a  copy  of  her
    passport would have made no difference.

24. In reply, Mr Abbas contended that the errors of law  made  by  the  FtJ
    were material.  The FtJ had  made  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility and it was not possible to say  the  extent  to  which  his
    perspective  of  the  appellant's  credibility  was  affected  by   the
    documents provided after the hearing.

25. In relation to the lack of provision of a copy  of  her  passport,  she
    needed to have been provided with every opportunity to obtain admission
    to another college.

    Assessment and Conclusions

26.  It  is  contended  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  whereas   the
    respondent's decision dated 8 January 2016  was  on  the  basis  of  an
    application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant, she had in
    fact varied  that  application  to  a  human  rights  application  with
    reference to Article 8.  Thus, reliance is placed  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal which states that an  application
    for further leave under Article 8 was made on 22 December 2015.  It  is
    argued that the FtJ wrongly characterised what was an 'application'  as
    written representations.

27. The difficulty for the appellant in relation to this contention is that
    the FtJ noted at [15] that  the  appellant's  bundle  did  not  include
    documents in relation to what was said to  have  been  the  application
    made on 22 December 2015.  The FtJ referred to the appellant's evidence
    in relation to that application and her oral evidence  as  set  out  at
    [19]-[20].

28. Furthermore, although the grounds before me assert that there  such  an
    application,  no  evidence  of  it  has  been  provided  such  as   may
    demonstrate that the FtJ made a mistake of fact leading to an error  of
    law in terms of facts which were in existence but about  which  he  was
    unaware, (see E v Secretary of State for Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA
    Civ 49).

29. On the basis  that  the  appellant  was  asserting  that  the  existing
    application was varied, it was for her  to  produce  evidence  of  that
    fact.  No such evidence has been forthcoming.  The FtJ was entitled  to
    conclude on the evidence before him that the  application  for  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 student was not varied, and that  that  was
    the decision which was the subject matter of the appeal.

30. It is also worth pointing out that if the appellant genuinely did  have
    any Article 8 claim to advance, the basis  of  it  was  manifestly  not
    apparent from the information or evidence put before  the  FtJ.   There
    was nothing whatsoever advanced on behalf of the appellant which  could
    conceivably have created a viable Article 8 claim.  That undermines the
    contention that there was in fact any application to vary the  existing
    application, on Article 8 grounds.

31. Thus, the FtJ dealt with the appeal entirely properly on the basis of a
    decision to refuse to vary leave to remain as a Tier  4  Migrant.   The
    appellant failed to produce to the respondent a valid CAS, and thus her
    appeal under the Rules could not succeed (the appeal having been  dealt
    with under the appeals regime prior to the recent amendments).

32. The appellant was found by the FtJ not to have been a credible witness,
    given the inconsistency in her account in terms of  what  was  said  to
    have been a request of the Home Office to provide her with a  certified
    copy of her passport  to  enable  her  to  gain  admission  to  another
    college.  The FtJ was entitled to conclude that there was no unfairness
    in the respondent's decision.  In any event, as Mr Jarvis  persuasively
    suggested, the appellant's case was that  she  was  not  able  to  gain
    admission to a new college because they would not issue a CAS to her in
    the middle of a term.  Even it could be said that  the  respondent  had
    wrongly failed to provide her with a certified copy  of  her  passport,
    any omission in that respect was not material.  As  is  clear  however,
    neither the FtJ's decision, nor mine, is dependent on that  alternative
    consideration.

33. As regards the FtJ's consideration of documents provided to  him  after
    the hearing, I have set out in full what he said about those  documents
    at [39] of his decision.  In this respect I do consider that  both  the
    Presenting Officer's action in sending documents to the FtJ  after  the
    hearing, and  the  way  that  the  FtJ  dealt  with  that  issue,  were
    unfortunate, to say the least.

34. In the first place, the Presenting Officer ought not to  have  provided
    documents to the FtJ after the hearing without having been  invited  to
    do so, or without first having sought permission to do so either at the
    hearing or in advance of having sent them post-hearing.   There  is  no
    indication that permission had been sought in advance or that  the  FtJ
    had invited the submission of documents post-hearing.  Furthermore, the
    Presenting Officer apparently did not leave on the respondent's file  a
    copy of any correspondence sent to  the  Tribunal  after  the  hearing,
    listing in a comprehensive form the documents that  were  sent  to  the
    FtJ, which she ought to have done.

35. More importantly for the purposes of the appeal before me,  I  consider
    that the FtJ should either have declined to consider the documents, and
    have said as much, because they were not the subject of any application
    or invitation by him, or he ought to have ensured that they were served
    on the appellant's representatives to allow for any submissions  to  be
    made on them, before any consideration of them, if  such  consideration
    was to feature in his reasons.  To do otherwise plainly creates a  risk
    of unfairness.

36. However, it is apparent from the FtJ's decision that even  without  the
    post-hearing documents, he had concluded that the appellant was  not  a
    credible witness, for  the  reasons  he  gave  independently  of  those
    documents, and that the appeal could not succeed, either under the Tier
    4 Rules, under Article 8, or in relation to any common law  unfairness.
    The letter said to be from the  respondent  to  the  appellant  or  her
    representatives stating that a  certified  copy  of  her  passport  was
    enclosed was not material  in  the  sense  that  the  FtJ  had  already
    concluded that the appellant was  not  credible  about  this,  for  the
    reasons he gave.  In relation  to  the  document  suggesting  that  the
    'application' of 22 December 2015 had been  rejected  as  invalid,  the
    appellant signally failed to produce to the FtJ any evidence in support
    of the contention that there had been a variation of  the  application.
    The 60-day letter was not a matter in contention,  and  therefore  that
    could not have made any difference either.  The FtJ said at  [39]  that
    he had already  found  against  the  appellant  on  the  issue  of  the
    variation application.  He expressly stated that the "new evidence" did
    not change the outcome of the appeal, and there is nothing to  indicate
    otherwise.

37. There is no reason at all to think that the FtJ had allowed  the  post-
    hearing documents to influence his decision in circumstances  where  he
    gave clear and sustainable reasons for concluding that the appeal could
    not succeed, and those reasons being manifest from the evidence  before
    him.

38. Accordingly, whilst I do  consider  that  the  circumstances  in  which
    documents  were  sent  post-hearing  to  the   FtJ,   and   the   FtJ's
    consideration of those documents, were wrong, I am not  satisfied  that
    this amounted to an error of law, or if it did, that it was an error of
    law that was material to the outcome of the appeal.

39. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      26/03/18

