
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00709/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice in Belfast   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 November 2018                           |On 21 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                Beverley [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  S  Gillespie  promulgated  on  8  February  2018,
    dismissing her appeal against the decision made on 15 December 2014  to
    refuse to issue her with a derivative residence card as a primary carer
    of a British citizen resident in the United Kingdom,  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The appellant did not attend the hearing, nor did anyone attend on  her
    behalf. No explanation for this has been given  and,  having  satisfied
    myself that due notice of the time date and venue  of  the  appeal  had
    been properly given, I was satisfied that I could proceed to  determine
    the appeal in the absence of the appellant and that to do so  would  be
    in the interests of justice, bearing in mind the overriding objective.

 3. As the date of this decision in this case is prior to 6 April 2015,  by
    operation of Schedule 4,  paragraph  3  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, the 2006 Regulations are preserved for
    the operation of this appeal.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who has  been  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2003.  She has a son who is a British  citizen  as
    his  father,  WP,  is  a  British  citizen.   The  couple  were  in   a
    relationship which broke down after the birth of the child.  It is  the
    appellant's case that she is the primary carer of the child;  that  the
    child's father has had no contact with him  since  2013;  and  that  in
    consequence, as he is either unable or  unwilling  to  look  after  the
    child, the child will be compelled to leave the United Kingdom were she
    removed.

 5. The respondent's case as  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  15
    December 2014 is that as the child's father is a  British  citizen,  he
    equally shares responsibility for the son's care and that  he  had  not
    shown, absent proof that the father was no longer living in the  United
    Kingdom, that he could not assume the care responsibility for the child
    were the appellant forced to leave the United Kingdom  as  accordingly,
    she did not meet the requirements of Regulation 15(4A) (c) of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 6. The appeal against that decision was heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in May 2016, and  was  dismissed.  The  appellant  then  appealed  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal which, in a  decision  promulgated  in
    December 2016, the appeal was allowed and remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made. None of the findings made  by
    the first judge were preserved

 7. On appeal, the judge found that:-

      i) the best interests of the child was not  a  relevant  consideration
         [23];

     ii) that the appellant's evidence was less than satisfactory and  there
         is no independent evidence to show  that  she  had  ever  tried  to
         contact the father via social workers or any other body that  might
         be able to trace her former partner and that her ability to  secure
         his cooperation to have  the  birth  registered  and  to  obtain  a
         passport proves that she had been able  to  secure  his  assistance
         whenever it suits [27];

    iii) that her false  claim  to  have  been  a  Zimbabwean  national  and
         claiming asylum casts doubt on her credibility [28];

 8. The appellant sought permission on the grounds that the judge had erred
    In claiming to have regard to the child's best interests.

 9. On 4 June 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge L  Murray  granted  permission
    stating that it was arguable that the judge had erred in  stating  that
    the children's interests were not a relevant consideration, having  had
    regard to Chaves-Vilchez [2017] EUECJ C-133/15.

10. On 19 October 2018 I issued a memorandum and directions stating:-

      i) It is my preliminary view  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal involved the making of an error of law as pleaded  in  the
         grounds in that the judge failed properly to  engage  with  Chaves-
         Vilchez.

     ii) Accordingly, the parties should prepare  for  the  hearing  on  the
         basis that the decision would be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  on
         the day of hearing and to address Chaves-Vilchez.

11. In Chaves-Vilchez the Court of Justice said this:

         "70. In this case, in order to assess the risk  that  a  particular
             child, who is a Union citizen, might be compelled to leave the
             territory of the European Union and thereby be deprived of the
             genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred  on
             him by Article 20 TFEU if the child's third-country  national
             parent were to be refused a right of residence in  the  Member
             State concerned, it is important to determine, in each case at
             issue in the main proceedings, which  parent  is  the  primary
             carer of the child and whether there is in fact a relationship
             of dependency between the child and the third-country national
             parent. As part of that assessment, the competent  authorities
             must take account of the right to respect for family life,  as
             stated in Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental  Rights  of
             the European Union, that  article  requiring  to  be  read  in
             conjunction with the obligation to take into consideration the
             best interests of the child, recognised in  Article 24(2)  of
             that charter.


         71.  For the purposes of such an  assessment,  the  fact  that  the
             other parent, a Union citizen, is actually able and willing to
             assume sole responsibility for the primary day-to-day care  of
             the child is a relevant factor, but it  is  not  in  itself  a
             sufficient ground for a conclusion that there is not,  between
             the third-country  national  parent  and  the  child,  such  a
             relationship of dependency that the child would  be  compelled
             to leave the territory of the European Union  if  a  right  of
             residence were refused  to  that  third-country  national.  In
             reaching such a conclusion, account must be taken, in the best
             interests  of  the  child  concerned,  of  all  the   specific
             circumstances, including the age of  the  child,  the  child's
             physical  and  emotional  development,  the  extent   of   his
             emotional ties both to the Union citizen  parent  and  to  the
             third-country national parent, and the risks which  separation
             from the latter might entail for that child's equilibrium.


         72.  In the light of the foregoing, the answer  to  the  first  and
             second questions is that Article 20 TFEU must be  interpreted
             as meaning that for the purposes of assessing whether a  child
             who is a  Union  citizen  would  be  compelled  to  leave  the
             territory of  the  European  Union  as  a  whole  and  thereby
             deprived of the genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the
             rights conferred on him by that article if the child's  third-
             country national parent were refused a right of  residence  in
             the Member State concerned, the fact that  the  other  parent,
             who is a Union citizen, is actually able and willing to assume
             sole responsibility for the primary  day-to-day  care  of  the
             child is a  relevant  factor,  but  it  is  not  in  itself  a
             sufficient ground for a conclusion that there is not,  between
             the third-country  national  parent  and  the  child,  such  a
             relationship of dependency that the child would indeed  be  so
             compelled were there to be  such  a  refusal  of  a  right  of
             residence. Such an assessment must take into account,  in  the
             best interests  of  the  child  concerned,  all  the  specific
             circumstances, including the age of  the  child,  the  child's
             physical  and  emotional  development,  the  extent   of   his
             emotional ties both to the Union citizen  parent  and  to  the
             third-country national parent, and the risks which  separation
             from the latter might entail for the child's equilibrium.


             Consideration of the third question referred."


    The court also said this:

         "78. In the light  of  the  foregoing,  the  answer  to  the  third
             question is that Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted  as  not
             precluding a Member State from providing  that  the  right  of
             residence in its territory of a third-country national, who is
             a parent of a minor child that is a national  of  that  Member
             State and who is responsible for the primary  day-to-day  care
             of that child, is subject to the requirement that  the  third-
             country national must provide evidence to prove that a refusal
             of a right of residence to the third-country  national  parent
             would deprive the  child  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
             substance of the rights pertaining to the child's status as  a
             Union citizen, by obliging the child to leave the territory of
             the European  Union,  as  a  whole.  It  is  however  for  the
             competent  authorities  of  the  Member  State  concerned   to
             undertake, on the basis of the evidence provided by the third-
             country national, the necessary enquiries in order to be  able
             to assess, in the light of  all  the  specific  circumstances,
             whether a refusal would have such consequences."


12. I am satisfied that in light of these observations that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of  law  and
    has to be set aside in that  the  judge  wrongly  discounted  the  best
    interests of the child  and  failed  properly  to  make  a  proper  and
    necessary findings of fact with respect to the child's position.

13. It is therefore necessary to remake the decision and, as I indicated to
    the parties in my directions, it is appropriate to do so today.

14. There are in this case no challenges to the findings of  fact  made  by
    the judge.  It flows from that there is no challenge to the appellant's
    lack of credibility and I observe that there is  no  dispute  that  she
    claimed to be  a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe  and  separately  used  another
    identity. I accept also that there are real doubts as  to  whether  the
    appellant is in fact in contact  with  the  child's  father.   She  has
    failed to provide any up-to-date evidence regarding the position of the
    child or the arrangements made for his care.  In short, there has  been
    a failure to provide the court with any basis on which  it  could  make
    the proper assessment pursuant to the ruling in Chaves-Vilchez  or  for
    that  matter  conduct  a  proper  "best   interests   of   the   child"
    determination.

15. Bearing in mind also what was said in Chaves-Vilchez at 78, I note that
    it is not an error of law to require the appellant to provide at  least
    the basic information to allow a proper assessment to be undertaken  by
    the competent authorities.

16. In the circumstances and given the lack of evidence  about  the  child,
    which is in itself worrying on the part of somebody  who  professes  to
    have his best interests at heart, I conclude  that  the  appellant  has
    failed to show that  her  removal  would  result  in  the  child  being
    compelled to be leave the charity of the European Union.  It is for the
    appellant to make out  her  case,  and  has  not  provided  any  proper
    evidential basis for doing so. Accordingly,  I  remake  the  appeal  by
    dismissing it on all grounds.

17. No anonymity direction is made.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing it on all grounds.


Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

