
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00839/2015
                                                               IA/00842/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR MOUSSA MOSTEFA
                              MS NAOUEL TOUHAMI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr C Lam of Counsel instructed by David Tang & Co.


                             DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondents (hereafter claimants) are husband and wife. The first
       claimant is a citizen of Algeria, the second a citizen of France  and
       hence an EEA national. On 12 December 2014 the  appellant  (hereafter
       the Secretary of State for the Home Department or  SSHD)  refused  to
       issue the first claimant with a residence card as confirmation of his
       right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national. On the same date
       she refused to issue the second claimant with a registration document
       to confirm she is an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

    2. Their appeal against this refusal came  before  First  tier  Tribunal
       Judge Majid who allowed it. The grounds  of  challenge  were  firstly
       that the judge had erred in failing to make findings on the qualified
       status of the second claimant and failed to resolve discrepancies  in
       the evidence relating to  whether  the  couple  had  entered  into  a
       marriage of convenience; the second ground was  that  the  judge  had
       failed to provide any adequate  findings  of  fact  decisive  to  the
       outcome of the appeal.

    3. There are a number of unsatisfactory features of the judge's  written
       decision. He appears to regard the issue he had to decide as  one  of
       whether the couple had "leave" under  the  Immigration  Acts,  rather
       than one  of  whether  there  was  compliance  with  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Areas) Regulations 2006. His decision  is  cursory
       and jumps from one issue to another without clear  sequencing.   This
       is not the first time I have said similar things about  this  judge's
       decisions. That said, I am only entitled to set aside such a decision
       if satisfied that it is vitiated by material error(s) of law  and  in
       this particular case I am not satisfied that the respondent has  made
       out her grounds.

    4. As regards the first ground, it is important to recall  that  in  the
       reasons for refusal letter the respondent was alleging,  inter  alia,
       that the second claimant had  not  established  she  was  in  genuine
       employment. By  the  time  the  case  came  before  Judge  Majid  the
       claimants had submitted considerably more evidence, dealing not  only
       with her past employment but with her new employments with AST  Audio
       Ltd (Orbitsond) and Contrella. The SSHD did  not  send  any  response
       disputing  any  of  this  evidence.  At  the  hearing  there  was  no
       appearance by a Presenting Officer. In the grounds  of  challenge  to
       the judge's decision it is not suggested that this  further  evidence
       is unreliable. When one turns to what the judge did, it is clear that
       he considered the further documentary evidence.  He  heard  from  the
       couple and in particular heard from the second claimant about her two
       new employments. He noted at [14] that the second claimant had  given
       specific evidence about her new jobs.  It is entirely clear from  his
       determination that he was satisfied that the evidence considered as a
       whole established that the  second  claimant  was  exercising  Treaty
       rights and that she was a qualified person. What  I  have  just  said
       overlaps with what I go on to say about  the  second  ground,  but  I
       shall first deal with a second limb of the first  ground  as  it  was
       advanced, namely the contention that  the  judge  failed  to  resolve
       discrepancies noted in the  marriage  interview,  although  this  too
       overlaps with what I go on to say as regards the second ground.

    5. Whatever the shortcomings of the judge's written decision it is clear
       that he properly identified all the relevant evidence  and  correctly
       understood that he had to resolve disputed matters. Although  he  did
       not address the  respondent's  decision  letter  in  detail,  or  its
       identification of a number of discrepancies in the marriage interview
       in full, it is clear that (i) he considered that the evidence he  had
       from the claimants clarified some  of  the  points  of  the  evidence
       before the  caseworker  ([4])  and  that  the  first  claimant  "gave
       evidence consistent with the assertions in various documents"  ([7]);
       (ii) he gave specific consideration to the  issue  of  discrepancies,
       noting for example that he accepted  Mr  Lam's  submissions  at  that
       hearing that all the "controversies" were minor ([10(c)]);  (iii)  at
       [14] he noted Mr Lam's submissions as regards Q9 which was one of the
       specific questions referred to in the decision  letter  and  seen  as
       demonstrating serious discrepancy; and (iv) he noted  that  the  oral
       evidence "persuaded[ed]" him of the fact that the couple had  entered
       into a genuine marriage [17].

    6. Turning then to the second ground, I consider the  answer  to  it  is
       inherent in what I have just said in relation to the second  limb  of
       the first ground. Whilst the judge can be criticised for giving  less
       than complete reasons and for failing to  engage  in  full  with  the
       respondent's concerns, it is clear that he did resolve  the  disputed
       issues of fact that were before him and that in doing so he did  give
       reasons.  His reasons go beyond a bare statement that he believed the
       witnesses; he also based his findings on the consistency between  the
       oral and documentary evidence; and on his own analysis of the alleged
       discrepancies in the marriage interview  in  light  of  the  couple's
       subsequent comments  on  these.  He  also  made  clear  that  he  was
       persuaded by the reasoning of Mr Lam. It is true that there  was  one
       discrepancy which the couple failed to address  in  their  subsequent
       statements, this related to questions about payment for rings at Q110
       However, in the context of an interview  of  over  100  questions,  I
       concur with Mr Lam that it would have been  disproportionate  of  the
       judge, in light of his assessment of the evidence as a whole, to have
       considered this unexplained discrepancy to possess sufficient  weight
       to alter his principal findings. I am also bound to say  that  having
       perused the marriage interview for myself in light of the  subsequent
       statements and oral evidence, it would be impossible for any decision-
       maker to ignore the very considerable  consistency  of  most  of  the
       couple's evidence on matters of detail.

    7. Accordingly, notwithstanding criticisms that can be levelled  against
       his decision, the judge's treatment of the evidence and his  findings
       upon it were entirely within the range of  reasonable  responses.  If
       the SSHD failed to respond to the further documentation or to  attend
       at the First tier Tribunal hearing when the couple were due  to  give
       evidence or if the judge was at times cursory in his analysis,  these
       are not matters which should  be  held  against  the  claimants.  The
       SSHD's grounds of appeal have-not been made  out.  As  a  result  the
       judge's  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  must  stand.  Although  he
       described it as "the appeal" it is apparent that the legal effect  of
       his decision was that the first claimant was entitled to issue  of  a
       residence card and  the  second  claimant  entitled  to  issue  of  a
       registration certificate.

    8. For the above reasons:

       The judge did not err in law and his decision to allow the appeals of
       the claimants must stand.


                               Signed   Date:


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
