

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00081/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 September 2017                |On 31 October 2017                |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MR OLALEKAN AL-AWWAL OYEDEPO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Handley allowing an appeal on human
      rights grounds under Article 8.


   2. The appellant before the First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to
      as "the applicant") is 24 years old and a national of Nigeria.  He
      appealed against a decision by the Secretary of State refusing him
      leave to remain.  He has been residing in the UK since 2010, having
      come to the UK as a visitor on several occasions from 2007.  In 2011
      he was given limited leave as his father's dependant.  His father had
      leave as an offshore worker but was subsequently unable to renew this
      leave as he was working on a vessel rather than a fixed installation.






   3. In 2015 the applicant's parents and sisters were given indefinite
      leave.  It seems that at the time the applicant's family were granted
      indefinite leave the applicant was over 18 and did not satisfy the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules as he had
      not spent half his life in the UK.  The Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal noted that when the applicant's family first moved to the UK
      the applicant remained at boarding school in Nigeria until he
      completed his studies.  Since the age of 17 he has been living in the
      UK with his parents and siblings.  The judge found there was family
      life between the applicant and his family in the UK.  The applicant
      has sickle cell disease which, although relatively mild, requires
      treatment and puts him at risk of infection.  He receives support from
      his family to cope with this condition.  He receives care and support
      from his parents, including preparing his meals and washing his
      clothes.


   4. Permission to appeal was granted principally on the basis that the
      judge arguably did not have regard to the public interest requirement
      in s 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as
      amended).  The judge arguably erred in not making a finding on whether
      treatment for sickle cell disease would be available in Nigeria.


Submissions

   5. In his submission Mr Matthews referred to a typographical error in the
      Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.  The reference to s 117B(6) in
      the grounds should have referred just to s 117B.  He submitted that no
      proper balancing exercise had been carried out by the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal.  There was no regard to the cost to the public
      purse of treating the applicant's medical condition.  He referred to
      the decision of the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  Very
      compelling factors were required to show that there was family life
      between adults.  Although there had been a delay of 4 years before the
      Secretary of State decided the applicant's application for leave to
      remain, this was caused neither by the applicant nor by the Secretary
      of State.  It was caused by proceedings to clarify and establish the
      applicant's father's entitlement.


   6. Mr Caskie, having regard to the decision of the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal, pointed out that the question of whether there was
      family life was a question of fact.  It was addressed at paragraphs 24-
      28 of the decision.  The judge carried out a careful analysis and was
      entitled to find there was family life.  The applicant's medical
      condition could be taken into account in relation to the existence of
      family life.

   7. Mr Caskie accepted that the reference to s 117B(6), rather than s
      117B, in the Secretary of State's grounds was a typographical error.
      In relation to s 117B, Mr Caskie pointed out that all the witnesses
      for the applicant had given evidence in English.  The applicant'
      father had been in the UK for a long time.  Although not fully
      independent the applicant was not a burden on the state.  He had never
      been in the UK unlawfully.  No argument was advanced on the basis of
      private life.  It could be assumed the judge was aware that the public
      interest was a material factor.

   8. Turning to Agyarko, Mr Caskie referred to a comment by Lord Reed at
      paragraph 52, which he submitted was to the effect that when a person
      was in the UK unlawfully the public interest was diminished by delay.
      It did not matter where responsibility for the delay lay.  The delay
      in the present case had been significant.

   9. Mr Caskie continued that although the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal might have been written better, the judge's decision on
      proportionality, at paragraph 31, was based on all the circumstances.



  10. Having heard Mr Caskie's submission, I informed the parties that I was
      satisfied the judge had made an error of law, in consequence of which
      the decision should be set aside.  I proposed to re-make the decision
      on the basis of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr
      Caskie asked for the appeal to be remitted to allow up-to-date
      evidence to be submitted and for the issue of delay to be further
      considered.  Mr Matthews pointed out that no application had been made
      to submit new evidence.  In the absence of any specification as to
      what fresh evidence of a material nature might be submitted, I was not
      satisfied that remittal was appropriate.  I invited the parties to
      address me on the substantive issues in the appeal following an
      adjournment until later in the day.

  11. When the hearing resumed I was addressed by Mr Caskie on the factual
      background to the appeal.  He pointed out that when the applicant's
      father applied for indefinite leave, the significance became apparent
      that he worked on an emergency response and rescue vessel, not on a
      rig, or fixed installation, as required by the Secretary of State's
      policy on offshore workers.  This resulted in an appeal by the whole
      family, which progressed through the Upper Tribunal as far as the
      Court of Session.  The Court of Session proceedings were not
      completed, as by that time the applicant's father had completed ten
      years' lawful residence.  The applicant's mother qualified under
      Appendix FM and the applicant's siblings under paragraph 276ADE of the
      Immigration Rules.  While the appeal was in progress the family had s
      3C leave.

  12. While in the UK the applicant studied for and graduated with a degree
      in Telecommunications and Electrical Engineering from Sheffield Hallam
      University.  He had paid overseas student fees, as did one of his
      sisters, who had also studied from a university in the UK.  Unlike his
      sister, the applicant had no route to settlement as a dependant.  Mr
      Caskie confirmed that the Upper Tribunal had found against the
      applicant's father in his appeal prior to the application to the Court
      of Session.

  13. Mr Caskie sought to distinguish the decision in Agyarko.  That
      decision was concerned with people who were in the UK unlawfully,
      applying the approach of the European Court of Human Rights in
      Jeunesse (2015) 60 EHRR 17.  The decision did not apply to someone who
      was here lawfully.  The applicant had not breached any immigration
      law.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had found the applicant had
      family life in the UK and this was enough to make the applicant's
      position exceptional.  It just so happened that owing to an accident
      of birth the applicant was over 18 when indefinite leave was given to
      the members of his family.

  14. Mr Caskie continued that s 117B made a clear distinction between
      private and family life.  Regard should be given to paragraphs 50-53
      of the decision in Agyarko on the issue of whether the applicant's
      residence should be considered precarious.  The applicant had never
      been here unlawfully and would complete 10 years' lawful residence
      next year.  His family life should be given very considerable weight.
      The delay in deciding his application was material, in terms of
      paragraphs 51-52 of Agyarko.  The applicant did not have to be
      financially independent - if the applicant was not being supported by
      his father, he could use his degree to obtain employment.  There were
      exceptional circumstances outside the Immigration Rules.  The
      applicant was 24 and had been in the UK since the age of 14.  He had
      family life with his parents and siblings.  The applicant's childhood
      and youth should be looked at together, in accordance with Maslov
      (2007) 47 EHRR 496.

  15. Mr Matthews made a submission on behalf of the Secretary of State.  He
      too referred to the factual background.  He pointed out that the
      applicant would not complete 10 years' residence in 2018 as he had
      been residing in the UK only since 2010.  Before that he had come to
      the UK as a visitor and it was in this capacity he entered in 2010.
      Mr Matthews acknowledged the applicant had not been in the UK
      unlawfully and that he had benefited from s 3C leave.  The applicant
      had studied in Sheffield and during this time he was away from his
      family in Scotland.  There was provision for adult dependants in
      Appendix FM.  The assessment of proportionality outside the Rules
      carried out by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not reflect
      public interest considerations.

  16. Mr Matthews submitted that the delay in this case was not attributable
      to anyone.  There was a complex history with a number of applicants
      and appeals.  The applicant had the opportunity of tertiary study in
      the UK.  At no point had either the applicant or his family had the
      expectation of remaining permanently in the UK.  This was not the type
      of precarious case which was considered in Agyarko but the applicant's
      position was nevertheless precarious.  The applicant had been in the
      UK for 7 years from the age of 17.  There was no evidence that
      treatment for the applicant's medical condition would not be available
      in Nigeria.  The applicant's father supported the applicant in the UK
      and, if necessary, could pay for the applicant's treatment in Nigeria.
       In relation to family life, although this was found to exist, that
      applicant was now 24 and would be making his own way in life.  There
      was nothing compelling to displace the public interest under s 117B.

  17. In response, Mr Caskie submitted that the applicant was given leave as
      a dependant in 2010.  This leave continued until 2012.  Regard should
      be given to the family's immigration history.  There had been an
      enormous delay in resolving the applicant's position.  The applicant's
      home was still with his parents while he was at University.  The
      decision in Agyarko was concerned with someone in the UK unlawfully.
      This was different from the applicant.  If the applicant had to leave
      the UK his family life would be ruptured.  His Article 8 claim was
      sufficiently strong to outweigh the public interest.  There were very
      strong and compelling factors and the applicant had always abided by
      the Immigration Rules.  His removal would be disproportionate.


Discussion

  18. It is clear that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by
      failing to give adequate reasons to support the outcome of the
      balancing exercise under Article 8.  Mr Caskie suggested that finding
      of the existence of family life was itself sufficient to show
      something exceptional to outweigh the public interest.  This is not
      so.  The finding of the existence of family life was required in order
      for Article 8 to be engaged but it would not, without more, lead to a
      finding that the refusal of leave was disproportionate.  Not only
      should the judge have given reasoning to support such a finding, the
      judge was required to have regard to those factors set out at s 117B,
      so far as relevant, and, in particular, the public interest in the
      maintenance of immigration control, set out in s117B(1).  It might not
      have been necessary for the judge to refer to the statute provided it
      was clear that the judge had directed his mind to the relevant
      matters.  The lack of reasoning in relation to proportionality means
      that the reader of the decision cannot be satisfied that the judge so
      directed himself, particularly with regard to the public interest.  It
      is the decision on proportionality which now requires to be re-made,
      on the basis of the findings by the First-tier Tribunal.


  19. It is not disputed that the family has acted in accordance with the
      law and has sought to comply with the Immigration Rules.  The family
      sought to ensure that the applicant's education was not disrupted by
      allowing him to complete his schooling in Nigeria before coming to the
      UK.  In this country the applicant has been successful in obtaining a
      university degree.  Mr Matthews pointed out that the degree was from a
      university in Sheffield while the applicant's family remained living
      in Scotland.  Mr Caskie implied that while studying the applicant's
      home was still in Scotland.  I have no evidence on how much time the
      applicant spent in Sheffield but it has not been suggested the degree
      was obtained by distance learning.  Accordingly it is reasonable to
      assume the applicant had sometimes to attend the university in
      Sheffield.  It does not follow from this that the judge's finding as
      to the existence of family life was wrong.  It does, however, give
      some weight to Mr Matthews' suggestion that now the applicant is over
      24 it was reasonable to assume he would start to go his own way in
      life.

  20. Each party referred me to the Supreme Court decision in Agyarko.  Mr
      Caskie made the point that this applicant has not been in the UK
      unlawfully, unlike the position of the persons under consideration in
      Agyarko.  I note that the decision in Agyarko is expressed in terms of
      the correct approach to the application of Article 8 to non-settled
      migrants, which would include this applicant.  Paragraphs 41 and 60,
      in particular, of the decision show the importance of applying a
      structured approach to proportionality to persons in this category.
      Consideration of the public interest is an important aspect of this
      approach.  Although the applicant has not been in the UK unlawfully,
      his position has always been precarious in the sense that he was
      entitled to remain in the UK only temporarily, as mentioned at
      paragraph 51.  The applicant in this appeal entered the UK on the most
      recent occasion in 2010 as a visitor, as he had done before, and was
      granted limited leave as the dependant of a work permit holder.  It
      appears that owing to the dubiety over the applicant's father's status
      as an offshore worker, there was no likelihood that the applicant's
      father would have obtained indefinite leave on this ground.  Instead
      the lengthy proceedings over the father's status petered out when he
      was granted indefinite leave on the basis of 10 years' lawful
      residence.  The other members of the family, apart from the applicant,
      were then able to rely on the father's status to obtain indefinite
      leave.  Unfortunately for the applicant and for his family the
      circumstances of the applicant were such that he could not benefit
      from paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  Mr Caskie sought to
      characterise this as an accident of birth but in family issues under
      the Immigration Rules the line between childhood and adulthood may be
      cruial, as in this case, to a person's entitlement.


  21. Mr Caskie looked to the European Court of Human rights in Maslov to
      show that the distinction between childhood and youth can be blurred
      and there can be a slow progression to adulthood.  While in many
      families that seems likely to be the case, it does not alter the terms
      of paragraph 276ADE in terms of which the applicant found himself
      treated differently from his siblings.  It does not follow from this
      that the outcome for the applicant under the Immigration Rules was
      disproportionate or even simply unfair.  Furthermore, decisions of the
      higher courts have made it clear that the consideration of Article 8
      outside the Rules should not be used for the purpose of circumventing
      those Rules.
  22. On the question of delay, the position in Agyarko is more nuanced than
      Mr Caskie appeared to suggest.  The point is made in paragraph 52 that
      the public interest in removal is likely to diminish where there is
      protracted delay.  The diminution of the public interest does not mean
      that the public interest is outweighed by the right to respect for
      family life in every instance of protracted delay.  Here the delay
      took place while the family was testing the interpretation of the
      Immigration Rules through appeal proceedings.  The members of the
      family, including the applicant, should have been aware that a
      negative outcome would lead to all or some members of the family
      losing their entitlement to remain in the UK.  Delay was in integral
      part of the family's attempt to establish rights to remain.
      Furthermore, it seems that the applicant was able to use at least part
      of the delay to his advantage to further his education.


  23. As is pointed out at paragraph 57 of Agyarko, family life having been
      found to exist, a very strong or compelling claim is required to
      outweigh the public interest in the maintenance of immigration
      control.  I have already referred to Mr Caskie's suggestion that a
      finding of the existence of family life is itself so exceptional as to
      show that the public interest was outweighed.  This is not the case,
      as I have already indicated.  The existence of family life is needed
      to show that Article 8 is engaged and, as Mr Matthews acknowledged,
      factors going to the existence of family life may themselves be
      relevant to the balancing exercise.  A finding that family life exists
      with his parents and siblings, however, even in the case of a 24-year-
      old graduate, is not sufficient to show that the refusal decision is
      disproportionate.

  24. One factor to be taken into account is the applicant's medical
      condition.  As Mr Matthews pointed out, however, there is no evidence
      that treatment is not available for this in Nigeria.  Indeed, as the
      applicant lived in Nigeria for the first 17 years of his life, it
      seems likely that treatment is available.  It has never been suggested
      that the applicant came to the UK to receive treatment that was not
      available in Nigeria, and if such a suggestion had been made it would
      have put a different complexion on the applicant's intentions.  Mr
      Matthews suggested that the cost of treatment was an factor adverse to
      the applicant in the balancing exercise.  It needs to be taken into
      account though that the applicant has been here lawfully as a
      dependant and paid fees as an overseas student.  In this context the
      cost of any ongoing treatment for a relatively mild form of this
      condition would be unlikely to swing the balance one way or another.

  25. The sad position of the applicant is that his circumstances show
      nothing in the way of a compelling factor or factors to outweigh the
      public interest in maintaining effective immigration control.  While
      the applicant has until now been nurtured by his family he is a young
      adult with a good educational qualification.  Mr Caskie submitted that
      to require the applicant to leave the UK would "rupture" life with his
      family.  Mr Matthews suggested that at his age the applicant might
      reasonably be expected to start making his own way in life.  Of these
      two different expectations for the applicant's future the one proposed
      by Mr Matthews would seem more likely to follow from the facts as they
      exist.  The applicant has already started demonstrating his ability to
      develop independence by securing an education at boarding school in
      Nigeria and then at university in the UK.  If he returns to Nigeria he
      will do so as a well-qualified young man with the support of a close
      family.  There seems no reason why emotional and financial support
      would necessarily end when the appellant leaves the UK.

  26. In the circumstances of this appeal there is only one feasible outcome
      to the balancing exercise under Article 8.  The refusal of leave is
      not disproportionate when the applicant's circumstances are weighed
      against the public interest.


Conclusions

  27. The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.


  28. The decision is set aside.

  29. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal din not make an anonymity direction.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and I see no reason of substance for
doing so.

Fee award                        (N.B. This is not part of the decision)

The appeal is dismissed so no fee award can be made.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
27th September 2017








