
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/00978/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 30 July 2015                           |On 14 August 2015           |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                ISHTIAQ KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Whitefield Solicitors (did not attend)
For the Respondent:   Mr G Harrison

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. Those representing the Appellant wrote to the  court  under  cover  of  a
   letter dated 28 July 2015 requesting that the case be dealt with  on  the
   basis of the papers before the court. I am satisfied that  the  Appellant
   was aware of the date of hearing as it is referred to in  the  Solicitors
   letter and I am satisfied that it is  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
   proceed to a hearing in the absence in court of  those  representing  the
   Appellant as they consent to such a course and it is permitted by Rule 38
   of The Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.
3. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan was  born  on  3  April  1981.  The
   Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated
   16 December 2014 to refuse to grant an application for leave to remain as
   a Tier 4 Student and to remove him from the  United  Kingdom.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith dismissed the appeal  and  the  Appellant  now
   appeals with permission to this Tribunal.
4. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  entered  the  United
   Kingdom on 15 May 2010 as a Tier 4 Student. That leave  was  renewed  was
   renewed and due to expire on 25 April 2015. On 25 April 2015 he made  the
   application the refusal of which is  the  subject  of  this  appeal.  The
   relevant paragraph of the Rules for the purposes of this appeal is 245(c)
   with reference to paragraph 116(e) of Appendix A and paragraph 245X(d).
5. The Respondent refused the application because the  Appellant  could  not
   be awarded the 30 points claimed for a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
   Studies (CAS) as the sponsor on the CAS he provided was no longer on  the
   Tier 4 Sponsor Register . The Appellant had been informed of this  on  26
   September and given 60 days to find a new sponsor and CAS but  failed  to
   do so. The Appellant could not be  awarded  the  10  points  claimed  for
   maintenance as he did not produce a valid CAS.
6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the  case  on  the  papers.  The
   evidence was that the Appellant had sought to obtain a new sponsor during
   the 60 day period. He was only able to obtain a  conditional  offer  from
   Coventry University College for a course due to start on 5 January  2015.
   The Appellant could only obtain a  conditional  offer  as  he  could  not
   provide the college with an English Language Certificate.  The  Appellant
   booked a Pearson English Language  test  for  13  November  2014  but  on
   attending was not allowed to participate in the  test  as  he  failed  to
   provide his original passport and /or alternative ID to the test provider
   on the day of the sitting. The provider would not  accept  the  certified
   copies of the Appellant's passport and BRP provided by the Respondent  on
   26 September 2014. His passport was with the Home Office and although  he
   had requested its return on numerous occasions it had not been  provided.
   Also at the time he was notified that he had 60 days to obtain a new  CAS
   the September 2014 admission date had passed  and  only  a  few  sponsors
   offered admission in January 2015.
7. The Judge set out the relevant law in her decision at  paragraph  3.  She
   referred to the evidence which consisted of the  appeal  bundle  and  the
   bundle for the hearing and she accurately summarised the Appellant's case
   in paragraph 7-8 reflecting that she had taken into account all  of   the
   evidence before her. The Judge did not accept the  explanations  he  gave
   for the difficulty in finding a course or obtaining a CAS. She found that
   he had left the application to the last day of his leave.  She  suggested
   that his previous CAS had been obtained in April then he would have had a
   valid language certificate in respect of that and should have used  that.
   She did not accept that he produced more than one request for the  return
   of his passport on 22 December 2014.  She  was  not  satisfied  that  the
   Appellant produced adequate  evidence  that  he  had  booked  to  take  a
   language test and that it was  the  absence  of  his  ID  documents  that
   prevented him from taking the test and therefore she did not  accept  the
   explanation  she  gave  for  him  being  unable  to  provide  a  language
   certificate to obtain a CAS.
8. The Appellant's representatives in the grounds of appeal argue  that  the
   Appellant did everything in his power to obtain  a  language  certificate
   because his previous one had expired but in the absence of  ID  documents
   he was unable to do so.
9. Mr Harrison relied on the Rule 24 notice.
10. The Appellant had 60 days to obtain a new CAS  in  accordance  with  the
   Respondent's policy and he failed to evidence  that  his  arrangement  to
   take the language certificate were frustrated by the  documentation  that
   he had. There was only one letter requesting the return of the  passport.
   In essence he had failed to make good use of the 60 days.
Error of Law

11. Having read the documents provided by  the  Appellant's  representatives
   and heard the submissions of Mr Harrison I reached  the  conclusion  that
   the Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. I am satisfied that the Judge gave comprehensive reasons  in  paragraphs
   6-9  why she did not accept the explanation given by the Appellant in his
   appeal bundle as  to  why  he  had  been  unable  to  obtain  a  language
   certificate in order to obtain a CAS within the 60 day period he had been
   given. It may well be that had he chosen to attend court  he  could  have
   amplified on the explanations he gave but he chose a  paper  hearing  and
   the Judge was entitled to make the  findings  she  did  on  the  evidence
   before her.

13. The Judge was also entitled to find that the Appellant did  not  produce
   any evidence that the reason he was unable to take the language test  was
   the absence of ID documents: given that this was the central  feature  of
   his appeal the Judge was entitled to conclude that he had failed to  meet
   the evidential burden he bore.

14. The grounds merely seek to reargue the case and I am satisfied no  error
   of law is made out.

CONCLUSION

15. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

16. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
8.8.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


