

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      APPEAL NO: IA/00667/2014

Heard at Field House on    Determination promulgated on
6 October 2014    28 October 2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY


                     FOLASHADE ELIZABETH OLAYIWOLE (MRS)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the respondent: Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellant: Mr Emezie




                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. On 27 November 2012 the appellant and her three children, citizens  of
      Nigeria, applied for leave to remain in this country outside the rules
      and the application was refused.  It  is  clear  that  the  respondent
      treated this as an application on behalf of the mother and  her  three
      children. The Reasons for Refusal Letter states this in terms[1],  and
      the letter refers, in the first paragraph,  to  "your  clients'  (sic)
      application for further leave to remain" and the four names appear  at
      the top of the letter, though there are places in the letter where the
      client becomes singular.


   2. The three children all had extant leave at the time of the application
      so it follows that they all had a  right  of  appeal.  An  appeal,  on
      behalf of the appellant and her three children was  lodged.  The  form
      refers to the appellant "+3", which, bearing in mind the lack of space
      in the form is understandable, but the typed grounds  of  appeal  name
      all three children in  full,  as  well  as  their  mother.  The  first
      paragraph states that "the appellants consist of a  mother  and  three
      dependent  children.  Subsequently  the  mother  is  referred  to  the
      "appellant" but it is clear that all four are appealing.


   3. The Home Office  trial  bundle  has  on  the  face  of  it  "Folashade
      Elizabeth Olayiwole....+3" and the third page of the bundle shows  all
      the children as appellants.


   4. When the case appeared before the First-tier Tribunal only the  mother
      was listed as an appellant on the Record of Proceedings  and  hers  is
      the only name that appears on the various documents sent  out  to  the
      parties.


   5. No-one appears to have pointed  out  this  fundamental  error  to  the
      judge.[2] The situation of one of the children was  considered  as  he
      had serious health problems and it was the judge's treatment of  these
      problems that caused Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman to grant  permission
      to appeal, the First-tier judge having dismissed the appeal.


   6. To call what  happened  here  an  administrative  irregularity  is  an
      understatement. The appeals of three  appellant  were  not  listed  or
      heard. In those circumstances the only course  is  to  set  aside  the
      decision by allowing the appeal and remitting the matter to the First-
      tier Tribunal for the appeals  of  all  the  appellants  to  be  heard
      together. The three children are all appellants and all that needs  to
      be done is for them to be listed as separate appellants. I do not  see
      any need for separate files to be prepared for each of them, but  that
      is an administrative matter.


   7.  It follows that the original determination did contain  an  error  of
      law in that  the  judge  did  not  deal  with  the  appeals  of  three
      appellants together with the appeal of the appellant that he did  deal
      with.

The appeal is accordingly allowed

   For the reasons given the appeal is allowed and the  matter  remitted  to
   Hatton Cross Hearing Centre where it will be heard de novo by  any  judge
   other than Judge Prior or myself.

Designated Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal     7 October 2014

-----------------------
[1] See paragraph 2 on page 2.
[2] Indeed, at the hearing before me, Mr Emezie only mentioned the matter,
in passing after the merits had been fully argued.

