
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00524/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |On 06 December 2018           |
|On 15 October 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                         mr Vickneswaran Selvaratnam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison, Counsel, instructed by Thakrar and Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national  of  Sri  Lanka  who  appealed
    against the respondent's refusal to grant him a residence card  as  the
    extended family member of his sister who is a doctor  in  this  country
    and is a national of Finland.  She is exercising treaty rights in  this
    country.

 2. The application was made  under  Regulation  8(2)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (subsequently  re-enacted  in
    the 2016 Regulations) and the respondent had  refused  the  application
    under that part of the Regulations.

 3. The appeal against this decision was also brought under Regulation 8(2)
    but was dismissed on the basis that the judge was  not  satisfied  that
    the appellant had been a member of  his  sister's  household  prior  to
    coming to this country and he had  not  entered  with  her.   In  those
    circumstances insofar as the decision was made  under  Regulation  8(2)
    the decision is adequately reasoned and is unappealable.

 4. This is however an unusual case, in that in between the decision of the
    respondent and the hearing of the  appeal  the  appellant  had  a  very
    serious stroke.  This is dealt with or the history of this is  set  out
    at paragraph 3 of the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada, in
    which he set out his reasons for  dismissing  the  appeal  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham (Priory Court) on 20 March 2018.   Judge  Borsada
    recounts as follows:

         "3.  The matter came before me on 20  March  2018  at  the  hearing
             centre in Birmingham, Priory Court.   The  appellant  was  not
             present  but  he  was  represented  by  [Counsel].   [Counsel]
             explained that his client had been admitted to hospital having
             suffered a stroke and having now  become  paralysed  down  the
             left-hand side of his body  (evidence  of  hospital  admission
             supplied).  I was also told by  the  sponsor  that  there  was
             little prospect of his being able to attend the hearing in the
             near  future  given  his  need  for  treatment  and  extensive
             rehabilitation.   [Counsel]  indicated  that  his  instructing
             solicitors had received his instruction which were to  proceed
             in his absence ...".

 5. At the end of the decision, at paragraph 10, when  giving  his  reasons
    why  the  appeal  had  to  be  dismissed,  the  judge  dealt  with  the
    appellant's medical condition and his current circumstances as follows:



         "... I note too the appellant's recent  catastrophic  brain  injury
         and that he is likely to need a long period of convalescence.   The
         sponsor is a qualified and legally registered doctor and  therefore
         under a particular duty to provide accurate information  about  any
         given patient's clinical condition particularly if that information
         is given in a public forum such  as  a  Tribunal  and  therefore  I
         accept on the  basis  of  the  sponsor's  oral  evidence  that  the
         appellant is likely to be severely incapacitated (there  [is]  also
         some evidence from the hospital confirming his current  admission).
         In those circumstances it is likely that he will remain physically,
         emotionally and  financially  dependent  on  the  sponsor  for  the
         foreseeable period".

 6. In other words, while rejecting the appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis
    that he did not satisfy the requirements set out within Regulation 8(2)
    the judge nonetheless accepted that he was extremely seriously ill  and
    that he was dependent (physically, emotionally and financially) on  the
    sponsor and would continue to be so for the foreseeable future.

 7. It is argued in the grounds (as the basis of the appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal) that in these circumstances and given this finding the  judge
    ought also to have considered whether or not  Regulation  8(3)  of  the
    2006 Regulations applied, which provides as follows:

         ""Extended Family Member"

         8 -  (1) in these Regulations  'extended  family  member'  means  a
                  person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
                  Regulation  7(1)(a),  (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  a
                  condition in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5) ...

             (3)  the condition in this paragraph is that the person  is  a
                  relative of an EEA national and on serious health grounds,
                  strictly requires the personal care of  the  EEA  national
                  ...".

 8. Unlike Regulation 8(2) there is no requirement that an applicant had to
    have been previously a member of the EEA national's family.

 9. Given the judge's acceptance of the very serious nature indeed  of  the
    appellant's medical condition, it is submitted that he  ought  to  have
    gone on to consider whether the conditions set  out  within  Regulation
    8(3) was satisfied.

10. When setting out his reasons for granting permission to appeal,  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Keane stated as follows:

         "The appellant applied in-time for permission to appeal against the
         decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  D   S   Borsada
         promulgated on 16 April 2018  in  which  the  judge  dismissed  the
         appeal in respect of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (the
         Regulations).  The grounds disclosed an arguable error of  law  but
         for which the outcome of the appeal might have been different.  The
         judge arrived  at  findings  of  fact  at  paragraph  10  of  [his]
         decision.  [He] accepted that the appellant had recently  sustained
         catastrophic brain damage, that he was likely to need a long period
         of convalescence, that he was severely incapacitated  and  in  such
         circumstances would remain physically, emotionally and  financially
         dependent on his sister for the foreseeable period.  Having arrived
         at such findings it  was  arguably  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to
         consider whether the appellant satisfied the condition in paragraph
         8(3) of the  Regulations.   The  judge  is  deserving  of  sympathy
         because it does not appear that [he] was referred to paragraph 8(3)
         of the Regulations.  Nevertheless, it was arguably  incumbent  upon
         the judge to consider paragraph 8(3) of the Regulations  given  the
         findings of fact which [he] had made ...".

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Davison, representing the appellant sought
    to rely upon the grounds.  On behalf  of  the  respondent  Mr  Whitwell
    asked the court to note that  Counsel representing  the  appellant  had
    not seen fit to rely on this argument, but it is the  appellant's  case
    that whether or not Counsel at the hearing had  or  had  not  made  the
    argument, in a case such as this is not determinative of the issue,  if
    it be the case that the point was one which was  or  should  have  been
    obvious to the judge hearing the case.  Mr Whitwell  did  not  seek  to
    argue that  the  Tribunal  should  not  have  considered  post-decision
    evidence, but did refer the Tribunal to the old but  nonetheless  still
    relevant decision of a presidential Tribunal in TR v SSHD [2008]  UKAIT
    00004 in which this Tribunal, when considering this provision, had made
    it clear that the hurdle to be overcome was a high one.

12. He submitted that in the event that this Tribunal was now to find  that
    the decision of Judge Borsada should be set aside it would be necessary
    for this issue to be considered properly before a decision was made.

13. In the judgment of this Tribunal in light of Judge Borsada's finding as
    to the severity of the appellant's health  condition  and  his  current
    dependence on his EEA national sister, he should then have gone  on  to
    consider the appeal with regard to Regulation 8(3) and as to whether or
    not the conditions set out within 8(3) were  satisfied.   The  decision
    will accordingly have to be remade.  The test is,  on  the  wording  of
    this  sub-paragraph  itself  and  in  light  of  the  decision  of  the
    presidential Tribunal in TR a high one, and the Tribunal will  have  to
    consider not just whether or not the applicant is  currently  dependent
    upon his sister but whether the management of  his  condition  strictly
    "requires" her personal  care.   This  will  involve  consideration  of
    whether and if so what alternative arrangements might or might  not  be
    available for him.  These are not matters which this Tribunal  can  now
    determine without a further hearing.

14. In the circumstances,  both  Mr  Davison  and  Mr  Whitwell  urged  the
    Tribunal to remit the appeal back to the First-tier  Tribunal  so  that
    these issues can be properly considered afresh,  and  I  shall  do  so.
    Given the complexity of this case it would be appropriate for this case
    to be listed for a case management review at the First-tier Tribunal so
    that the parties can canvass with the First-tier Tribunal what evidence
    ought now to be sought.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada as  containing
a material error of law and remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
sitting at Birmingham to be reheard by any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other
than Judge Borsada.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                     Date:  3 December 2018


