
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00022/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th June 2013                               |On 13th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN
                     dEPUTY Upper Tribunal Judge grimes


                                   Between

                             mRS DEVI RANA BIRA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant :        Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent :   Not Represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State, with
    permission, in relation to a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Malins promulgated on 15th April 2013.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was not  represented  nor  was
    she present.  That was because an  Admin  error  on  the  part  of  the
    Tribunal had led to the  representatives  being  informed  the  evening
    before that the hearing had been adjourned.  However  for  the  reasons
    that follow we proceeded to hear the case as there was no  disadvantage
    to the Respondent  in our doing so.

 3. The claimant had applied on 20th March 2012  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of her marriage. She had previously  been
    granted, on 22nd December 2009, leave to remain in the UK for two years
    and three months expiring on 22nd  March  2012  on  the  basis  of  her
    marriage.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application in a decision dated  4th
    December 2012.

 5. In its determination the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had considered the application under  paragraph  284
    of the Immigration Rules and noted that the Refusal  referred  only  to
    one aspect of paragraph 284; the failure of the claimant to produce the
    appropriate  language  certificate.  The  Judge  found  that  a   valid
    certificate from a registered education provider had been submitted and
    allowed the appeal.

 6. The judge said at paragraph 8 (c):-

          "Accordingly, this single issue appeal, is allowed."

 7. It is in relation to that sentence that the Secretary of  State  sought
    permission to appeal. The Secretary of State submitted  that  this  was
    not a "single issue appeal". She asserted that the  Refusal  dated  4th
    December 2012, as well  as  considering  the  English  language  issue,
    considered the maintenance requirement in the second half of the second
    page and found the claimant did not meet the requirements of the  rules
    (E-LTRP.3.1).

 8. An examination of the Refusal reveals that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds are correct to that extent. The Refusal starts by  saying  that
    an extension of stay as the spouse or civil partner of a person present
    and settled in the  United Kingdom is to be refused if the Secretary of
    State is not satisfied each of the requirements  of  paragraph  284  is
    met.

 9. It then goes on to refer to paragraph 284 (i)(a)  with  regard  to  the
    requirement to provide an English language test certificate. It  is  in
    relation to that that the Judge found the  Secretary  of  State  to  be
    wrong and allowed the appeal.

10. However, the Refusal then refers to "Decision under  Appendix  FM"  and
    also the income requirements under appendix FM.

11. However, the claimant made her application in March 2012. She made  her
    application under paragraph 284. Appendix  FM  was  inserted  into  the
    Immigration Rules by HC 194 and took effect from 9th July 2012. Page  1
    of the Statement of Changes states:-

         "However, if an application for entry clearance, leave to remain or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9th July  2012  and
         the application has  not  been  decided,  it  will  be  decided  in
         accordance with the rules in force on 8 July 2012".

    It goes on at page 2 to state:-

         "Appendix FM applies to applications made on or after 9  July  2012
         as set out in paragraph 91 of this Statement of Changes".

12. It is clear therefore that Appendix FM and the requirements of the  new
    Immigration Rules  in  relation  to  maintenance  for  married  persons
    seeking  leave  to  remain   had  no  application  in  this  case.  The
    application was made in March 2012 and thus fell to  be  decided  under
    the Rules as they were on 8th July 2012. The reference in  the  Refusal
    to Appendix FM is therefore incorrect. The only failure under paragraph
    284 identified by the Secretary of State was the issue of the  language
    certificate and that was dealt with in the  claimant's  favour  by  the
    Judge. That part of  the  decision  has  not  been  challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State.

13. As the Secretary of State has not indicated that the claimant failed to
    meet any other aspect of paragraph 284 (as at 8th July 2012)  then  the
    claimant is entitled to assume, as is the Judge that she met the  other
    requirements.

14. Accordingly, the Judge was correct to allow the appeal under the  Rules
    and his determination discloses no error of law, material or otherwise.

15. Ms Horsley referred to the fact that the Secretary of  State  had  also
    made a removal decision under section 47 that she wished  to  withdraw.
    That is not an option open to her before the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  any
    event, the section 47 decision was not dealt  with  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The failure to do so has not been challenged by either  side.
    The fact remains that the decision was unlawful but is now in any event
    relevant as the claimant's substantive appeal has been allowed.

16. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 12th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

