
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA001712016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 June 2017                               |On 06 July 2017               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                              muhammad mubashar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Williams, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Muhammad Mubashar, was born on 21 August 1988 and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  He has appealed against the decision of  the
    respondent dated 17 December 2015 to  revoke  his  EEA  residence  card
    which had been issued on 13 June 2013.  The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    A Simmonds) in a decision promulgated on 9 November 2016, dismissed the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. I find that the First-tier Tribunal decision should be set  aside.   My
    reasons for reaching that conclusion are as  follows.   First,  I  find
    that  it  is  not  clear  from  the  decision  whether  the  judge  has
    appreciated the fact that the burden of proof in this  appeal  (insofar
    as it concerned the respondent's  allegation  that  the  appellant  was
    engaged in a sham marriage) rested not upon the appellant, but upon the
    respondent (Rosa v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 14).  In his decision, the judge  at  [6]  stated  that,  "The
    burden of proof in this case is upon the appellant and the standard  of
    proof is upon the balance of probability."  I note that the judge  does
    refer to Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 0038 (IAC).  The  Tribunal  in  that  case  noted  that  an
    evidential  burden  rested  upon  a  claimant  to   "address   evidence
    justifying reasonable suspicion  that  the  marriage  in  question  was
    undertaken for the predominant purpose of securing  residence  rights."
    The judge also refers to IS (marriages of  convenience)  Serbia  [2008]
    UKAIT 0031 and correctly notes that any burden  upon  an  appellant  as
    regards proving that a marriage is not  one  of  convenience  does  not
    arise in the absence of evidence of matters supporting a suspicion that
    the marriage is not genuine.  However, notwithstanding  his  references
    to those relevant authorities, there is nothing in the analysis  itself
    that suggests any attempt to apply the  principles  enunciated  in  the
    cases to the facts of the appeal.

 3. Further, for reasons I will set out below, the judge  has  relied  upon
    evidence which in is plainly problematic.  The  judge  gave  weight  to
    evidence produced by  Immigration  Officers  who  had  encountered  the
    appellant.  The appellant was encountered by Officers Shaw  and  Nixon.
    There is a statement from Immigration Officer Shaw which indicates that
    the  officers  were  given  permission  by  the  appellant,  during  an
    interview, to look at his mobile telephone.  There  were,  however,  no
    screen shots or other written  evidence  showing  the  Facebook  images
    placed before the  judge.   Whilst  hearsay  evidence  is,  of  course,
    admissible before the Tribunal, the evidence in IO Nixon's statement is
    disputed by the appellant as would have been apparent to the respondent
    from the appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  For
    example, the statement records that "a search on the subject's Facebook
    also showed that he was not friends with his wife and that she was in a
    relationship with another man and had been since 2012 and also appeared
    to have had a child."  This evidence begs an important question; if the
    appellant was not friends with his wife on Facebook it is not clear how
    IO Nixon examined the wife's entries on the appellant's telephone.   It
    is possible that the wife has no restrictions upon her Facebook account
    but, equally, the "search" carried out by IO  Nixon  and  to  which  he
    refers may have occurred after the encounter  with  the  appellant  and
    using a different telephone.  If that was the case, then it is  unclear
    why the concerns of the  Immigration  Officers  were  not  put  to  the
    appellant and his response  invited.   Moreover,  I  find  that  it  is
    unsatisfactory for important evidence to have be given in the  form  of
    the statement of IO Shaw which is not supported (as easily  could  have
    been) by photographic copies of the  actual  entries  on  the  Facebook
    account.

 4. Thirdly, I note that although IO Shaw prepared the  witness  statement,
    the notebook upon which the contents of  the  statement  is  based  was
    completed  by  the  other  Immigration  Officer,  IO  Nixon.    Indeed,
    according to the extract of the notebook we have in the papers, it  was
    IO Nixon and not IO Shaw who had examined the mobile telephone  of  the
    appellant.  There was no mention in the notebook of the wife's Facebook
    account.

 5. Fourthly, there is concern that the judge has not done  anything  other
    than accept the statement and notebook evidence without question.   The
    appellant, who was not represented before the First-tier  Tribunal,  is
    recorded as having stated in evidence that he believed it was  possible
    to "backdate" an entry on a Facebook account  and  suggested  that  the
    judge gave little weight to the Facebook evidence.  The judge  rejected
    that suggestion out of hand but, again in the  absence  of  the  actual
    Facebook entries and relying upon nothing  more  than  the  second-hand
    hearsay evidence of the Immigration Officer's statement (unsupported by
    any entries from IO Nixon's notebook) that is not clear to  me  why  he
    did so.

 6. In the light of what I have said above, I have decided to set aside the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   The  evidence  of  the  Immigration
    Officers, in its current form and without the addition of the copies of
    the Facebook entries, it seems to me unsatisfactory.  However, I do not
    suggest that the evidence cannot be presented in  a  more  satisfactory
    form or that the Immigration Officers' evidence  cannot  be  of  value.
    The next Tribunal will expect the respondent  to  look  again  at  this
    evidence before the next hearing and, in particular, to produce  screen
    shots of any internet pages upon which she may seek to rely.

Notice of Decision

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 9 November  2016
    is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The appeal is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  A  Simmonds)  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 3 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

