
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/00012/2019
                                                               IA/00013/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On Tuesday 15 October 2019           |On Friday 18th October 2019          |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              RAJANI SHRESHTHA
                            SAMIR KUMAR SHRESHTHA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Patyna, Counsel instructed by Kidd Rapinet
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

    1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
       E M M Smith promulgated on 11 July 2019 ("the  Decision")  dismissing
       the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's  decision  dated  28
       January 2019 refusing the First Appellant leave to remain as a Tier 4
       (student) with the Second Appellant as  her  dependent  and  refusing
       their human rights claim in consequence.

    2. The Appellants came to the UK in October 2009 with leave as a student
       and dependent.  Their  leave  was  extended  following  a  successful
       appeal to 20 April 2014.  On 19 September 2012, the  First  Appellant
       undertook a TOEIC test at London College of Media &  Technology.   On
       17 April 2014, the Appellants made the applications (supported by the
       TOEIC certificate) which  led  to  the  Respondent's  decision  under
       appeal.  There was a delay of over four years  in  the  making  of  a
       decision on the Appellants' applications.  So  far  as  their  family
       circumstances are concerned, the Appellants have a child born  on  16
       January 2012 who lives with her grandparents in Nepal.

    3. The Respondent refused the Appellants' application on the basis  that
       the First Appellant had used  a  proxy  test-taker  when  taking  her
       English language test.  This is therefore one of the  many  so-called
       "ETS"  cases.   The  Judge  having  heard  oral  evidence  from  both
       Appellants concluded that the Respondent had made  out  her  case  in
       that regard and that the First Appellant had used deception.   Having
       reached that finding, he went on  to  consider  Article  8  ECHR  and
       concluded that the Respondent's decision was not disproportionate.

    4. The Appellants raise four grounds of appeal.  The first  two  grounds
       concern the Judge's consideration of the evidence surrounding the ETS
       issue.  The third ground asserts that the  Judge  adopted  the  wrong
       burden of proof on that issue.   The  fourth  ground  challenges  the
       Judge's conclusion in relation to Article 8 ECHR independently of the
       ETS issue and based on consideration of  the  Respondent's  delay  in
       deciding the Appellants' applications for over four years.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Neville
       on 9 September 2019 as follows (so far as relevant):

           "... 3.     Whereas the Judge was not required to  mention  each
           and every piece of evidence  put  before  him,  the  appellants'
           skeleton argument placed primary reliance on the first appellant
           adducing evidence of a 2011 IELTS course, together with  a  2008
           bachelor's degree in Nepal,  a  2014  M.A.  from  Anglia  Ruskin
           University, and a 2014  postgraduate  diploma  in  the  UK,  all
           taught  in  English.   The  Judge   does   not   mention   these
           qualifications at all.  As to the second ground, while the first
           appellant's level of English at  the  hearing  is  a  legitimate
           factor, given the weight placed on this factor by the  Judge  he
           arguably  ought  to  have  engaged  to  some  degree  with   the
           appellant's evidence on language ability that had the  potential
           to point the other way.  The weight the Judge gave to the  level
           of English at the hearing means that any error has the potential
           to be material.

           4.    The other grounds are consequential on the first  two,  so
           may also be argued."

    6. The appeals come before me to decide whether the Decision contains  a
       material error of law and if I conclude that it does, either  to  re-
       make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for
       redetermination.



DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    7. Judge  Neville  commented  that  the  third  and  fourth  ground  are
       consequential on grounds one and  two.  I  do  not  agree  with  that
       analysis so far as ground three is concerned and since that  concerns
       the application of the burden of proof, it  is  convenient  to  begin
       with that ground.

  Ground Three

    8. The Appellant relies on the statement at [18] of  the  Decision  that
       "[i]n Immigration Appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant and
       the standard of proof required is a balance of probabilities".  As  a
       statement of general principle, that is correct.  Moreover, these are
       appeals generated  by  the  refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim  and
       therefore that analysis of the overall burden on the central issue is
       correct.

    9. The Judge went on at [27] to [28] of the Decision  to  refer  to  two
       cases dealing with the burdens and standards of proof specific to the
       ETS issue.  Ms Patyna submitted that the Judge had there set out  the
       correct standard, but it was not clear that this had been applied and
       his consideration was infected by  what  was  said  at  [18]  of  the
       Decision.   I  disagree.    The  two  case-law  citations   make   it
       abundantly clear that the Judge understood the shifting burden  which
       applies on this issue.  Moreover, he went on to say at  [29]  of  the
       Decision that he was satisfied based on the look-up tool and evidence
       of results from the college  in  question  that  the  Respondent  had
       "discharged the initial burden of proof and established a prima facie
       case  for  the  appellant  to  answer".   What  follows  then  is   a
       consideration of the Appellants' case and evidence.

   10. Ms Patyna argued that what was said at [33] suggested that the  Judge
       used the look-up tool and generic evidence as part of the analysis of
       the Appellants' case and therefore placed  the  burden  on  them.   I
       struggled to understand this point.  What is  said  at  [33]  of  the
       Decision is supportive of the Appellants and simply makes  the  point
       that the evidence of voice analysis has to be viewed with  a  certain
       amount of caution because of the risk of false positives.  That  then
       leads to the Judge's round up of the evidence on both sides  at  [34]
       of the Decision (as set out below) and conclusion as to deception.

   11. There is no error disclosed by ground three.    The  Judge  correctly
       applied the shifting burdens of proof.  The real issue in  this  case
       is whether, in so doing, he properly considered all the evidence.



  Grounds One and Two

   12. Grounds one and two are both concerned with the Judge's consideration
       of the evidence.  Ground  one  asserts  a  failure  to  consider  the
       documentary  evidence  of  the  First  Appellant's  previous  studies
       conducted in the English  language.   The  second  asserts  an  over-
       emphasis on the First Appellant's level of spoken English during  her
       oral evidence.

   13. The Judge considered the Appellants' evidence at [23] to [26] of  the
       Decision as follows:

           "23.  Throughout the appellant's evidence she had to be asked to
           repeat her answers because unfortunately her standard of English
           was very difficult to follow.  I accept  that  a  person  giving
           evidence in court will be extremely nervous  and  that  must  be
           factored into my assessment of her evidence but having done that
           I found it very difficult to  understand  the  account  she  was
           giving.  Equally, I must factor into her favour the  delay  that
           has occurred in making a decision on  her  application  and  any
           questions about events in relation to the test over 6 years  ago
           may be difficult to recall.  She has however, in  her  statement
           (AB p2) set out in some detail the events that both led  her  to
           take the tests and the events of the day when she did.  I assume
           for her to do that the delay has not disadvantaged her greatly.

           24.   Her evidence to me was that she had undertaken the test in
           2012 because her college was merging with another college called
           Citizen 2000 however, the  relevance  of  that  answer  did  not
           become obvious.  The appellant went onto explain that in June or
           July 2013 her college had difficulty with  their  licence  which
           was eventually revoked.  The appellant was asked by Mr Swaby why
           she would need to take a test in 2012 when she had  leave  until
           2014 and how the problems in 2013 were relevant to her taking  a
           test in 2012.  The  appellant  explained  that  she  thought  it
           better to do it than wait.   I  asked  the  appellant  when  she
           eventually found a new college and she  replied  in  January  or
           February 2014 and she has stopped  studying  with  her  previous
           college in 2013.  Mr  Swaby  asked  the  appellant  if  she  had
           contacted ETS to get  the  recordings  so  she  could  establish
           whether it was her.  She said she had not.

           25.   I asked the appellant various background questions to  her
           life in Nepal and having asked  her  if  she  had  children  she
           replied she did and gave the date of birth as 16th January 2012.
            She confirmed that the child was sent to Nepal in 2013 to  live
           with her maternal grandmother.  The appellants have not seen the
           child since.  Mr Swaby asked the appellant what  her  intentions
           were when she arrived in the UK  and  whether  she  intended  to
           return to Nepal after her studies, she said she did.

           26.   When the 2nd appellant gave evidence, he was challenged by
           Mr Swaby and asked what his and his wife's intentions were  when
           they had finished their studies.  He said it was always the plan
           to stay in the UK.  At  this  stage  it  was  clear  there  were
           difficulties to his ability to explain his evidence  in  English
           so the court was adjourned to establish  whether  there  was  an
           interpreter  present  who  could  help.   Fortunately,  a  court
           interpreter was sourced reasonably quickly in Hindi and  it  was
           confirmed that  both  understood  each  other  so  his  evidence
           continued through the interpreter.  When again asked by Mr Swaby
           what his intentions were when they  first  came  he  provided  a
           different reply and said they were intending to return.  He also
           confirmed that it was not until 2016-2017 that they decided  not
           to go back.  He was asked why there had been no mention  in  the
           application or in their statements  about  the  birth  of  their
           child.  He replied she didn't stay in the UK but he would  apply
           for her to join them."

   14. Having correctly stated the burden of proof which applies in relation
       to  the  ETS  issue  (see  above),  and  having  concluded  that  the
       Respondent had met her evidential burden, the Judge went  on  to  say
       the following about the Appellants' evidence:

           "30.  In his submissions Mr Swaby focused on the  need  for  the
           appellant to undertake a  test  2  years  before  submitting  an
           application.  He submitted that it is possible that because  the
           appellant was concerned at the status of her college she  wanted
           to ensure she had the appropriate documentation in place to move
           to another college.  The fact is that she did take a test  at  a
           time when she had no need to supports the  fact  that  the  only
           rational explanation is because she feared that she  would  need
           to move college with the need to take  a  new  test.   I  cannot
           ignore the fact that both appellants standard  of  English  when
           giving evidence was [to] poor (sic),  a  matter  that  Mr  Swaby
           relied upon.  I have taken into account  she  was  nervous,  but
           even if I factor that into my assessment of her evidence she was
           a very difficult witness to understand.   It  is  possible  that
           moving to a new college this difficulty would be noticeable  and
           possibly that was why she decided to undertake a new test before
           she needed to."

   15. The Judge then dealt with the generic evidence and  the  case-law  in
       that regard before reaching his reasoned conclusions about  what  the
       totality of the evidence showed:

           "34.  I am satisfied that even if I factor  into  my  assessment
           the potential of false positives and the explanation provided by
           the appellant of the events on the day of her  test  I  am  left
           with the fact that her English is clearly poor, she took a  test
           2 years before she needed to and has not provided  any  evidence
           to support her somewhat confused evidence as to  when  she  knew
           she had to change college and therefore a need  to  take  a  new
           test.   Having  considered  the  account  the  appellants   have
           provided  I  have  assessed  whether  there   is   an   innocent
           explanation which satisfies the minimum of plausibility of  both
           the events of the day in question and the need to take the test.
            I am satisfied she has not provided an innocent explanation  as
           to why she would need to take a test 2 years  before  her  leave
           expired.  Whilst she has provided details of the events  on  the
           day in question taken as a whole I am satisfied her  account  is
           simply  not  credible  and  when  placed  before   her   obvious
           difficulty speaking English she has not  discharged  the  burden
           that is upon her and the respondent has  discharged  the  burden
           and established to my satisfaction that  the  appellant  used  a
           proxy to undertake her tests in 2012.  It is clear  to  me  that
           had the appellant obtained the recordings from ETS it would have
           been clear whether she had or had not undertaken the tests.  The
           appellant has not done that."

   16. As Mr Melvin pointed out, there are factors in this case which  count
       against the Appellants unless they can  be  satisfactorily  explained
       away.  The First Appellant took a test two years  before  she  needed
       to.  The Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that he did about
       the likely reason  for  that.   Similarly,  the  Appellants  had  not
       obtained the voice recording of the test from ETS.  It  is  now  well
       known that appellants can obtain those voice  recordings  from  ETS's
       representatives in the UK. If the voice in that recording was that of
       the First Appellant, she  would  have  a  cast  iron  answer  to  the
       Respondent's case.   Her failure to request the recording is a factor
       telling against her as the Judge found.  The Judge also had  evidence
       of the percentage of cases where ETS test scores  were  found  to  be
       invalid at the college where the First Appellant took her test.  That
       was also relevant to the overall assessment  of  the  evidence.   The
       Judge also considered and took into  account  the  First  Appellant's
       evidence about  the  taking  of  the  test  ([23]  and  [34]  of  the
       Decision).

   17. As Mr Melvin also pointed out, where what is at issue is  whether  an
       appellant can speak English to a standard suggested  by  his  or  her
       qualifications, the  Judge  is  entitled  to  consider  whether  that
       appellant can speak English to that standard.  As was pointed out  in
       the rule 24 reply, a person who obtained a near perfect  score  in  a
       speaking test, would be expected to be able to  speak  English  to  a
       fairly high standard (subject to considerations of  a  court  setting
       and nerves which the Judge took into account).  I was unable to  find
       a copy of the test certificate on file, but I have no reason to doubt
       what is said in the rule 24 reply about the scores  which  the  First
       Appellant is said to have achieved.  I do not take into account  what
       is said in the rule 24 reply about the precise level of English which
       would be expected in such circumstances as, as Ms Patyna pointed out,
       that evidence was not before the Judge.

   18. However, I do not understand it to be the Appellants' case  that  the
       Judge had to ignore his own assessment of the First Appellant's level
       of spoken English.  Their case is that, following what  was  said  by
       the Tribunal at [80] of the decision in SM and Qadir v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department (ETS -  Evidence  -  Burden  of  Proof)
       [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) ("SM and Qadir"), the Judge  should  have  been
       slow to place so much emphasis on this as reason  for  rejecting  the
       Appellants' case.

   19. I do not discern any over-emphasis on this factor when rejecting  the
       Appellants' case.  As I have already pointed out, the Judge relied on
       other factors in  addition  to  his  own  observation  of  the  First
       Appellant giving evidence.  He was entitled  to  take  those  factors
       into account.   Ms Patyna also relied on the case of MK (duty to give
       reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 and the lack of any detail  leading
       to the Judge's assessment of  the  level  of  the  First  Appellant's
       spoken English.  I accept that it may have been  preferable  for  the
       Judge to give one or two examples of the  difficulties  in  following
       evidence or  the  need  for  repetition  of  questions  and  answers.
       However, I would not have found this ground to disclose an  error  of
       law taken alone.

   20. However, the stronger of these two grounds  is  ground  one  and  the
       Judge's failure to have regard to evidence that the  First  Appellant
       had undertaken studies in English in the past.   As is pointed out in
       the grounds, based on what is said at [79] to [80] of  SM  and  Qadir
       such evidence may well  be  of  greater  value  than  an  appellant's
       ability to speak English during a hearing.   It is a material factor.

   21. In this case, there is documentary evidence at Tabs B and  C  of  the
       Appellants'  bundle  concerning  the   First   Appellant's   previous
       qualifications.  Not all of that evidence is  necessarily  worthy  of
       weight.  The Masters' degree qualification  taken  at  Anglia  Ruskin
       University is said to be instructed and assessed in English  but  the
       First Appellant is said to have successfully completed  "an  approved
       programme" and it is not entirely clear whether that course  involved
       face to face tuition; similarly the  postgraduate  diploma  completed
       with EduQual. However, there is evidence at,  for  example,  [AB/B/8]
       that the First Appellant completed her bachelor's degree in Nepal "in
       English medium" and her school leaving certificate at [AB/B/11] shows
       that she studied English at that time (although  her  marks  are  not
       particularly impressive).  The  First  Appellant  also  undertook  an
       "Intensive IELTS Preparation" at Blake Hall College over three months
       in 2009 and although there is no certificate in that regard there  is
       at [AB/C/2] a certificate showing that she completed the course.  The
       First Appellant also deals with her previous education at [14] of her
       witness statement.

   22. For the reasons I give above, this evidence does not necessarily mean
       that the First Appellant's explanation will be accepted.  However, in
       spite of  Mr  Melvin's  valiant  efforts  to  save  the  Decision  by
       reference to [15] and [17] of the Decision where the Judge said  that
       he had considered all the evidence but would refer only to that which
       was relevant, I am satisfied that the Judge  did  need  to  give  the
       evidence  of  the  First  Appellant's  past  study   record   express
       consideration and that his failure to do so  amounts  to  a  material
       error of law.  The Judge has considered most of the factors  weighing
       for and against the Appellants, but this was evidence which  had  the
       potential to strengthen  the  Appellants'  case.   It  needed  to  be
       considered and put into the balance with the other evidence.

  Ground four

   23. Strictly, having found an error of law to be  established  on  ground
       one, I do not need to go on  to  deal  with  ground  four.    If  the
       Appellants lose on the ETS issue, it is also highly unlikely that the
       Respondent's delay could swing  the  balance  in  their  favour  when
       assessing proportionality.

   24. However, since the appeals  will  need  to  be  reconsidered,  it  is
       necessary to say a little about this ground, particularly since it is
       the Appellants' case that  the  Judge  misunderstood  how  delay  was
       relevant.

   25. The Judge mentioned the Respondent's delay  as  follows.   First,  at
       [12] of the Decision, the Judge noted that the Respondent  had  taken
       four years to consider and refuse  the  Appellants'  application  and
       that no explanation had been offered for  this  delay.   This  is  of
       course one of a significant number  of  ETS  cases  which  have  been
       subject to litigation over a number of years (see the summary at  [2]
       to [5] of SM and Qadir and the consideration of the generic  evidence
       dating back to the  Panorama  programme  and  immediately  before  in
       January - February 2014).  The applications made by these  Appellants
       were in April 2014 and  it  is  therefore  quite  possible  that  the
       general developments in ETS cases account for at least  some  of  the
       delay.  That is however an assumption on my part.

   26. Second, the Judge considered delay to be potentially relevant on  the
       basis that it might have affected the  First  Appellant's  powers  of
       recall in relation to the test (see [23] and [40] of the Decision).

   27. However, as Ms Patyna pointed out, the delay is also relevant on  the
       basis of the Appellants  having  been  allowed  to  strengthen  their
       private lives in the UK (see EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the
       Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 - "EB (Kosovo)").  That might  perhaps
       be encompassed within the Judge's comment at [40] of the Decision the
       "neither appellant has returned to  Nepal  to  see  family  or  their
       child" in the period of delay.

   28. Ms Patyna also submitted that the significant delay for which no good
       reason has been given leads to a diminution of the public interest in
       the maintenance of effective immigration control,  thereby  impacting
       on the proportionality assessment.  That might be relevant  if  there
       is a systemic failure - see [16] of the judgment in EB (Kosovo) - but
       I doubt could have the same implications on the basis of  one  delay,
       particularly where, as here, an inference might well be drawn  as  to
       the reasons for at least some of it.

   29. In any event, the Judge did deal with that submission.  He did so  at
       [41] of the Decision but found that  it  did  not  have  that  effect
       because the First Appellant  had  acted  fraudulently.   That  was  a
       conclusion open to him  if  the  conclusion  on  the  ETS  issue  was
       otherwise sound.  However, for the reasons I give above, there is  an
       error of law in the Judge's consideration of the evidence relating to
       the ETS issue.  Accordingly, there is a knock-on error in relation to
       the  delay  issue  and   the   Judge's   overall   consideration   of
       proportionality.

  Next Steps

   30. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Appellants  have
       established by their ground one that there is a material error of law
       in the Decision. I therefore set aside the Decision. The error  which
       has been established has consequential implications for  the  Judge's
       overall credibility findings which in  turn  impact  on  the  Judge's
       assessment of proportionality.  In short, the Appellants' credibility
       and the assessment of their  human  rights  claim  will  have  to  be
       revisited in full.  All issues need to be redetermined.

   31. I have regard to the  Joint  Practice  Statement  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of  appeals  in
       this Tribunal and the guidance  there  given  as  regards  remittals.
       This case is more akin to that of an appellant having  been  deprived
       of the opportunity to have the central part of their case  considered
       rather than there being any procedural  unfairness,  but  it  remains
       appropriate for the appeals to be remitted.

CONCLUSION

   32. For the above reasons, there is an error  of  law  disclosed  by  the
       Appellants' ground one which infects  the  entirety  of  the  Judge's
       findings.  For the reasons given above, I set aside the Decision  and
       I do not preserve any findings.



DECISION

I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Decision of Judge E  M  M  Smith
promulgated on 11 July 2019 contains a material error of  law.  I  therefore
set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge E M M Smith.

Signed      [pic]      Dated:  17 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
