
[pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/00783/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 August 2014                               |On 26 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                              Felix Kofi Kontoh
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Aminu instructed by Afrifa & Partners,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, appeals with permission against  the
    dismissal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bircher of  his  appeal  against
    the respondent's decision to refuse him a residence card as the  family
    member of an EEA citizen under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 (as amended).

 2. The appellant  asserts  that  he  entered  into  a  Ghanaian  customary
    marriage, by proxy, with a German citizen of Ghanaian  descent  who  is
    exercising Treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom  and  that  he  should
    therefore  be  treated  as  her  spouse,  for  the  purposes   of   the
    Regulations. Neither of the parties was in Ghana when the marriage  was
    entered into.

 3. The appellant did not attend the First-tier Tribunal hearing or arrange
    representation. The respondent was also unrepresented.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was obliged to determine the  appeal  on  the  materials
    before him.  At paragraph 14 of the determination, he accepted that the
    appellant had voluntarily registered his marriage Provisional  National
    Defence CLB Law 112 Customary Marriage and Divorce  (Registration)  Law
    1985, as amended by the 1991 Amendment Act.   However,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was not satisfied that all of the relevant  requirements
    of the Ghanaian statutes had been complied with (statutory declarations
    from the parties' parents had not yet been provided).

 4. He then considered whether the appellant  could  bring  himself  within
    regulation 8(5) which  applies  to  unmarried  partners,  but  was  not
    satisfied as to the evidence of durability of the relationship.

 5. Finally,  he  considered  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended), and Article 8 ECHR  outside  the
    Rules.   She concluded that  the  appellant  could  not  bring  himself
    within the Rules and that this was not  a  case  where  the  respondent
    should exercise discretion outside the Rules on private and family life
    grounds.   The appeal was dismissed.

 6. The appellant appealed.  His grounds of appeal in the first application
    dealt only with the question of the validity of the customary  marriage
    in Ghana, applying CB (validity of  marriage:  proxy  marriage)  Brazil
    [2008]  UKAIT  00080,  and  contended  that  the  marriage  should   be
    recognised as valid in United Kingdom law. He argued  that  the  Kareem
    guidance was wrong since as a matter of private international law,  the
    lex loci celebrationis should be determinative of the validity  of  the
    marriage.

 7. He argued that there was no authority that  parties  domiciled  in  the
    United Kingdom could not conduct a marriage by proxy, and  referred  to
    the decision of the High Court in Pazpena de Vire  v  Pazpena  de  Vire
    [2000] All ER 2010, a case which concerned a proxy  marriage  conducted
    in Uruguay while the parties were both in Germany, followed by  lengthy
    cohabitation.  He also relied on McCabe v  McCabe  [1994]  1  FLR  410,
    [1994] 1 FCR 257 which dealt with the essentials of an  Akan  customary
    marriage in Ghana and establishes that it is lawful for both parties to
    be absent if family support can be demonstrated.

 8. There was no challenge to the Article 8 findings (within or without the
    Rules) or to the conclusion  that  he  had  not  established  that  his
    partnership was durable under regulation 8(5). Permission to appeal was
    refused.

 9. The appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds for his second application also focused on
    the Ghanaian requirements for a valid customary marriage by proxy,  and
    again, there was no challenge to  the  regulation  8(5)  or  Article  8
    findings in the First-tier Tribunal determination.

10. The second application grounds do not engage with the Upper  Tribunal's
    guidance in Kareem at all, nor do they repeat the private international
    law arguments contained in  the  first  application.    However,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey granted permission to appeal on  the  basis  that
    the  decision  in  Kareem  arguably  did  not   address   the   private
    international law rules to which all EU states are party.

11. By a rule 24 Reply, the respondent contended that there was no error of
    law in the determination and that Kareem was authority for showing that
    all proxy or customary marriages must be  shown  to  be  valid  in  the
    country of the EEA citizen whose free movement rights were in issue.

12. That was the basis on which the appeal came before me today.

The Kareem guidance

13. The guidance in Kareem so far as relevant to this appeal was that:

         "d.             In  appeals  where  there  is  no   such   marriage
             certificate or where there is doubt that a marriage certificate
             has been issued by a  competent  authority,  then  the  marital
             relationship may be proved by other evidence. This will require
             the Tribunal to determine whether a marriage was contracted.
         e.             In such an appeal, the starting  point  will  be  to
             decide whether a marriage was contracted between the  appellant
             and the qualified person according to the national law  of  the
             EEA country of the qualified person's nationality.
         f.              In all such situations, when resolving issues  that
             arise because of conflicts of law, proper respect must be given
             to the qualified person's rights as provided  by  the  European
             Treaties, including the right to marry and the rights  of  free
             movement and residence.
         g.            It should be assumed that,  without  independent  and
             reliable evidence about the recognition of the  marriage  under
             the laws of the  EEA  country  and/or  the  country  where  the
             marriage took place, the Tribunal is likely  to  be  unable  to
             find that sufficient evidence has been  provided  to  discharge
             the burden of proof. Mere production of  legal  materials  from
             the EEA country or country where the marriage took  place  will
             be insufficient evidence because they will rarely show how such
             law  is  understood  or  applied  in  those   countries.   Mere
             assertions as to the effect of  such  laws  will,  for  similar
             reasons, carry no weight.
         h.            These remarks apply solely to the question of whether
             a person is a spouse for the purposes of EU law.  It  does  not
             relate to other relationships that might be regarded as similar
             to  marriage,   such   as   civil   partnerships   or   durable
             relationships."

14. Shortly after this determination was promulgated,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    reaffirmed the importance of evidence  about  recognition  in  the  EEA
    citizen's country of a customary marriage by proxy in Ghana.   The case
    concerned a customary marriage between a Ghanaian citizen and a citizen
    of the Netherlands.  The guidance therein is summarised in the judicial
    headnote thus:

         "Following the decision in Kareem  (  proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)
         [2014] UKUT 24, the determination of whether  there  is  a  marital
         relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of  the
         Member State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality."

Submissions

15. For the respondent, Mr Melvin relied on his grounds of appeal  and  did
    not add to them by way of oral submissions.

16. In his submissions for the appellant, Mr Aminu put his  case  in  three
    ways:  first, that the marriage in Ghana was valid  and  Kareem  wrong;
    second, that the appellant was entitled  to  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on Article 8 grounds; and  third,  as  set  out  in  the
    grant, that Kareem is wrong because it  takes  no  account  of  private
    international law on the recognition of marriages.

Discussion

17. None of the appellant's arguments can succeed.   As regards the private
    international law point, that turns on the domicile of each party.  The
    appellant is a Ghanaian citizen; his spouse is of Ghanaian descent, but
    there is nothing in the material  before  us  which  suggests  that  in
    adopting  German  nationality,  she  retained  her  Ghanaian  domicile.
    Absent any evidence to the contrary, adoption of the citizenship  of  a
    third country in which you are living indicates that  you  have  a  new
    domicile of choice, in this case in Germany.

18. The parties contracted their marriage by proxy, neither of  them  being
    in Ghana when it was celebrated.  As the Kareem cases indicate,  it  is
    therefore crucial that the appellant can prove that Germany  recognises
    marriages contracted in this manner, since that is where the  wife  was
    domiciled at the date of marriage.  The suggestion in the first grounds
    that these parties are domiciled in the United Kingdom is not supported
    by any evidence and, given that both of  them  are  citizens  of  other
    countries, the evidence does  not  oust  the  presumptions  as  to  the
    appellant's domicile of origin in Ghana  and  the  wife's  domicile  of
    choice in Germany.  The United Kingdom is  not  required  to  recognise
    customary marriages unless the parties can show that they were  validly
    contracted under the applicable laws, and the appellant has  not  shown
    that to be the case in relation to his marriage.

19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in  law  in  applying  Kareem
    (proxy marriage - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) and  concluding  that
    the appellant did not fall to be treated as a family member  under  the
    Regulations. The appellant had not  and  still  has  not  supplied  any
    evidence as whether German law recognises customary marriages by  proxy
    contracted in Ghana.  The judge was  entitled  to  applied  the  Kareem
    guidance, indeed it would have been an error of law had he not done so.
     The marriage element of the appeal was therefore bound to fail.

20. The grounds in the  second  application  also  did  not  challenge  the
    Article 8 and regulation 8(5) elements of the determination.   Although
    Mr Aminu sought to raise these issues again at the hearing,  they  were
    not challenged in the grounds of appeal and no Rule 24 Reply was  filed
    putting them in issue.  I have examined the judge's findings  on  these
    points and can find no error of law in his approach.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Date                                                                  Signed

                                     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
