
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00180/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On  3 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                          Mr Mohammad Saiful Islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sayem, Legal Representative, Uzma Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and his date  of  birth  is  1
    January 1984.  The appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to cancel his leave pursuant to  paragraph  321A  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The date of that decision is 21 December  2014.
    His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morris  in
    a decision which was promulgated on 24 July 2015 following a hearing on
    3 July 2015.  During the hearing the judge heard oral evidence from the
    appellant.  The  evidence  on  which  the  Secretary  of  State  relied
    comprised a statement from  Matthew  Harold,  a  statement  from  Peter
    Millington  and  a  statement  from  Rebecca  Collings.   In  addition,
    attached to Mr Harold's statement was  Annex  A  which  is  a  document
    entitled "ETS SELT Source Data" and "MIDA Matched Data".

2.   For the purposes of today's hearing, which came about as  a  result  of
    the appellant having been granted leave to appeal by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Page on 9 November 2015, I have taken  into  account  the
    grounds of appeal and  the  two  skeleton  arguments  (one  drafted  by
    solicitors previously instructed by the appellant and  one  drafted  by
    Uzma Law).

3.   The judge found that the appellant was not credible and that he had  in
    fact submitted a TOEIC certificate from  Educational  Testing  Services
    ETS which had been obtained fraudulently because a proxy  had  sat  the
    English language test and not the appellant.  This certificate had been
    submitted in support of a previous application in  December  2013.  The
    certificate is dated 14 December 2011.

4.   The judge heard the appellant's oral evidence  which  she  recorded  at
    paragraphs 6 and 7.  The appellant was interviewed in  2014  about  the
    certificate and the English language test which he claimed to have  sat
    in 2011.  In support of the respondent's  case  a  transcript  of  that
    interview was relied upon which  by  any  account  indicated  that  the
    appellant was not able to provide an account of how and when he sat the
    test in 2011.  The judge  at  paragraph  16  rejected  the  appellant's
    evidence that he was unable to answer questions about it because he was
    tired after a long journey.  The judge was entitled to attach weight to
    the interview and  his  findings  are  grounded  in  the  evidence  and
    adequately reasoned.

5.    At  paragraph  18  the  judge  took  into  account  evidence  of   the
    appellant's English language  ability  and  found  that  there  was  no
    explanation why the appellant had performed seemingly so well in  2011,
    but had only just passed an English language test in March 2013.  There
    had in fact been a deterioration in the  appellant's  English  language
    ability evidenced by the certificates that  he  had  produced  and  the
    judge was entitled to attach weight to this.

6.   At paragraph 19 the judge considered an aspect of the appellant's  oral
    evidence to be inconsistent with that at paragraph 10  of  his  witness
    statement.  The judge was entitled to interpret the  evidence  in  this
    way.  It was not a matter of her  having  misunderstood  the  evidence.
    There is no support for the assertion that the judge did  not  properly
    apply the burden and standard of proof or that she failed  to  consider
    the appellant's English language ability having heard him give evidence
    at the hearing.

7.   I have considered the issues raised at paragraph 5 of the  most  recent
    skeleton argument which contained issues that were  raised  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The document produced by the respondent and
    attached to Mr Harold's  statement  records  the  appellant's  name  as
    Saiful Islam, therefore omitting Mohammad.  In  my  view  this  is  not
    material and in the light of the decision of the judge, considered as a
    whole, that the judge did not make specific reference to this, does not
    amount to an error of  law  (I  note  that  the  document  records  the
    appellant's  correct  date  of  birth).   The  document  entitled  MIDA
    indicates that at some stage the appellant has produced a passport. The
    judge did not refer to this. However, there was no  evidence  from  the
    appellant which would indicate when it is asserted that he produced his
    passport and in what circumstances. The judge did not make reference to
    these matters because they do not advance the appellant's case.

8.   The judge was entitled to attach weight to  the  evidence  produced  by
    the  respondent  and  prefer  that   to   the   appellant's   evidence,
    particularly in light of the transcript of interview and  the  findings
    that had been made by the judge in relation to the appellant's  English
    language ability.

9.   There are shortcomings in the evidence as relied on  by  the  Secretary
    of State and I am aware of the observations of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    the case of Gazi, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department (ETS -  judicial  review)  (IJR)  [2015]  UKUT  327
    (IAC).  However, the respondent's  evidence  included  the  appellant's
    transcript  of  interview  and  the  appellant's   own   evidence   was
    problematic. The judge was entitled to conclude  in  the  circumstances
    that the respondent had discharged the burden of proof and  to  dismiss
    the appeal.

10.  There is  no  error  of  law  and  the  decision  of  Judge  Morris  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 26 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

