
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00386/2014
                                                               IA/51098/2014
                                                               IA/51107/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 18 March 2016                     |on 19 August 2016                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                KOLAWOLE [O]
                                TEMITOPE [O]
                                    [N O]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                               THE AIRE CENTRE
                                                                  Intervener




Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B. Asanovic, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Smyth instructed by the Government Legal
                    Department on behalf of the respondent.
For the Intervener:    Leave to intervene granted limited to the making of
                    written submissions only.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       promulgated on the 30 December  2014  in  which  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge S Rodgers allowed the appellants' appeals against the  decision
       of the Secretary of State refusing  their  applications  for  derived
       residence cards but dismissed the  appeals  against  the  refusal  of
       their applications for permanent residence.

Background


    2. The appellants' form part of a family unit. The first appellant  (A1)
       entered the United Kingdom on 7 November 2012  on  a  6  month  visit
       visa. The second appellant (A2), his wife, gave birth to their  first
       child [M] in Ireland on [ ]  2003  and  entered  the  United  Kingdom
       thereafter with the child  on  4  December  2003.  [M]  is  an  Irish
       national  and  therefore  an  EU  citizen.  The  first   and   second
       appellants' are citizens of Nigeria.

    3. The third appellant (A3) was born on [ ] 2005 but does not pursue her
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal having acquired British  citizenship  in
       the interim.

    4. On 2 August 2010 the Upper Tribunal allowed [M]'s appeal against  the
       refusal of her application for a  registration  certificate,  on  the
       grounds that she  was  exercising  a  right  to  reside  as  a  self-
       sufficient person in the UK. The first and  second  appellants'  were
       granted residence cards not permitting them to work.

    5. On 9  November  2012  the  appellants  applied  for  residence  cards
       permitting them to work.  Those  applications  were  refused  by  the
       Secretary of State dated 12 December 2013.

    6. Permission to appeal the decision of Judge  Rodgers  was  refused  by
       another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but  granted  on  a  renewed
       application by the Upper Tribunal in the following terms:

           "It is arguable for the reasons set out in detail in the renewed
           grounds seeking permission to appeal that this matter raises  an
           important point of law relating to  the  issue  of  a  right  of
           permanent residence for a Chen parent.  The submissions filed by
           Wilson Solicitors are supplemented by a  letter  from  the  Aire
           Centre which makes reference to the  CJEU  judgment  of  O  &  B
           [2014] ECR I-nyr (12 March 2014)."

    7. Directions given on the grant of permission included  that  providing
       The Aire Centre with leave to intervene by way of written submissions
       only. The matter was also directed be listed before the President  of
       the Upper Tribunal, Mr Justice McCloskey, and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Hanson although as a result of urgent presidential  business  on  the
       day the President was unable to sit in panel and the matter proceeded
       before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson  sitting  alone.  Accordingly  the
       President has had no input into the making of this decision.

Preliminary issue


    8. At the commencement of the hearing Ms Asanovic raises the issue of an
       adjournment pending the decision of  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
       European Union (CJEU) in the case of Secretary of State for the  Home
       Officer v NA, on the basis there was no  direct  authority  from  the
       CJEU on the point in issue.  Reference was also made to  a  statement
       of Ana Gonzalez, a partner in Wilsons Solicitors LLP, who has conduct
       of this matter of behalf of the appellants'.

    9. The statement refers to the author's personal knowledge of  the  case
       of NA (Pakistan) which was heard on the 18 February 2016 by the First
       Chamber of the Court of Justice of the  European  Union  (CJEU).  The
       Advocate Generals Opinion was to be handed down on 14 April 2016  and
       full judgment delivered later in 2016. It was concluded by the author
       to be a matter of potential relevance, although it is also  noted  by
       Ana Gonzalez at paragraph 8 of the  statement  that  "Notwithstanding
       this situation, I would respectfully suggest that there is no  reason
       for any hesitation with proceeding with this hearing  listed  for  18
       March 2016 -  because  the  prospect  of  the  CJEU  ruling  on  this
       particular issue is extremely small and in  any  event  the  specific
       issue of self-sufficiency does not arise on the facts of NA".

   10. On 10 May 2016, post hearing, the Upper Tribunal received  a  further
       letter from Wilsons Solicitors having attaching to it a copy  of  the
       Opinion of Advocate General Wathelet in case  C-115/15  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department v NA, dated 14 April 2016.

   11. The application for an  adjournment  was  refused  as  there  was  no
       arguable basis for granting the same when considering  the  issue  of
       fairness. An opinion of an Advocate General is not binding and it was
       acknowledged in the appellants' own  material  that  there  would  be
       further delay and that the core issue in this case may  not  even  be
       considered by the CJEU in NA. The  Opinion  is  referred  to  further
       below.

   12. Ms Asanovic also raised the issue of a reference to the CJEU  in  her
       skeleton argument at [55-61] on the basis the legal position is  acte
       clair, (the idea in EU law being that there is no  need  to  refer  a
       point of law which is reasonably clear and free  from  doubt  to  the
       European Court of Justice), which is disputed by Ms Smyth who asserts
       the matter is acte eclaire.

   13. Whether a question needs to be referred to the CJEU is a matter to be
       considered at the conclusion of a hearing when it can be  established
       if the law as it stands is reasonably clear and free from doubt. This
       issue shall be referred to further below.

   14. The vote to leave the European Union, more commonly  referred  to  as
       BREXIT,  occurred  between  the  hearing  of  this  matter  and   the
       publication of this decision. It has not  been  considered  necessary
       for the parties to be invited to  make  further  submissions  as  the
       impact of the vote and timetable for leaving the European  Union  and
       impact upon the application of  European  law  to  decisions  of  the
       United Kingdom's courts and Tribunals is not yet clear. In particular
       it has not been suggested that the case law or legislative provisions
       relied upon by the parties in their submissions should be  viewed  in
       any different light at this time.  If in the future the status of the
       United Kingdom changes, the impact upon this and many other decisions
       reliant upon European Union law may  have  to  be  reconsidered.  The
       decision reflects the writer's opinion of the state of the law at the
       date of the publication of the judgment.

Grounds and submissions


The appellants' argument

   15. The appellants' case is set  out  in  the  skeleton  argument  of  Ms
       Asanovic and oral submissions made to the Tribunal.

   16. The core submission is that a teleological interpretation of  Article
       16 of Directive 2004/38EC warrants a grant of residence so as to give
       effect to  the  intentions  of  the  drafters  of  the  Directive  to
       establish a permanent right of residence  so  as  to  promote  social
       cohesion. The term teleological being taken by this Tribunal to be  a
       reference to 'relating to design or  purpose'  rather  than  being  a
       submission based upon the strict wording of the Directive.

   17. Ms Asanovic submitted that the definition of  what  it  means  to  be
       'legally resident' for the purposes of  Article  16(2)  of  directive
       2004/38/EC must include persons who have been self-sufficient in  the
       sense of Article 7(1)(b) having derived the  EU  right  of  residence
       from the principles in C-200/02 Zhu and Chen v SSHD [2005] OQ 325 [A-
       C-125-152] - i.e. the Directive 2004/38/EC and Articles  21  TFEU  if
       interpreted in the context of the preamble and  the  subsequent  case
       law. It is submitted, in the alternative, that this  not  acte  clair
       and a reference should be made as noted above.

   18. In paragraph 16 of the skeleton argument the  issue  is  put  in  the
       following way:

           '16.   In the present case, [M] had moved from Ireland to the UK
           where she had sufficient resources so as not to become a  burden
           on the social assistance of the member state and  she  also  had
           private health insurance, thus falling squarely  within  Article
           7(b) of the Directive.  The family members also fulfil the  same
           criteria required by Article 7(b), but for not being her  family
           members as defined by Article 2(2) in  that  they  are  not  her
           descendants (Art 2(2)(c)) or her dependants (Art  2(2)(d)).  The
           issue therefore is whether wording, context and purpose  of  the
           Directive 2004/38  warrant  a  broader  interpretation  in  this
           case.'

   19. Ms Asanovic makes the following five submissions:

        a. Unlike other derived rights, the derived right to a residence of
           a Chen parent is derived from the Directive 2004/38/EC  and  the
           Treaty of the Functioning of the EU (TFEU) thereby including  an
           effective connection with the Directive  and  with  exercise  of
           free movement.

        b. Derived rights with  a  substantive  connection  with  Directive
           2004/38/EC are subject  to  application  of  principles  of  the
           Directive 'by analogy'.

        c. Where there is  a  genuine  connection  with  exercise  of  free
           movement rights, broad interpretation of who is a beneficiary of
           the Direction 2004/38/EC is required.

        d. Case law of the CJEU supports the proposed interpretation in the
           context of substantive compliance with the Directive.

        e. It would be disproportionate to refuse the appellants  permanent
           residence, as their daughter [M]  qualifies  for  the  same  and
           there is no policy reason, nor conflict  of  interpretation  nor
           any  other  reasons  to  exclude  them  from  being   considered
           beneficiaries of the Directive in the broad sense.

The Respondent's argument

   20. The respondent's case is set out in the skeleton argument of Ms Smyth
       and submissions made to the Tribunal.

   21. Ms Smyth makes the following submissions in her skeleton:

        a. It is not accepted that the appellants qualify for  a  right  of
           permanent residence. Reliance is placed upon the decision of the
           Upper Tribunal in Bee and another [2013] UKUT 00038. (This  case
           is discussed below.)

        b. On the plain wording of the  Directive  the  appellants  do  not
           qualify for permanent residence.

        c. The appellants' submission  in  relation  to  the  'teleological
           interpretation',  which  they  are   forced   to   contend,   is
           fundamentally flawed.

        d.  Partial  compliance  with  the  terms  of  the   Directive   is
           insufficient to acquire a right of permanent residence.  Such  a
           right can only be acquired in the circumstances set out  in  the
           Directive.

        e. The appellants' submission relating to the 'application  of  the
           Directive by analogy' fails as it is said  Article  21  of  TFEU
           cannot be used to bypass a clear limitation in the Directive.

        f. In relation to the 'broad interpretation of beneficiary  point',
           the Case C-202/12 McCarthy v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
           Department did not raise an issue as to the applicability of the
           Directive. It is submitted that in this case the CJEU  confirmed
           the wording of the Directive  as  being  definitive  as  far  as
           "family members" within Art 2(2) are concerned.

        g. It is similarly submitted that the case law of the CJEU does not
           supported the appellants' proposed interpretation.

The intervener's argument

   22. In their letter dated 5 March 2015 The Aire Centre state:

           "The AIRE Centre believes that this  case  raises  an  important
           point of law, specifically around permanent residence for a Chen
           parent. This is in light of the recent CJEU judgment in C-456/12
           O&B [2014] ECR I-nyr (12 March 2014), the  broad  interpretation
           of Article 7 of 2004/38/EC adopted in Sean McCarthy, and whether
           such  residence  is  'lawful'  for  the  purposes  of   Art   16
           2004/38/EC.  This question does not appear to have been asked or
           answered in either Alarape or Ziolkowski."

   23. The written submission  on  behalf  of  The  Aire  Centre,  dated  14
       September 2014, asserts the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Bee and
       another (permanent/derived rights of residence) v Secretary of  State
       for the Home Department [2013] UKUT 83  was  wrongly  decided.  After
       referring to the relevant  legal  provisions,  which  are  reproduced
       below, the interveners full submissions are as follows:

           '8.     The  starting  point  is  article  21  Treaty   on   the
                Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).  A3 is  a  citizen
                of the Union and enjoys the right to move and reside  freely
                within the Union territory (subject  to  conditions  in  the
                Treaties and 'by the measures adopted to give them  effect')
                under Article 21.  The restrictions and limitations  can  be
                derived from secondary  legislation,  notwithstanding  their
                absence in the primary legislation (TFEU).

           9. By virtue of Directive 2004/38 Article 7(1)(b), A3 also has a
                right to reside in the UK.  After five  years  residence  he
                acquired permanent residence pursuant to Article 16.  A1 and
                A2 are not family members  within  the  meaning  of  Article
                2(2): while they are direct relatives in the ascending  line
                they are not dependent upon A1.  They are not family members
                of him.  There  is  no  provision  in  the  Directive  which
                provides for the Appellants precise situation. Relatives  in
                the ascending line, such as the parents in the present case,
                do not feature in the Directive as it was adopted before the
                Court of Justice had addressed the question of non-dependent
                parents in Zhu and Chen and in Zambrano.

           10.    The Court of Justice in Zhu and Chen v Secretary of State
                for the Home  Department  [2004]  ECR1-1925  held  that  the
                minor's right to reside in that case came from Article  18EC
                and Directive 90/364.  If his parents were  not  allowed  to
                remain in the Member State with  him  his  right  to  reside
                would be frustrated. The Court went on:

                    "46.   For that reason alone,  where,  as  in  the  main
                    proceedings, Article 18 EC and Directive 90/364 grant  a
                    right to reside for an indefinite  period  in  the  host
                    Member State to a young  minor  who  is  a  national  of
                    another Member State,  those  same  provisions  allow  a
                    parent who is that minor's primary carer to reside  with
                    the child in the host Member State."

           11.    Where does A1 and A2's right to reside come from?  It  is
                a derived right, derived from A3.  We submit  that  this  in
                itself  does  not  mean  that  it  must  remain  permanently
                confined by  the  status  of  A3.   As  established,  rights
                enjoyed under EU law on the basis of a relationship  enjoyed
                with a person enjoying a primary/substantive right to reside
                can in other cases develop  into  an  independent  right  to
                reside (e.g. third country national family  members  of  EEA
                nationals after a period of  five  years  acquire  permanent
                rights to reside -  see  Article  16(2)  Directive  2004/38;
                former spouses - due to death or divorce - of EEA  nationals
                can acquire permanent residence - see Article  13  Directive
                2004/38.

           12.    Substitute Directive 2004/38 and Article 21(1)  TFEU  for
                Article 18EC and Directive 90/364, and the  ultimate  source
                for A3 is identified.  He has resided 'legally'  within  the
                meaning of Article 16 for a continuous period of five years.
                 The Court of Appeal in Alarape  focussed  on  Article  7(1)
                Directive 2004/38 and whether conditions therein  were  met.
                The Court concluded that they were  not,  as  the  right  to
                reside there arose  from  a  different  source  -  Directive
                1612/68, which did  not  provide  for  permanent  residence.
                Article 12 provided that:

                    "Children of a national of a Member State who is or  has
                    been employed in a Member State  shall  be  admitted  to
                    that State's  general  educational,  apprenticeship  and
                    vocational training courses under the same conditions as
                    the nationals of that State".

                The Court of Justice concluded that residence on  the  basis
                of Article 12, directive 1612/68 did not amount to residence
                that could develop into permanent residence under Article 16
                Directive  2004/38.   A3,   by   contrast,   satisfies   the
                substantive requirements of Article 7(1)  Directive  2004/38
                and his consequential right to reside should be matched by a
                right for his parents/carers so as to enable him to continue
                to meet the requirements of Article  7.   Directive  2004/38
                aims to facilitate the exercise of the individual  right  to
                reside and move within the territory  of  the  Member  State
                that is conferred directly  on  Union  citizens  by  Article
                21(1) TFEU and it aims  in  particular  to  strengthen  that
                right: see C-127/08  Metock  and  Others  [2008]  ECR1-6241,
                paras. 59 and 82.  A3's right to reside in  strengthened  by
                the acquisition of residence by  his  parents  -  those  who
                facilitate his right to reside - equivalent to his.

           13.     The  Court  in  C-456/12   Minister   voor   Immigratie,
                Intefratie en Asiel v O  expanded  the  scope  of  directive
                2004/38 to include  third  country  family  members  of  EEA
                Member State citizens who return with the EEA citizen to the
                EEA citizen's  own  State,  after  having  exercised  Treaty
                rights in another State.  The third country nationals or the
                Member States citizens had tentative  connections  with  the
                other Member State only.  The Directive does not provide for
                such a scenario (one of the EU citizens resided  in  another
                Member State for weekend only, in another the third  country
                national resided in another Member State for two months only
                and  subsequently  was  a  frequent  visitor).   The   Court
                concluded  that  Article  21(1)  required,   to   be   fully
                effective, that family  members  (spouses  in  those  cases)
                enjoyed a right to reside  similar  to  that  which  spouses
                would enjoy under  the  Directive  'by  analogy'  (para.50).
                Applying that teleological approach in the Directive it  was
                not restrained from affording the benefits of the  Directive
                to the family members of the relevant EAE nationals although
                they do not strictly fall within its material  scope.    The
                Court considered that if the third country  spouse  in  that
                case did not have a right of reside in the home State  of  a
                Union citizen on return to the home  Member  State,  the  EU
                citizen could be discouraged from leaving the  Member  State
                of which he  is  a  national  in  order  to  pursue  gainful
                employment (para.47).  The court went on:

                    "52.   Where, during the genuine residence of the  Union
                    citizen in the host Member State,  pursuant  to  and  in
                    conformity with the conditions set out in  Article  7(1)
                    and (2) of Directive 2004/38, family life is created  or
                    strengthened in that Member State, the effectiveness  of
                    the rights conferred on the  Union  citizen  by  Article
                    21(1) TFEU requires that the citizen's  family  life  in
                    the host Member State may continue on returning  to  the
                    Member State of which he  is  a  national,  through  the
                    grant of a derived right  of  residence  to  the  family
                    member who is a  third  country  national.  If  no  such
                    derived right of  residence  were  granted,  that  Union
                    citizen could be discouraged  from  leaving  the  Member
                    State of which he is a national in order to exercise his
                    right of residence under Article 21(1) TFEU  in  another
                    Member State because he is uncertain whether he will  be
                    able  to continue in his Member State of origin a family
                    life with his immediate family members  which  has  been
                    created or strengthened in the host Member state (see to
                    that effect,  Eind,  paragraph  35  and  36,  and  Iida,
                    paragraph 70).

                During the residence of A1, A2 and A3 in the UK their family
                life has grown and strengthened.   It  has  facilitated  the
                exercise of rights by A3 under Article 7  Directive  2004/38
                and Article 21(1) TFEU.  The  prospects  for  the  continued
                exercise of those rights  are  reduced  if  the  immigration
                status of A1 and A2 is maintained on a temporary basis  only
                and at a time when the status of A3 is of a permeant nature.
                  Further,  the  best  interests  of  A3  are  preserved  by
                providing his parents and him with the security  of  knowing
                that their residence is settled.  Article 7 of  the  Charter
                provides:

                    "Everyone has the  right  to  respect  for  his  or  her
                    private and family life, home and communications".

                The Court of Justice in C-356/11  and  C-35711  O  and  S  v
                Maahanmuuttovirasto, observed the obligation to have  regard
                to the child's best interests, recognised by  Article  24(2)
                of the Charter.  The failure to afford  permanent  residence
                to the parents of A3 breaches EU law in that (i) it  hinders
                the exercise of free movement enjoyed by a  citizen  of  the
                Union, (ii) it violates the  right  to  respect  for  family
                life, and (iii) breaches the duty under section 55  Borders,
                citizenship and Immigration act 1999 (child's best interests
                duty).

           14.    While A1 and A2  are  not  'family  members'  within  the
                meaning of Article 2 Directive 2004/38, they are the  carers
                for A3 and they form  family  life  within  the  meaning  of
                Article 8 European Convention on  Human  Rights,  and  their
                presence is required to give necessary effect to  the  right
                of residence of an EEA national  (A1)  under  Article  21(1)
                TFEU.   Similarly, it is submitted that to give full  effect
                to rights of free movement under Article 21 to A3,  a  right
                to reside should be given  to  the  Appellants  inline,  and
                subsistent,  with  that  of   A1   (who   enjoys   permanent
                residence).  The right to reside enjoyed  by  the  child  in
                Alarape cannot develop into permanent residence rights.  The
                derived rights of his parents  cannot  extend  to  permanent
                residence rights. However, A3 has permanent  residence.   In
                view of the dependency between A1 and A2, A3 there can be no
                justification for affording the parents (A1 and A2) a lesser
                right to reside, a temporary right to reside.  The  parent's
                right to reside cannot be greater than  that  of  the  child
                (A3)  and  it  is  more  coherent  that  their  rights   are
                coterminous.    The   parents'   right    to    reside    in
                subsistent/coterminous with  the  right  to  reside  of  the
                child.   When  the  latter  right  develops  into  permanent
                residence so should the right of the parents.   Full  effect
                should be given to A3's right  to  reside  by  granting  the
                parents residence in line with the EU  national  who  enjoys
                the primary free movement right.

           15.    Certainly, it cannot be considered that the issue is acte
                clair. The Court of Justice has not previously been asked to
                decide whether a parent carer of a child who enjoys a  right
                to reside under Directive 2004/38 and TFEU  is  entitled  to
                qualify for permanent residence in line with the  child  who
                resides and satisfies the conditions in Articles child 7 and
                16 [sic].  The right of residence enjoyed by  the  child  in
                Alarape is very different from  that  enjoyed  by  A3.   The
                child in Alarape did not  satisfy  any  of  the  substantive
                considerations of Article 7 and it would be counterintuitive
                to conclude that he would be entitled to permeant residence.
                 All of the Appellants, by contrast, derive their rights  to
                reside from  Directive  2004/38  and  TFEU.   The  Directive
                provides for permanent residence.  It fits with  the  scheme
                of the Directive  and  Article  21(1)  TFEU  to  accord  the
                benefit of Article 16 to the parents of an EU child enjoying
                a permanent right of residence under that Directive.'

The law


   24. Articles 20 and  21 of the Treaty on the Functioning on the  European
       Union (TFEU) state:

           'Article 20

           (ex Article 17 TEC)

             1. Citizenship of the Union is hereby established. Every person
                holding the nationality of a Member State shall be a citizen
                of the Union. Citizenship of the Union shall  be  additional
                to and not replace national citizenship.

             2. Citizens of the Union shall enjoy the rights and be  subject
                to the duties provided for in the Treaties. They shall have,
                inter alia:

                 a) the right to move and reside freely within the territory
                    of the Member States;

                (b)    the right to vote  and  to  stand  as  candidates  in
                    elections to the European Parliament  and  in  municipal
                    elections in their Member State of residence, under  the
                    same conditions as nationals of that State;

                (c)    the right to enjoy,  in  the  territory  of  a  third
                    country in which the Member  State  of  which  they  are
                    nationals is not  represented,  the  protection  of  the
                    diplomatic and consular authorities of any Member  State
                    on the same conditions as the nationals of that State;

                (d)    the right to petition  the  European  Parliament,  to
                    apply to the European  Ombudsman,  and  to  address  the
                    institutions and advisory bodies of the Union in any  of
                    the Treaty languages and to obtain a reply in  the  same
                    language.

                These rights shall  be  exercised  in  accordance  with  the
                conditions and limits defined by the  Treaties  and  by  the
                measures adopted thereunder.

           Article 21

           (ex Article 18 TEC)

             1. Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move  and
                reside freely within the territory  of  the  Member  States,
                subject to the limitations and conditions laid down  in  the
                Treaties and by the measures adopted to give them effect.

             2. If action by the Union should prove necessary to attain this
                objective and the Treaties have not provided  the  necessary
                powers, the European Parliament and the Council,  acting  in
                accordance with  the  ordinary  legislative  procedure,  may
                adopt provisions with a view to facilitating the exercise of
                the rights referred to in paragraph 1.

             3. For the same purposes as those referred to  in  paragraph  1
                and if the Treaties have not provided the necessary  powers,
                the Council, acting in accordance with a special legislative
                procedure, may adopt measures concerning social security  or
                social protection. The Council shall act  unanimously  after
                consulting the European Parliament.'

   25. The  relevant  parts  of  Directive  2004/38,  incorporated  into  UK
       domestic law in the Immigration (European Economic  area)  Regulation
       2006 are as follows:

           'Article 2

           Definitions

           For the purposes of this Directive:

           1) "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of  a
           Member State;

           2) "Family member" means:

                (a)    the spouse;

                (b)     the  partner  with  whom  the  Union   citizen   has
                contracted a registered partnership, on  the  basis  of  the
                legislation of a Member State, if  the  legislation  of  the
                host  Member  State  treats   registered   partnerships   as
                equivalent to marriage and in accordance with the conditions
                laid down in the relevant legislation  of  the  host  Member
                State;

                (c)    the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or
                are dependants and those of the spouse or partner as defined
                in point (b);

                (d)    the dependent direct relatives in the ascending  line
                and those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);

           3) "Host Member State" means the Member State to which  a  Union
           citizen moves  in  order  to  exercise  his/her  right  of  free
           movement and residence.

           Article 3

           Beneficiaries

             1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to
                or reside in a Member State other than that  of  which  they
                are a national, and to their family members  as  defined  in
                point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them.

             2.  Without  prejudice  to  any  right  to  free  movement  and
                residence the persons concerned may have in their own right,
                the host Member State shall, in accordance with its national
                legislation,  facilitate  entry  and   residence   for   the
                following persons:

                (a)    any  other  family  members,  irrespective  of  their
                    nationality, not falling under the definition in point 2
                    of Article 2 who, in the country from  which  they  have
                    come, are dependants or members of the household of  the
                    Union citizen having the primary right of residence,  or
                    where  serious  health  grounds  strictly  require   the
                    personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;

                (b)    the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
                    relationship, duly attested.

                The  host  Member  State  shall   undertake   an   extensive
                examination of the personal circumstances and shall  justify
                any denial of entry or residence to these people.

           Article 7

           Right of residence for more than three months

           1.     All Union citizens shall have the right of  residence  on
                the territory of another Member State for a period of longer
                than three months if they:

                 a) are workers or self-employed persons in the host  Member
                    State; or

                 b) have  sufficient  resources  for  themselves  and  their
                    family members not to become  a  burden  on  the  social
                    assistance system of the host Member State during  their
                    period of  residence  and  have  comprehensive  sickness
                    insurance cover in the host Member State; or

                 c) - are enrolled at a  private  or  public  establishment,
                    accredited or financed by the host Member State  on  the
                    basis of its legislation or administrative practice, for
                    the principal purpose of following a  course  of  study,
                    including vocational training; and

                    - have comprehensive sickness  insurance  cover  in  the
                    host Member  State  and  assure  the  relevant  national
                    authority,  by  means  of  a  declaration  or  by   such
                    equivalent means as they  may  choose,  that  they  have
                    sufficient resources for  themselves  and  their  family
                    members not to become a burden on the social  assistance
                    system of the host Member State during their  period  of
                    residence; or

                 d) are family  members  accompanying  or  joining  a  Union
                    citizen who satisfies  the  conditions  referred  to  in
                    points (a), (b) or (c).'

   26. The workings of the  scheme  established  by  the  Directive  can  be
       summarised as follows:

       i. an initial right of residence for three months.

       ii.    An extended right of residence beyond that initial three month
           period if a Union citizen fulfils  the  conditions  set  out  in
           Article 7(1) of the Directive.

       iii.   A Union citizen unable to fulfil the conditions in  Article  7
           will not have an extended right for residence.

       iv.    After a continuous period of five  years  legal  residence,  a
           Union citizen acquires a right of permanent residence,  pursuant
           to Article 16(1).

       v. The right of permanent residence is a valuable right which carried
           with  it a range of benefits including unqualified access to the
           social assistance  system  of  the  Member  State  and  enhanced
           protection against expulsion.

   27. The need to demonstrate an ability to satisfy the criteria in Article
       7 is, in part, a reflection of the purpose of the free movement right
       which is available to those able to show they are  qualified  persons
       to ensure they do not become a burden on the social assistance of the
       host Member State.

   28.  The  adult  appellants  succeeded  on  appeal  in  relation  to   an
       entitlement to remain under EU law.  Judge  Rodgers  summing  up  the
       finding on this issue as follows:

           "28.   Based on  the  evidence  in  the  bundles  and  the  oral
                evidence of the Appellants, I find that;

                 i) The First and Second Appellants are the  primary  carers
                    of [M] who is an EEA national living in the UK

                ii) [M] is aged under 18,

               iii) [M] is self-sufficient and has been between 28/02/07 and
                    28/02/12 and iii) that [M] from March 2012 to date,  and
                    that

                iv) [M] would be unable to remain in the  UK  if  a  derived
                    right of residency was not granted to the Appellants.

           29.    Accordingly, I am therefore satisfied that the First  and
                Second appellants have made out their  case  that  they  are
                entitled to a derived right of  residency  under  Regulation
                15A(2) of the EEA Regulation. I am also satisfied  that  the
                Third appellants has made out her case that she is  entitled
                to a derived right of residency under Regulation 15A(5)."

   29. The concept of a Derived Right of Residence does not  appear  in  the
       Directive as it is a concept that has evolved following a  number  of
       cases that are discussed below. Regulation 15A  was  introduced  into
       the 2006 Regulations from 16 July 2012 in the following terms:

           Derivative right of residence

           15A.   (1)   A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and  who
           satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A)  or  (5)
           of this regulation is entitled to a derivative right  to  reside
           in the United Kingdom for as long as P  satisfies  the  relevant
           criteria.

           (2)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

                (a)    P is the primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national  ("the
                relevant EEA national"); and

                (b)    the relevant EEA national-

                    (i)    is under the age of 18;

                    (ii)   is residing in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                    sufficient person; and

                    (iii)  would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom
                    if P were required to leave.

           (3)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

                (a)    P is the child of an EEA national ("the EEA  national
                parent");

                (b)    P resided in the United Kingdom at a  time  when  the
                EEA national parent was residing in the United Kingdom as  a
                worker; and

                (c)    P is in education in the United Kingdom  and  was  in
                education there at a time when the EEA national  parent  was
                in the United Kingdom.

           (4)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

                (a)    P is the  primary  carer  of  a  person  meeting  the
                criteria in paragraph (3) ("the relevant person"); and

                (b)    the relevant person would be unable to continue to be
                educated in the United Kingdom if P were required to leave.

           (4A)   P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

                (a)    P is the primary carer of  a  British  citizen  ("the
                relevant British citizen");

                (b)    the relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the
                United Kingdom; and

                (c)    the relevant  British  citizen  would  be  unable  to
                reside in the UK or in another EEA State if P were  required
                to leave.

           (5)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

                (a)    P is under the age of 18;

                (b)    P's primary carer is entitled to a  derivative  right
                to reside in the United Kingdom by virtue of  paragraph  (2)
                or (4);

                (c)    P does not have leave to enter,  or  remain  in,  the
                United Kingdom; and

                (d)    requiring P to leave the United Kingdom would prevent
                P's primary carer from residing in the United Kingdom.

           (6)    For the purpose of this regulation-

                (a)    "education" excludes nursery education;

                (b)    "worker" does not include a jobseeker or a person who
                falls to be regarded as a worker  by  virtue  of  regulation
                6(2); and

                (c)    "an exempt person" is a person-

                    (i)    who has a right to reside in the  United  Kingdom
                    as a result of any other provision of these Regulations;

                    (ii)   who has a right of abode in the United Kingdom by
                    virtue of section 2 of the 1971 Act;

                    (iii)  to whom section 8 of the 1971 Act, or  any  order
                    made under subsection (2) of that provision, applies; or

                    (iv)   who has indefinite leave to enter  or  remain  in
                    the United Kingdom.

           (7)    P is to be regarded  as  a  "primary  carer"  of  another
           person if

                (a)    P is a direct relative or a legal  guardian  of  that
                person; and

                (b)    P-

                    (i)    is the person who has primary responsibility  for
                    that person's care; or

                    (ii)    shares  equally  the  responsibility  for   that
                    person's care with one other person who is not an exempt
                    person.

           (7A)   Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer  of  another
           person  by  virtue  of  paragraph  (7)(b)(ii)  the  criteria  in
           paragraphs (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall  be  considered
           on the  basis  that  both  P  and  the  person  with  whom  care
           responsibility is shared would be required to leave  the  United
           Kingdom.

           (7B)   Paragraph (7A) does not apply if  the  person  with  whom
           care responsibility is shared acquired  a  derivative  right  to
           reside in the United Kingdom as  a  result  of  this  regulation
           prior to P assuming equal care responsibility.

           (8)    P will not be regarded as  having  responsibility  for  a
           person's care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis
           of a financial contribution towards that person's care.

           (9)     A  person  who  otherwise  satisfies  the  criteria   in
           paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) will not be entitled  to  a
           derivative right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  where  the
           Secretary of State or an immigration officer has made a decision
           under regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1), 20A(1) or 23A.

   30. The Secretary of State's position  has  always  been  that  the  2006
       Regulations were amended to give effect to the judgments of the Court
       of Justice of the European  Union  (CJEU)  'The  Zambrano  derivative
       rights for parents'. The Court established new rights  to  enter  and
       reside in the UK and restricts  the  terms  on  which  free  movement
       rights can be exercised. Rights to reside in the UK on the  basis  of
       CJEU  judgments  are  said  to  not  stem  directly  from   Directive
       2004/38/EC, therefore they are referred to  as  'derivative  rights'.
       This means that the recognition of this right by the UK is not  equal
       to rights under the Directive.

   31. The Secretary of State's position is, therefore, that this also means
       that those who acquire derivative rights are not eligible to  acquire
       permanent residence in the UK, or to sponsor family members into  the
       UK once they have acquired a right to reside.

The case law


   32. There has been frequent reference to the concept of a Chen parent  in
       this matter. Although an older  case,  and  before  the  decision  in
       Zambrano, Chen and Zhu v  SSHD-  Case  C  200/02  has  an  historical
       context. Catherine Zhu was an Irish national  born  of  16  September
       2000 in Belfast.  Her parents were  Chinese  nationals.   Her  mother
       went to Belfast for the birth to avoid repercussions from China's one
       child policy. Catherine acquired Irish nationality  but  not  British
       nationality.  The  family  had  independent  means  and  applied  for
       residence permits to the UK  which  were  refused.   The  Adjudicator
       referred questions to the ECJ (as the CJEU  was  then  known)  for  a
       preliminary ruling.  The Court found that Catherine's right to reside
       permanently in the UK could not be based on her status as a recipient
       of child care services or  medical  services  provided  privately  in
       return for money which would only entitle her to remain in the UK for
       the periods necessary to receive the treatment.  Mrs Chen was  not  a
       'dependent member'  of  Catherine's  family  within  the  meaning  of
       Directive 73/148 or 90/364  as  the  term  related  unambiguously  to
       material dependency.  However, Mrs  Chen  could  invoke  a  right  of
       residence deriving from that of her daughter  as  any  other  finding
       would be manifestly contrary to the interests of the minor and to the
       requirement of respecting the unity of family life.   "Above  all  it
       would deprive of any useful effect the right of  residence  conferred
       by the Treaty upon Catherine because clearly, since she cannot remain
       alone in the UK, she would otherwise ultimately be  unable  to  enjoy
       the right".  Mrs Chen was entitled to the right  of  residence  under
       Article  12  which  prohibited  discrimination  on  the  grounds   of
       nationality.

   33. This decision has been summarised in the opinion of Advocate  General
       Szpunar in the recent case, C-165/14, as follows:

           "86.   In its judgment in Zhu and Chen, (40) the Court held that
           the situation of a minor child, who is a citizen  of  the  Union
           residing in a Member State other than that of which he or she is
           a national and who has not exercised the right to free  movement
           nevertheless falls within the scope of the provisions of EU  law
           on the free movement of persons (41)  and,  in  particular,  the
           provisions of Directive 90/364, which was repealed and  replaced
           by Directive 2004/38. In its  reasoning,  the  Court  emphasised
           that the situation of a national of a Member State who was  born
           in the host Member State and has not made use of  the  right  to
           freedom of movement  is  not,  for  that  reason  alone,  to  be
           assimilated to a purely internal  situation,  thereby  depriving
           that national of the benefit in the host  Member  State  of  the
           provisions of EU law on freedom of movement  and  of  residence.
           (42) The Court also pointed out that the right to reside in  the
           territory of the Member States provided  for  in  Article  21(1)
           TFEU is granted directly to every citizen  of  the  Union  by  a
           clear and precise provision of the Treaty. (43)

           87.    In short, simply as a national of  a  Member  State,  and
           therefore as a citizen of the Union, Mr Rendn Marn's  daughter
           is entitled to rely upon Article 21(1) TFEU. However,  according
           to the Court, the right of citizens of the Union  to  reside  in
           another Member State is recognised subject  to  the  limitations
           and conditions imposed by the Treaty and by the measures adopted
           to give it effect, (44) those limitations and conditions  having
           to be applied in compliance with the limits imposed  by  EU  law
           and in accordance with the general principles of  that  law,  in
           particular the principle of proportionality."

  In Zambrano v Office of National de l'emploi C-34/09 (ECJ) the Zambrano's
       were Colombian nationals who had been resident in Belgium since 1999.
       They had two children, born in Belgium,  who  both  acquired  Belgian
       nationality by birth. The  ECJ  held  that  the  rights  of  the  two
       Zambrano children, who are EU citizens, comes directly  from  Article
       20 TFEU (citizenship of the Union).  Those rights include  the  right
       to live in Belgium (para 40 and 41); the right of residence for their
       third country national parents (both of them it would seem)  to  live
       in Belgium with them as this is necessary for the children who are EU
       citizens to enjoy their rights as citizens of the Union (para 42  and
       43); and the right to a work permit for the  third  country  national
       parents to support the children (as otherwise they might all have  to
       leave the state on ground of penury) (para 44). The  effect  is  that
       any third country  national  family,  which  includes  at  least  one
       dependent minor child who is an EU citizen, even if that child is the
       citizen of the state where the family lives, is entitled to  rely  on
       the EU child's rights under Article 20 TFEU to a residence  right  in
       that state. There is no clarity on the form of the  residence  right.
       The third country national family members of a dependent minor who is
       an EU citizen, even where that child is a national of the state where
       the family lives, are entitled to work permits. Both these rights for
       third country national family members are based on the principle that
       the dependent minor with EU  citizenship  might  have  to  leave  the
       territory of the Union in order to accompany his or her  parents,  if
       they were not allowed to reside and work to support the  child.   The
       age at which the child ceases to need his/her parents is  yet  to  be
       explored, but may be up to the conclusion of full time  education  if
       the analysis in judgment C-480/08 Teixeira  interpreting  Article  12
       Regulation 1612/68, is applied


  In Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA  Regs)  [2013]  UKUT  89
       (IAC) the Tribunal held that the principles established by the  Court
       of Justice in Zambrano Case C-34-/09 [2011] ECR 1-0000 and subsequent
       cases dealing with Article 20 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
       European Union (TFEU) have potential application even where  the  EEA
       national/Union citizen child of a third-country  national  is  not  a
       national of the host Member State: the test in all cases  is  whether
       the adverse decision would require the child to leave  the  territory
       of the Union.


  The Advocate General's opinion in SSHD  v  NA  Case  Z-115/15  held  that
       Articles 20 TFEU and 21 TFEU precluded a Member State from denying  a
       third country national a right of residence in  its  territory  where
       that national had sole responsibility for  children  who  were  Union
       citizens and who had resided with him since their birth but  who  did
       not possess the nationality of that Member State and had not made use
       of their right to freedom of movement,  in  so  far  as  those  Union
       citizens satisfied the conditions laid down in Directive 2004/38  or,
       failing that, in so far as such a refusal deprived those citizens, in
       practice, of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the  rights
       conferred by virtue of their status as Union citizens. If  there  had
       been a judicial finding that the removal  of  those  concerned  would
       infringe Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU  or
       Article 8(1) of the ECHR, the national court must take  that  finding
       into account.


   34. Limitations have been placed upon the  Zambrano  principle  in  cases
       such as Shirley McCarthy v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       Case C-434/09 and Dereci and others v Bundesministerium  fur  Inneres
       (Case C-256/11) CJEU (Grand Chamber).

   35. In DH (Jamaica) and others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 the  Court  of
       Appeal said that the application of  the  Zambrano  test  required  a
       focus on whether, as a matter of reality, the  EU  citizen  would  be
       obliged to give up residence in the EU if  the  non-EU  national  was
       removed. If the EU citizen,  be  it  wife  or  child,  would  not  in
       practice be compelled to leave  the  country  if  the  non-EU  family
       member were to be refused the right of residence, there  was  nothing
       in the jurisprudence to suggest that EU law would be  engaged  simply
       because their continuing residence was in some  sense  affected,  for
       example, in relation to the quality of life. The right  of  residence
       was a right to reside in the territory not a right to any  particular
       quality of life or particular standard of living and only if that was
       affected to such an extent that  it  was  likely  to  compel  the  EU
       citizen to leave would the principle apply.

   36. In Ayinde and Thinjom (carers- Reg 15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT  00560
       it was held that (i)   The deprivation of the  genuine  enjoyment  of
       the substance of the rights attaching to the status of European Union
       citizens identified in the decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ  C-34/09
       is limited to safeguarding a British citizen's EU rights  as  defined
       in Article 20; (ii) The provisions of reg.  15A  of  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended apply  when  the
       effect of removal of the carer  of  a  British  citizen  renders  the
       British citizen no longer able to reside in the United Kingdom or  in
       another EEA state.  This requires the carer to establish  as  a  fact
       that the British citizen will be forced to leave the territory of the
       Union

   37. In Alokpa v Ministre du Travail,  de  l'Emploi  et  de  l'Immigration
       (Case C-86/12) it was found Articles 20 and 21 TFEU did not  preclude
       a Member State from refusing to allow  a  third-country  national  to
       reside in its territory, where that third-country national  had  sole
       responsibility for her  minor  children  who  were  citizens  of  the
       European Union, and who had resided with her  in  that  Member  State
       since their birth, without possessing the nationality of that  Member
       State and making use of their right to freedom of movement, in so far
       as those Union citizens did not satisfy the  conditions  set  out  in
       Directive 2004/38/EC,  or  such  a  refusal  did  not  deprive  those
       citizens of effective  enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the  rights
       conferred by virtue of the status of European  Union  citizenship,  a
       matter which was to be determined by the referring court.  In  Alokpa
       it was held that, provided a minor EU citizen who had  not  exercised
       right of free movement and was born in a host member state  satisfied
       the conditions of Article 7(1)(b) and either on his  own  or  through
       his parent had sufficient resources and comprehensive sickness cover,
       Article 21 TFEU and the Citizens Directive gave  the  minor  child  a
       right to reside in the host member state and a parent of that  child,
       whether an EU citizen or national of a third  country,  who  was  the
       primary carer, was entitled to reside with  the  child  in  the  host
       member state since otherwise the child's right of residence would  be
       infringed. However, even when Article 21 did not preclude the refusal
       of the right of residence to  the  parent  (when  the  conditions  in
       Article 7 were not met), there would be a right  for  the  parent  to
       reside if the effect of refusal was that the  minor  EU  child  would
       have to leave the territory of the European Union altogether.

   38. In Advocate General Opinion  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department v CS (Case  C-304/2014)  it  was  held  that  it  was,  in
       principle, contrary to Article 20 TFEU for a Member  State  to  expel
       from its territory to a non-member State a third-country national who
       was the parent of a child who was a national of that Member State and
       of whom the parent had sole care and custody, when  to  do  so  would
       deprive the child who is a citizen of the Union of genuine  enjoyment
       of the substance of his or her rights as  a  citizen  of  the  Union.
       Nevertheless, in exceptional  circumstances,  a  Member  State  might
       adopt such a measure, provided that  it  observed  the  principle  of
       proportionality and it was based  on  the  personal  conduct  of  the
       foreign  national,  which  constituted   a   genuine,   present   and
       sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of   the   fundamental
       interests of society, and  it  was  based  on  an  imperative  reason
       relating to public security.

   39. The parties disagree about the application of  the  decision  in  the
       case of Bee  and  Another  (permanent/derived  rights  of  Residence)
       [2013] UKUT 0083. This case was heard  by  a  panel  composed  of  Mr
       Justice Blake and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.  In  relation
       to the issue of entitlement to a right of permanent  residence  by  a
       Chen parent the panel found:

                  "The position of the appellants

                  33.  Chapter IV of Directive  2004/38/EC  deals  with  the
                  right of permanent residence. Article 16(2) states:

                  2. Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family members who  are
                  not nationals of a Member State who have  legally  resided
                  with the Union citizen in the  host  Member  State  for  a
                  continuous period of five years.

                  The appellants have resided lawfully  for  at  least  five
                  years because they have been granted leave  for  at  least
                  that period. However, the definition of  "family  members"
                  in Article 2 (2) (d) refers to:

                  "the dependant direct relatives in the ascending line..."

                  34. This was considered in Chen in relation to the earlier
                  Directive 90/364:

                  "42 Article 1(2)(b) of Directive 90/364, which  guarantees
                  'dependent' relatives in the ascending line of the  holder
                  of the right of residence the right to install  themselves
                  with the holder of the right of residence,  regardless  of
                  their nationality, cannot confer a right of residence on a
                  national of a non-member country in Mrs. Chen's  situation
                  either by reason of the emotional bonds between mother and
                  child or on the ground that the mother's  right  to  enter
                  and reside in the  United  Kingdom  is  dependent  on  her
                  child's right of residence.


                  43 According to the case-law of the Court, the  status  of
                  'dependent' member of the family of a holder of a right of
                  residence  is  the   result   of   a   factual   situation
                  characterised by the fact that material  support  for  the
                  family member is provided by the holder of  the  right  of
                  residence (see, to that effect, in relation to Article  10
                  of Regulation No 1612/68, Case  316/85  Lebon  [1987]  ECR
                  2811, paragraphs 20 to 22).



                  44 In circumstances such as those of the main proceedings,
                  the position is exactly the opposite in that the holder of
                  the right of residence is dependent on the national  of  a
                  non-member  country  who  is  her  carer  and  wishes   to
                  accompany her. In those circumstances,  Mrs.  Chen  cannot
                  claim to be a 'dependent' relative  of  Catherine  in  the
                  ascending line within the meaning of Directive 90/364 with
                  a view to having the benefit of a right  of  residence  in
                  the United Kingdom."


                  35. It is clear from this  that  the  appellants  are  not
                  their  children's  dependants.  As  in  Chen  the  factual
                  situation is exactly the opposite. Consequently,  they  do
                  not satisfy the  definition  of  "family  member"  and  so
                  cannot benefit from the right to  permanent  residence  in
                  Article 16(2).


                  36. Mr. Cox has been unable to refer us to  any  provision
                  in the Directive or Treaty which would confer the right of
                  permanent   residency   on   the   appellants    in    the
                  circumstances.

                  37. In Chen the  ECJ  did  not  find  the  parents  had  a
                  permanent right to reside. Paragraph 45 states "the  carer
                  must be in a position to reside with the child in the host
                  Member State for the  duration  of  such  residence".  The
                  Court did not say that the residence must be permanent.

                  38. The respondent has reflected this in the  drafting  of
                  the 2012 amendment  to  the  Regulation  15  of  the  2006
                  Regulations, dealing with permanent rights of residence.

                  39. The new 15(1A) states:

                  "Residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  result  of  a
                  derivative  right  of  residence   does   not   constitute
                  residence for the purpose of this regulation".

                  This lack of a permanent right is further reflected in the
                  new 15A which provides for a derivative right of residence
                  but only for so long as the person satisfies the criteria.
                  In the case of self sufficiency it can only  relate  to  a
                  person under the age of 18 who would be unable  to  remain
                  in the UK if the carer had to leave.

                  40. The notion of a derivative right only  exists  for  so
                  long as  there  is  a  need  has  been  reflected  in  the
                  provisions in relation to  EU  rights  to  education.  The
                  Court of Justice in its judgment of 23  February  2010  in
                  Case 480/08 Maria Teixeira v London Borough of Lambeth and
                  the SSHD considered  the  impact  of  the  child's  having
                  reached the age of  majority  on  the  parent's  right  of
                  residence as the person who is the child's primary  carer.
                  The Court stated that the right of residence of the parent
                  who is the primary carer for a child of a migrant  worker,
                  where that child is in education in that State, ends  when
                  the child reaches the age of majority  'unless  the  child
                  continues to need the presence and care of that parent  in
                  order to be  able  to  pursue  and  complete  his  or  her
                  education'.

                  41. There are other indications in the  case  law  of  the
                  Court of Justice that a right of permanent residence  that
                  is not expressly provided for in the Directives that  give
                  effect to Treaty rights is not to be implied. In the  case
                  of C- 83/11 Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
                  Islam and others [2012] 5 September the Court  of  Justice
                  indicated that in the absence  of  express  words  in  the
                  Directive the subsequent residence rights of "other family
                  members" who had been admitted as such under Article 3  of
                  the Citizen's Directive fell outside the Directive.

                  42. Since the hearing of this appeal, Advocate General Bot
                  has delivered her opinion on a reference  from  the  Upper
                  Tribunal in case C 529/11 Alarape v Secretary of State for
                  the Home Department 15 January  2013.  She  has  concluded
                  that Article 16 of the Citizens Directive does not  afford
                  a right of permanent residence to a non-national parent of
                  a EU national child who was receiving education in a  host
                  state, although both had rights to reside  under  European
                  law to  give  effect  to  the  child's  right  to  receive
                  education. She distinguished between rights  of  residence
                  afforded under national law  where  the  subject  in  fact
                  complied with the provisions of EU law and those  who  did
                  not. If the Court of Justice adopts a  similar  conclusion
                  that further suggests that these appellants have  no  such
                  rights.

                  43. We note that we are not asked to consider whether  the
                  condition of residence prohibiting either  appellant  from
                  taking employment is lawful. Nor do we  have  to  consider
                  whether the appellants should at some point in the  future
                  be granted permanent residence  as  a  matter  of  general
                  discretion and or human rights law. Although, the judge at
                  [26] referred  to  the  refusal  of  a  visa  as  being  a
                  disproportionate interference with human rights, we  think
                  that this was  an  unfortunate  slip.  The  case  was  not
                  concerned  with  refusal  of  a  visa  but  the  grant  of
                  permanent residence; there  was  no  free  standing  human
                  rights point before the judge as no  immigration  decision
                  had  been  made  under  s.82  NIAA  as  noted  above;   no
                  submissions had been advanced to the judge  that  the  EEA
                  decision was in breach of human rights and no reasons were
                  given by the judge for the decision. Human rights are  not
                  an issue for determination before us.  We  note  that  the
                  applicants will have completed 10 years  lawful  residence
                  in the United  Kingdom.  If  their  children  are  granted
                  permanent residence and  still  require  the  presence  of
                  their parents to give effect to their rights of residence,
                  this may well justify the grant of permanent residence  or
                  indefinite leave to remain under national law.

                  44. However, this does not mean that these appellants  had
                  the right of permanent residence under the  terms  of  the
                  Citizens Directive or other provisions of EU law which  is
                  what the judge determined below.

                  Conclusion.

                  45. We find that Immigration  Judge  Fox  was  correct  in
                  finding that there was an appealable decision  giving  the
                  Tribunal jurisdiction.

                  46. We find he materially erred in law in concluding  that
                  the appellants were  entitled  to  a  permanent  right  of
                  residence on the basis claimed and we  conclude  that  the
                  appellants' derivative rights do not  confer  a  permanent
                  right of residence.

                  47. We accordingly re-make this appeal by dismissing it.

   40. Ms Asanovic submits this decision pre-dates three relevant  decisions
       of the CJEU which are identified  as  C-529/11  Alarape  and  Anor  v
       Secretary of State of the Home Department [2014] All ER (EC) 470,  (8
       May 2013), C-456/12 O &B [2014] QB 1163 decided on the 12 March  2014
       and C-202/13 and Sean McCarthy and others v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department [2014] ECR 1-nry (18 December 2014).

   41. The case of  Alarape  arose  following  a  referral  from  the  Upper
       Tribunal to the CJEU for a preliminary ruling on the question of  the
       interpretation of article 12 of Regulation 1612/68 and article 16  of
       Directive 2004/38.  Article 16 is the provision governing the ability
       to acquire permanent residence and is in the following terms:

           'Article 16

           General rule for Union citizens and their family members

           1. Union citizens who have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
           period of five years in the host Member  State  shall  have  the
           right of permanent residence there.  This  right  shall  not  be
           subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.

           2. Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family members  who  are  not
           nationals of a Member State and have legally  resided  with  the
           Union citizen in the host Member State for a  continuous  period
           of five years.

           3. Continuity of residence shall not be  affected  by  temporary
           absences not exceeding a total of  six  months  a  year,  or  by
           absences of a longer duration for compulsory  military  service,
           or by one absence of a maximum of twelve consecutive months  for
           important reasons such  as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,  serious
           illness, study or vocational training, or a posting  in  another
           Member State or a third country.

           4. Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be lost
           only through absence from the host Member  State  for  a  period
           exceeding two consecutive years.'

   42. The Court held that the parent of a child who had attained the age of
       majority and who had obtained access to education  on  the  basis  of
       article 12 of Council Regulation (EEC)  No  1612/68  (as  amended  by
       Parliament and Council Directive 2004/38/EC) could continue to have a
       derived right of residence under that article if the  child  remained
       in need of the presence and care of that parent in order to  be  able
       to continue and to complete his or her education, which was  for  the
       referring court to assess, taking into account all the  circumstances
       of the case before it. Periods of residence in a  host  member  state
       which were completed by family members of a Union  citizen  who  were
       not nationals of a member state solely on the basis of article 12  of
       Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 could not be taken into consideration for
       the purposes of acquisition by those family members  of  a  right  of
       permanent residence.

   43. Ms Smyth has  drawn  the  Tribunals  attention  to  the  fact  it  is
       inconsistent with the nature of  a  Chen  derivative  right  that  it
       should give rise to a right of permanent  residence.  The  derivative
       right to reside only subsists for as long as necessary to give useful
       effect to the child's right of  residence, in this  case,  until  the
       age of majority. Reference is made to the opinion of Advocate General
       Bot in Alarape at [30-31] in the following terms:

           "30.   The approach adopted by the court in the Teixeria case is
           therefore applicable to the child as soon as he reaches the  age
           of majority.  Although the fact of attaining his majority has no
           impact on the child's original rights, the converse  rule,  laid
           down in that decision in respect of the  derived  right  of  the
           parent who is the primary carer of the chid, is that  the  right
           of residence is lost, as the extension of that right beyond  the
           age of majority of the child stands as an exception.  That  rule
           follows from a presumption that the adult child  is  capable  of
           caring for himself, but it is a  rebuttable  presumption,  since
           evidence to the contrary  showing  the  child  continues  to  be
           dependent on his parents may be adduced.

           31.    The choice of words used by the court seems to me  to  be
           sufficiently clear.  It is apparent that the right of  residence
           of the parent of the  child  who  is  pursuing  his  studies  is
           conceived as a conditional  right  having  a  specific  purpose,
           which can be extended beyond the  child's  majority  only  where
           such extension appears to be essential in order for the child to
           be able to complete his studies. The maintenance of  that  right
           is therefore the outcome of a test of necessity  to  be  carried
           out by the national authorities."

   44. At [34] it is stated:

           "34.   Determining whether an  adult  child  does  or  does  not
           continue to need the presence and care of his parents  in  order
           to pursue and complete his studies is to my mind a  question  of
           fact that falls to be resolved by the  national  courts  in  the
           light of all the circumstances of a specific to each case."

   45. It was not found that after five years the parents with  the  benefit
       of a derived right are entitled to apply for permanent residence  and
       the reference to domestic law indicates that the Advocate General was
       clearly of the opinion that the  solution  beyond  majority  may  lie
       outside the free movement provision of European law. Whether  such  a
       right is granted is a question of fact in each case.

   46. The judgment of the Court on the question of  the  acquisition  of  a
       right of permanent residence, 'the fifth question' is as follows:

           "The fifth question

           32.    By its fifth question,  the  referring  court  seeks,  in
           essence, to ascertain whether periods of  residence  in  a  host
           Member State which are completed by family members  of  a  Union
           citizen who are not nationals of a Member State  solely  on  the
           basis  of  Article  12  of  Regulation  No  1612/68,  where  the
           conditions  of  entitlement  to  a  right  of  residence   under
           Directive  2004/38  are  not  satisfied,  may  be   taken   into
           consideration for the purpose of the acquisition by those family
           members of a right of permanent residence under that directive.

           33.    In that  regard,  it  must  be  recalled  that  Directive
           2004/38 refers to two different situations in which  the  family
           members of a Union citizen who are not  nationals  of  a  Member
           State may acquire a right  of  permanent  residence  under  that
           directive. First, under Article 16(2) of that  directive,  those
           family members are also  entitled  to  the  right  of  permanent
           residence referred to in Article  16(1)  thereof  if  they  have
           legally resided with that Union citizen in the host Member State
           for a continuous period  of  five  years.  Article  17  of  that
           directive provides, subject to  certain  conditions,  exemptions
           for workers who are no longer working in the host  Member  State
           and  their  family  members.  Secondly,  under  Article  18   of
           Directive 2004/38, the family members of a Union citizen to whom
           Articles 12(2) and 13(2) of that directive  apply,  who  satisfy
           the conditions laid down in those provisions, are to  acquire  a
           right of permanent residence after residing legally for a period
           of five consecutive years in the host Member State.

           34.    If Article 16(2) of Directive 2004/38 is to apply, it  is
           clear that the acquisition of a right of permanent residence  by
           family members of a Union citizen who are  not  nationals  of  a
           Member State is dependent, in  any  event,  on  the  fact  that,
           first, the Union citizen himself satisfies the  conditions  laid
           down in Article 16(1) of that  directive  and,  secondly,  those
           family members have resided with him for the period in question.

           35.    As regards the conditions which must be satisfied by  the
           Union citizen, it must be observed that, in relation to  Article
           16(1) of  Directive  2004/38,  the  Court  has  held,  after  an
           examination of the aims of that directive and  its  overall  and
           specific context, that the concept of legal residence implied by
           the words 'have resided legally' in Article 16(1)  of  Directive
           2004/38 should be construed as meaning  a  period  of  residence
           which complies with the conditions laid down in that  directive,
           in particular  those  set  out  in  Article  7(1)  thereof,  and
           consequently a period of residence which complies with  the  law
           of a Member State but does not satisfy the conditions laid  down
           in Article 7(1) of  Directive  2004/38  cannot  be  regarded  as
           'legal' residence within the meaning of  Article  16(1)  (Joined
           Cases C-424/10 and C-425/10 Ziolkowski and Szeja [2011]  ECR  I-
           14035, paragraphs 46 and 47).

           36.    As regards  the  acquisition  of  a  right  of  permanent
           residence by the family members of a Union citizen who  are  not
           nationals of a  Member  State,  the  requirement,  described  in
           paragraph 34 of this judgment, of residence with that citizen in
           the host Member State for  the  period  concerned  implies  that
           those family members necessarily and concurrently have  a  right
           of residence under Article 7(2) of Directive 2004/38, as  family
           members accompanying or joining that citizen.

           37.    It follows that, for the purposes  of  acquisition  of  a
           right of permanent  residence  by  family  members  of  a  Union
           citizen who are not nationals of a Member  State  under  Article
           16(2) of Directive 2004/38, only the  periods  of  residence  of
           those family members which satisfy the condition  laid  down  in
           Article 7(2) of that directive may be taken into consideration.

           38.    Likewise, by referring to Articles  12(2)  and  13(2)  of
           Directive 2004/38, Article 18  of  that  directive  defines  the
           right of permanent residence which it establishes, since, first,
           that right of residence is available only to the family  members
           of a Union citizen who are not nationals of a Member  State  and
           whose right of residence is retained in the event of  the  death
           of that citizen  or  in  the  event  of  divorce,  annulment  of
           marriage  or  termination  of  a  registered  partnership   and,
           secondly, that right of residence is subject  to  the  condition
           that the persons concerned can  themselves  demonstrate,  before
           acquiring a right of permanent residence, that they satisfy  the
           same conditions as those specified in Article 7(1)(a),(b) or (d)
           of Directive 2004/38.

           39.    Consequently, only those periods of residence  satisfying
           the conditions laid down in Directive 2004/38 may be taken  into
           consideration for the purposes  of  acquisition  by  the  family
           members of a Union citizen who are not  nationals  of  a  Member
           State of a right of permanent residence under that directive.

           40.    The fact that the family member of a Union citizen who is
           not a national of a Member State has resided in a  Member  State
           solely on the basis of  Article  12  of  Regulation  No  1612/68
           cannot therefore have any effect on the acquisition of  a  right
           of permanent residence under Directive 2004/38.

           41.    That conclusion cannot be called  into  question  by  the
           finding in the judgment of  7  October  2010  in  Case  C-162/09
           Lassal [2010] ECR I-9217 that continuous periods of five  years'
           residence,  completed  before  the  date  of  transposition   of
           Directive 2004/38 in the Member State concerned,  in  accordance
           with earlier European Union law instruments, must be taken  into
           consideration for the purposes of  acquisition  of  a  right  of
           permanent residence under Article 16(1) of that directive.

           42.    First, as is stated  in  paragraphs  33  to  39  of  this
           judgment, only periods of residence which satisfy the conditions
           laid down by Directive 2004/38 may be taken  into  consideration
           for the purposes of the acquisition by the family members  of  a
           Union citizen who are not nationals of a Member State of a right
           of permanent residence under that directive.

           43.    Secondly, it must be observed that,  in  the  case  which
           gave rise to the  Lassal  judgment,  the  question  whether  the
           person concerned was a 'worker' within the meaning  of  European
           Union law and, consequently, whether she satisfied the condition
           laid down in Article 7(1)(a) of  Directive  2004/38  was  not  a
           matter on which there was any argument.

           44.     It  is  admittedly  true  that,  since  the  periods  of
           residence of  the  person  concerned  in  the  Member  State  in
           question largely preceded Directive 2004/38, those periods could
           not have been completed other than 'in accordance  with  earlier
           European Union law instruments'. However, that wording in Lassal
           must be understood in the context of the questions  put  by  the
           referring court, which concerned not the substantive  conditions
           for legal residence within  the  meaning  of  Article  16(1)  of
           Directive 2004/38, but the treatment  of  periods  of  residence
           satisfying  those  conditions  completed  before  the  date   of
           transposition of that directive in that Member State.

           45.    On the other hand, the concept of legal residence implied
           by  the  words  'have  resided  legally'  in  Article  16(1)  of
           Directive 2004/38 was  analysed  for  the  first  time  only  in
           Ziolkowski and Szeja.

           46.    Further, it must be recalled that, on the one  hand,  the
           aim of Directive 2004/38 is to leave behind  a  sector-by-sector
           piecemeal approach to the  right  of  freedom  of  movement  and
           residence in order to facilitate the exercise of that  right  by
           providing a single legislative act which  codifies  and  revises
           the instruments  of  European  Union  law  which  preceded  that
           directive and that, on the other hand, that directive introduced
           a gradual system as regards the right of residence in  the  host
           Member State which, while reproducing, in  essence,  the  stages
           and conditions set out in the various  instruments  of  European
           Union law and case-law preceding that directive,  culminates  in
           the right of permanent  residence  (see  Ziolkowski  and  Szeja,
           paragraphs 37 and 38).

           47.    Accordingly, the phrase 'earlier [than Directive 2004/38]
           European Union law instruments', used in paragraph 40 of Lassal,
           must be understood as referring to the  instruments  which  that
           directive codified, revised and repealed and  not  those  which,
           like Article 12 of Regulation No  1612/68,  were  unaffected  by
           that directive.

           48.    In the light of the foregoing, the answer  to  the  fifth
           question is that periods of residence in  a  host  Member  State
           which are completed by family members of a Union citizen who are
           not nationals of a Member State solely on the basis  of  Article
           12 of Regulation No 1612/68, where the conditions laid down  for
           entitlement to a right of residence under Directive 2004/38  are
           not satisfied, may not  be  taken  into  consideration  for  the
           purposes of acquisition by those family members of  a  right  of
           permanent residence under that directive."

   47. I find this does not arguably render the decision in Bee unsafe.

   48. The second case of O & B, case number C-456/12 is  a  request  for  a
       preliminary ruling under Article 267 TFEU from  the  Raad  van  State
       (Netherlands) concerning the interpretation of  Directive  2004/38/EC
       on the right of citizens of the Union and  their  family  members  to
       move and reside freely within the territory of the Member States.

   49. The Court identify the issues arising in the first, second and  third
       question they were asked as :

           "Consideration of the questions referred

           The first, second and third questions

           33.    By its first, second and third questions, which should be
           examined together, the referring court asks, in essence, whether
           Directive 2004/38 and Article 21(1) TFEU must be interpreted  as
           precluding a Member State from refusing a right of residence  to
           a third-country national who is the family  member  of  a  Union
           citizen holding the nationality of that Member State,  following
           the  return  of  that  citizen  to   that   Member   State,   in
           circumstances  where  that  citizen,  before  his  return,   had
           exercised his right of freedom of movement under  Article  21(1)
           TFEU by residing in another Member State with the family  member
           in question, solely by virtue of his being a Union citizen, and,
           if that question is answered in the affirmative,  what  are  the
           conditions under which such a right of residence is granted?"

   50. This distinguished the case from that  under  consideration  in  this
       appeal as in B & O  it  was  not  disputed  that  the  third  country
       national was able to satisfy the definition of  a  family  member  as
       that term is defined in the Directive. The  finding:  "Article  21(1)
       TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that where a  Union  citizen  has
       created or strengthened a family life with a  third-country  national
       during genuine residence, pursuant to  and  in  conformity  with  the
       conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) and Article 16(1) and  (2)
       of Directive 2004/38/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council
       of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens  of  the  Union  and  their
       family members to move and reside freely within the territory of  the
       Member States amending Regulation  (EEC)  No  1612/68  and  repealing
       Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC, 72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC,
       75/35/EEC, 90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC, in  a  Member  State
       other than that of which he is a national,  the  provisions  of  that
       directive apply by analogy where that Union citizen returns, with the
       family member in question, to his Member State of origin.  Therefore,
       the conditions for granting a derived right of residence to a  third-
       country national who is a family member of that Union citizen, in the
       latter's Member State of origin, should not, in  principle,  be  more
       strict than those provided for by that directive for the grant  of  a
       derived right of residence to  a  third-country  national  who  is  a
       family member of a Union citizen  who  has  exercised  his  right  of
       freedom of movement by becoming established in a Member  State  other
       than the Member State of which he is a national" shows the  different
       issues  under  consideration.  This  case   does   not   assist   the
       appellants'.

   51. The third case, that of McCarty - C-202/13, arises from a referral by
       the High Court. The operative part of the judgment reads:

           "... both Article 35 of Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European
           Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the  right  of
           citizens of the Union and  their  family  members  to  move  and
           reside freely within the territory of the Member States amending
           Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing Directives 64/221/EEC,
           68/360/EEC,  72/194/EEC,   73/148/EEC,   75/34/EEC,   75/35/EEC,
           90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC  and  93/96/EEC  and  Article  1  of  the
           Protocol (No 20)  on  the  application  of  certain  aspects  of
           Article 26 of the Treaty on  the  Functioning  of  the  European
           Union to the United Kingdom and to Ireland must  be  interpreted
           as not permitting a Member State to require, in  pursuit  of  an
           objective of general prevention, family members of a citizen  of
           the European Union who are not nationals of a Member  State  and
           who hold a valid residence card,  issued  under  Article  10  of
           Directive 2004/38 by the authorities of another Member State, to
           be in possession, pursuant to national law, of an entry  permit,
           such as the EEA (European Economic Area) family permit, in order
           to be able to enter its territory."

   52. This is, again considering a different  issue  involving  a  case  in
       which Mr McCarthy and his  wife  fell  within  Article  3(1)  of  the
       Directive as he had exercised his right of free movement to Spain:

           35.    Indeed, Article 3(1)  of  Directive  2004/38  defines  as
           'beneficiaries' of the rights conferred by  the  directive  'all
           Union citizens who move to or reside in  a  Member  State  other
           than that of which they are a national,  and  ...  their  family
           members as defined in point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join
           them'.

           36.    Thus, the Court has held that not all family members of a
           Union citizen who are not nationals of  a  Member  State  derive
           rights of entry into  and  residence  in  a  Member  State  from
           Directive 2004/38, but only those who are family members, within
           the meaning of point 2 of Article 2  of  that  directive,  of  a
           Union citizen who has exercised his right of freedom of movement
           by becoming established in a Member State other than the  Member
           State of which he is a national (judgments in Metock and Others,
           EU:C:2008:449,  paragraph  73;  Dereci  and  Others,   C-256/11,
           EU:C:2011:734,  paragraph  56;  Iida,  C-40/11,   EU:C:2012:691,
           paragraph 51; and O. and B., EU:C:2014:135, paragraph 39).

           37.    In the case  in  point,  it  is  common  ground  that  Mr
           McCarthy has exercised his  right  of  freedom  of  movement  by
           becoming established  in  Spain.  Furthermore,  it  is  likewise
           common ground that his wife, Ms McCarthy Rodriguez,  resides  in
           that Member State with him and the child born of their union and
           that she is in possession of a valid residence  card  issued  by
           the Spanish authorities under Article 10  of  Directive  2004/38
           that permits her to reside lawfully in Spanish territory.

           38.    It follows that Mr McCarthy and Ms McCarthy Rodriguez are
           'beneficiaries' of that directive, within the meaning of Article
           3(1) thereof.

   53. Ms Smyth refers in her skeleton to the finding at [36] in  which  the
       CJEU confirms that the wording of the Directive was definitive so far
       as "family members" within Article 2(2) are concerned.

   54. After the hearing Wilsons Solicitors provided a copy of  the  opinion
       of Advocate General Wathelet in the proceeding  referred  to  it  the
       witness statement of Ana Gonzalez and referred to above as  Secretary
       of state for the Home Department v NA (Pakistan).  The  Tribunal  has
       not sought addition submission from Ms Smyth in response as the  same
       are not required to ascertain the respondent's position.

   55. The facts involved a lady from Pakistan known  only  as  NA  who  had
       married a German national in 2003 and moved to the UK  in  2004.  The
       German national was a worker or was self-employed during his time  in
       the UK. NA was a victim of domestic  violence.  In  2006  the  German
       national left the  marital  home  and  returned  to  Germany  shortly
       afterwards. The couple had two daughters who were born in the  UK  in
       2005 and 2007 and who had German nationality. They attended school in
       the UK from 2009 and 2010 respectively. The German national purported
       to divorce NA by means of a Talaq divorce in 2007. In 2008  NA  began
       divorce proceedings in the UK and divorce was finalised in 2009.

   56. The accompanying letter refers to paragraphs  39-47  of  the  opinion
       which are in the following terms:

           "39.   In that regard, it should be recalled that, in  order  to
           determine the scope of a  provision  of  EU  law,  its  wording,
           context and objectives must all be taken into account  (judgment
           of 10 October 2013, Spedition Welter,  C-306/12,  EU:C:2013:650,
           paragraph 17).

           40.    It is apparent, first, from the wording employed both  in
           the heading and in  the  text  of  Article  13(2)  of  Directive
           2004/38, that provision is made for the right of  residence,  to
           which, on the basis of that provision, a Union citizen's  family
           members who do not have the nationality of a  Member  State  are
           entitled, to be retained, in particular, in the event of divorce
           and that, as a consequence, when the  conditions  laid  down  in
           that provision are satisfied, divorce does not entail  the  loss
           of such a right of residence.

           41.    Second, as regards the context of that provision, Article
           13(2) of Directive 2004/38 constitutes  a  derogation  from  the
           principle that Directive 2004/38 confers rights  of  entry  into
           and residence  in  a  Member  State  not  on  all  third-country
           nationals, but solely on those who are a 'family member', within
           the meaning of point 2 of Article 2  of  that  directive,  of  a
           Union citizen who has exercised his right of freedom of movement
           by settling in a Member State other than  the  Member  State  of
           which he is a national, that principle being established by  the
           Court's settled case-law (see, inter alia, judgment of  16  July
           2015, Singh and Others, C-218/14, EU:C:2015:476, paragraph 51).

           42.    Article 13(2) of Directive 2004/38 covers the exceptional
           cases where divorce does not mean  the  loss  of  the  right  of
           residence  of  the  third-country  nationals  concerned,   under
           Directive 2004/38, when, following their divorce,  those  third-
           country nationals no longer satisfy the conditions laid down  in
           Article 7(2) of that directive, and in particular, the condition
           of being a 'family  member'  of  a  Union  citizen,  within  the
           meaning of Article 2(2)(a) of that directive.

           43.    It must be added, first, that  Article  12  of  Directive
           2004/38, which covers specifically the retention of the right of
           residence of family  members  in  the  event  of  the  death  or
           departure of the Union  citizen,  provides  that  the  right  of
           residence of his family members who do not have the  nationality
           of a Member State is to be retained only in  the  event  of  the
           death of the Union citizen, and not in the event of his  or  her
           departure from the host Member State.

           44.    Second, it is therefore clear that, when  that  directive
           was adopted, the EU legislature declined to make  provision,  in
           the event of the departure from the host  Member  State  of  the
           Union citizen, for specific safeguards that would be  available,
           on account of, inter alia, particularly difficult situations, to
           his family members who do not have the nationality of  a  Member
           State, that would be comparable to those provided for in Article
           13(2)(c) of Directive 2004/38.

           45.    Last, as regards the aims of Article 13(2)  of  Directive
           2004/38, that provision corresponds to the objective, stated  in
           recital 15 in the preamble of that directive, of providing legal
           safeguards for family members in the event of the death  of  the
           Union citizen, divorce, annulment of marriage or termination  of
           a registered partnership, taking measures  in  that  respect  to
           ensure  that  in  such  circumstances  family  members   already
           residing within the territory of the host  Member  State  retain
           their right of residence exclusively on a personal basis.

           46.    In that regard,  it  is  apparent  from  the  history  of
           Directive 2004/38 and, more particularly, from  the  explanatory
           memorandum of the Proposal for a European Parliament and Council
           Directive on the right of citizens of the Union and their family
           members to move and reside freely within the  territory  of  the
           Member States (COM/2001/0257 (final)), that, under EU law  prior
           to Directive 2004/38, the divorced spouse could be  deprived  of
           the right of residence in the host Member State.

           47.    In that context, that proposal  for  a  directive  states
           that the purpose of the envisaged provision, now  Article  13(2)
           of Directive 2004/38, was to offer certain legal  safeguards  to
           third-country nationals whose right of residence  was  dependent
           on a family relationship by marriage and who could therefore  be
           open to blackmail accompanied by threats of  divorce,  and  that
           safeguards were necessary only in the event  of  final  divorce,
           since, in the  event  of  de  facto  separation,  the  right  of
           residence of a spouse who is a third-country national is not  at
           all affected."

   57. It is further submitted  by  the  appellants'  that  the  Opinion  of
       Advocate General Wathelet is in addition to the  European  Commission
       being of the view that the  Directive  2004/38  is  applicable  to  a
       situation of a Chen parent given that the right to reside is  derived
       from the Directive. Reference is also made  to  the  opinion  of  the
       Advocate General in C-165/14 Alfredo Rendon  Matin  v  Admonistracion
       del Estado although the issue in this case was a consideration of the
       question whether national legislation which excludes the  possibility
       of granting a residence permit to the  parent  of  a  European  Union
       citizen who is a child and dependent  on  that  parent,  because  the
       parent has a criminal record in the country in which the  request  is
       made, is compatible with Article 20 of the Treaty on the  Functioning
       of the European Union, interpreted in the light of the  decisions  of
       19 October 2004 (Case C-200/02 Zhu-Chen) 1 and 8 March 2011 (Case  C-
       34/09 Ruiz Zambrano), even if this results  in  the  removal  of  the
       child from the territory of the European Union, as that child has  to
       follow the parent?

   58. In relation to C-165/14 the introduction to the opinion is important.
       It states:

           "1.    The questions raised by  the  Tribunal  Supremo  (Supreme
           Court, Spain) and the Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
           Chamber)  London  (United  Kingdom)  concern,  essentially,  the
           interpretation  of  Article  20  TFEU  and  the  scope  of  that
           provision, either in the light of the judgments in Zhu and  Chen
           (C-200/02,   EU:C:2004:639)   and   Ruiz   Zambrano    (C-34/09,
           EU:C:2011:124), or in the light of the judgment in Ruiz Zambrano
           (C-34/09, EU:C:2011:124) alone. The factual background to  these
           cases involves third-country nationals who have been  refused  a
           residence permit by, or against whom an expulsion order has been
           made, by  the  Member  State  in  which  their  minor  dependent
           children reside and of which those  children,  citizens  of  the
           Union,  for  whom  they  are  responsible,  are  nationals.  The
           decisions just mentioned could potentially deprive the  children
           in question of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of  the
           rights conferred by virtue of their status as  citizens  of  the
           Union. The risk of that happening is the result of the  adoption
           of national measures against the parents, who are  third-country
           nationals, on grounds of their criminal records.

           2. The present requests for a preliminary ruling will  therefore
           require the  Court  to  consider,  first  of  all,  whether  the
           situations at issue in the  main  proceedings  fall  within  the
           scope  of  EU  law.  If  that  question  is  answered   in   the
           affirmative, the Court will then have to determine what effect a
           criminal record might have on the recognition of a derived right
           of residence arising under Directive  2004/38/EC.  (2)  Finally,
           the Court will have an opportunity to rule on the possibility of
           imposing limitations on the right of residence flowing  directly
           from Article 20 TFEU and, therefore, on the implications of  the
           terms 'public order' and 'public security' in situations such as
           those at issue in the cases in the main proceedings."

   59. The opinion contains interim conclusions as follows:

           "c)    Interim conclusion in Case C-165/14

           105. On the basis of all the foregoing considerations, I propose
           that the Court should rule that Directive 2004/38 applies to the
           situation in which Mr Rendn Marn and his  daughter,  a  Polish
           national, find themselves. Consequently,  Article  21  TFEU  and
           Directive 2004/38 should be interpreted as  precluding  national
           legislation which requires the automatic refusal of a  residence
           permit for a third-country national who is the parent of a minor
           child who is a citizen of the Union  and  a  dependent  of  that
           parent and lives with that parent in the host Member State, when
           that parent has a criminal record.

           4. The right of residence conferred on members of the family  of
           a citizen of the Union in the Member State of which the  citizen
           of the Union is a national: analysis  of  the  situation  of  Mr
           Rendn Marn and his children and the situation of  CS  and  her
           child

           106. In my view, the situation in which Mr Rendn Marn and  his
           daughter, a Polish national, find themselves  falls  within  the
           ambit of Directive 2004/38. However, in case the national  court
           should, when ascertaining whether the conditions  laid  down  in
           that directive have been met, reach  the  conclusion  that  they
           have not, I shall  analyse,  with  reference  to  the  principle
           established in the judgment in Ruiz Zambrano, (59) the situation
           of Mr Rendn Marn and his children together with the  situation
           of CS and her child."

     60. It has not been shown that in reality and/or fact that the  derived
         right fell within the ambit of the Directive.

     61. Two further sets of interim conclusions provide:

           "c)    Interim conclusion in Case C-165/14

           176. It is contrary to Article 20 TFEU, as interpreted  in  the
           light  of  the  judgments  in  Zhu  and  Chen (169)  and  Ruiz
           Zambrano, (170)  for  national  legislation  to  require   the
           automatic refusal of a  residence  permit  for  a  third-country
           national, the parent of minor children who are citizens  of  the
           Union and of whom the parent has sole care and custody,  on  the
           grounds of the parent's criminal record, when the consequence of
           such a refusal is that the  children  will  have  to  leave  the
           territory of the European Union.

           d) Interim conclusion in Case C-304/14

           177. Having regard to the foregoing  considerations,  I  propose
           that the Court's answer should be  that  it  is,  in  principle,
           contrary to Article 20 TFEU for a Member State to expel from its
           territory to a non-member State a third-country national who  is
           the parent of a child who is a national of that Member State and
           of whom the parent has sole care and  custody,  when  to  do  so
           would deprive the child who is a citizen of the Union of genuine
           enjoyment of the substance of his or her rights as a citizen  of
           the Union. Nevertheless, in exceptional circumstances, a  Member
           State may adopt such a measure, provided that it:

                -  observes the principle of proportionality and is based on
                the personal conduct of the  foreign  national,  which  must
                constitute  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests   of
                society, and

                -  is based on  an  imperative  reason  relating  to  public
                security.

           178. It is for the referring court to determine whether that  is
           the position in the case before it."

Discussion


   62. As indicated above, it is the judgements of the CJEU in  the  earlier
       cases which gave rise to the creation of the  concept  of  a  derived
       right of  residence.  There  is  no  provision  for  such  status  in
       Directive 2004/38.

   63. The desire by Chen parents to be entitled to permanent residence is a
       matter that has been raised on a number of occasions all of which, to
       date, have failed. There is no indication of a proposal to change the
       terms of the Directive or to introduce further provisions to bring  a
       person with a derived right of residence within the definition  of  a
       'family member'.

   64. The CJEU has held that 'a  refusal  to  allow  a  parent,  whether  a
       national of a Member State or of a third country, who is the carer of
       a minor child who is a Union citizen to reside with that child in the
       host Member State would deprive the child's right of residence of any
       useful effect, since enjoyment  by  a  young  child  of  a  right  of
       residence necessarily implies  that  the  child  is  entitled  to  be
       accompanied by the person who is his primary  carer  and  accordingly
       that the carer must be in a position to reside with the child in  the
       host Member State for the duration of such  residence'.   The  United
       Kingdom made provision for such a right to be granted  to  the  third
       country national Chen parent by amending  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2006 by the introduction of Regulation 15A
       which provides a right with  a  finite  nature,  during  the  child's
       minority as per the case law.  It is for this reason  that  there  is
       specific provision preventing a person with a derived right  accruing
       a permanent right of residence.

   65. Neither the first nor  second  appellant  has  a  personal  right  to
       permeant residence. This is not a class of case such as may arise  in
       a spousal case on divorce where the person seeking recognition  of  a
       derived right of permanent residence  on  divorce  will  have  had  a
       personal right under the Regulations as a family member  to  live  in
       host state before the break down of the marriage.

   66. It is accepted that the Directive is a  living  instrument  and  that
       even if it does not provide for  a  specific  situation,  it  can  be
       interpreted in accordance with principles of  EU  law  such  as  free
       movement. - see The Aire Centre submissions at paragraph 13.

   67. The child's best interests are satisfied by the grant  of  a  derived
       right as the parents have leave during his or her  minority.  It  has
       not been made out on the facts  that  the  case  is  otherwise.   The
       assertion the needs of the child are better  suited  to  a  permanent
       period of residence is not an issue of EU law but a factual  question
       which has not been established in this matter.

   68. It has not been made out that a grant of a  derived  right,  for  the
       specific purpose and period identified in the case law, denies A3  of
       the right of free movement during the time it exists which is for  at
       least the child's minority. Once a child reaches adulthood and if his
       or her parents are dependent upon them they may  be  able  to  secure
       status in different category  as  dependant  family  members  in  the
       ascending line, under domestic law, or by a continuation of a derived
       rights as discussed in the case law above.

   69.  The  coterminous  argument,  taken  as  meaning  'having  the   same
       boundaries or extent in space, time, or meaning' has been  considered
       but it must be recognised that the status of the parties is  not  the
       same.   The child, A3, is an EEA national and has rights flowing from
       the Treaty and Directive.  The parents, A1 and A2, are third  country
       nationals and have no such rights. They are dependent upon a grant of
       a retained right which is based upon a need for  them  to  remain  to
       meet the needs of their child, A3, to enable the child to be able  to
       exercise rights as an EU citizen.  It has  not  been  made  out  that
       permitting the third country nationals to obtain  a  permanent  right
       under EU law is required for the primary function of  a  grant  of  a
       derived right to be fulfilled.

   70. If it is thought a person with a derived right can  argue  they  have
       the same status as a person entitled by virtue of Article 7, why  did
       the CJEU not say so in  case  law  when  similar  issues  were  being
       considered. The Court recognised the need for a parent to remain in a
       Member State to enable their EU national  child  to  exercise  treaty
       rights under the Directive, but have not found there is a need to  go
       beyond the current provisions, as per Alarape.

   71. In relation to the Charter, Article 8 or a similar distinct right has
       not been raised. When A3  reaches  majority  this  may  be  a  ground
       available as the basis of an application under  domestic  provisions.
       It has not been made out that the Charter can be used  to  circumvent
       the provisions of the Directive.

   72. The assertion by the appellants' that the failure to afford permanent
       residence to the parents of A3 breaches EU law in that (i) it hinders
       the exercise of free movement enjoyed by a citizen of the Union, (ii)
       it violates the right to respect for family life, and (iii)  breaches
       the duty under section 55 Borders, citizenship  and  Immigration  act
       1999 (child's best interests duty), is not made out.

   73. When adopting a purposive approach regarding the  intentions  of  the
       free movement provisions of the Directive, and  considering  how  the
       current working  of  regulation  15A  and  any  similar  scheme  will
       interfere with or restrict a child's free movement rights, it has not
       been shown recognition of a derived right is  not  effective  through
       all the EU as it is right granted under EU law. If the  child  wanted
       to exercise a right of free movement it has not been  made  out  that
       the parents will not have the  right  to  accompany  the  child,  and
       continue to provide care and support on  the  basis  of  the  derived
       right, elsewhere in the EU.

   74. It is accepted that the free movement of persons constitutes  one  of
       the fundamental freedoms of the internal market, which means an  area
       without internal frontiers in which freedom is ensured in  accordance
       with the provisions of the Treaty. It has not been made  out  on  the
       facts or in principle that the prospects for the  continued  exercise
       of those rights are reduced if the immigration status of A1 and A2 is
       maintained on a temporary basis only and at a time when the status of
       A3 is of a permeant nature

   75. No definitive binding case law or legal provision have been  produced
       showing that a person entitled to a derived  right  of  residence  is
       entitled to be recognised as a 'family member'. To find otherwise  is
       to extend or rewrite the definition of the same found in Art 2(2)  of
       the Directive.

   76. No definitive binding case law or legal provisions have been produced
       to show that reg 15A of the 2006 Regulations is incompatible with  EU
       law. The concept of a derived right is compatible for those unable to
       satisfy the definition of a person entitled to remain  in  their  own
       right under the Directive, but who have a  right  to  remain  on  the
       basis of a breakdown of a marriage  based  upon  a  preceding  lawful
       right to remain or a need to remain to prevent  an  EU  national  not
       being able to exercise rights conferred as a citizen of the  EU  such
       as the right of free movement.

   77. No definitive binding case law or legal provisions have been provided
       to show that EU law requires a Chen parent to be enable to acquire  a
       right of permanent residence after  five  years  to  enable  them  to
       fulfil the specified purpose of the initial grant.

   78. It has not been shown to be discriminatory or disproportionate in  EU
       law terms to have separate routes and recognised status.

   79. It has not been shown that the restriction  on  a  person  granted  a
       derived right from applying for a right  of  permanent  residence  is
       contrary to EU law.

   80. The wording of articles 2(2), 3(1), 7(2),  14(2)  and  16(2)  of  the
       Directive are clear and unambiguous and do not assist the appellants'
       argument.

   81. It has not been shown the appellants' periods of residence as persons
       with a grant of a derived right of residence satisfies the conditions
       laid down by Directive 2004/38 such as to entitle them to a grant  of
       permanent residence.

   82. CJEU's case law in cases such as Chen clearly  define  those  persons
       covered by the term "family member" which does not include  a  person
       with a derived right in the circumstances of the appellants' in  this
       case.

   83. The CJEU have found in Alarape and Ziolkpwski that in order to reside
       legally a third country  national  must  reside  in  accordance  with
       Article 7(2), hence the required five year period of lawful residence
       to acquire a right of residence does not arise.

   84. In relation to referral, it is not considered such is  required.   Ms
       Asanovic referred to the different approaches to the issue of EU  law
       in European courts to those in the UK but I do  not  find  this  good
       reason to make a referral. It has not been made out that  a  referral
       is required to ensure EU law is interpreted and applied the  same  in
       every EU country.  The wording of the Directive  is  clear  and  free
       from ambiguity. The strict interpretation of a family member is clear
       and unambiguous. The situation in which a person is able to acquire a
       right of  permanent  residence  under  the  Directive  is  clear  and
       unambiguous. The inability of a person only  entitled  to  a  derived
       right to be able to satisfy the definition of a  'family  member'  is
       clear and unambiguous. The inability of a person only entitled  to  a
       derived right as a Chen parent to satisfy the definition of a  family
       member is clear and  unambiguous.  In  this  case  it  has  not  been
       established on the facts that the grant of a derived  right  to  Chen
       parents and the prohibition on acquisition of a  permanent  right  of
       residence denies the EU child the enjoyment of his  right  as  an  EU
       citizen. No arguable ambiguity in the legal position  has  been  made
       out.

   85. The response to the  specific  question  posed  of  whether  wording,
       context and purpose  of  the  Directive  2004/38  warrant  a  broader
       interpretation, is no.

   86. It has not been shown rights enjoyed under EU law on the basis  of  a
       relationship enjoyed with a  person  enjoying  a  primary/substantive
       right to reside can in all cases develop into an independent right to
       reside sufficient to lead to a grant of permanent residence.

   87. It is as a result of the lack of any  specific  provision  supporting
       the appellants case that they have been  forced  to  contend  that  a
       teleological interpretation of the Directive should prevail. Ms Smyth
       in her skeleton argument claims  such  a  submission  is  flawed,  as
       follows:

           '31.   First, and contrary to [21] of the  Appellants'  skeleton
           argument, it is not legitimate to  use  the  tool  of  purposive
           interpretation to  defeat  clearly  stated  limits  set  out  in
           secondary  legislation.   The  position  is  captured   in   the
           following passages from the Advocate-General's opinion in Case C-
           350/03 Schulte v Deutsche Bausparkasse Badenia AG [2005] ECR  I-
           9215 (see [84-94]; see also , for example, the Court of Appeal's
           decision in Oboh v Secretary of  State  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1525)
           [60]:

                "Careful examination of the case-law  shows  that  purposive
                interpretation is used only where the provision in  question
                is  open  to  several   interpretations   ...   teleological
                interpretation is not used where, as in  the  present  case,
                the text in question is absolutely clear and unambiguous. In
                that case, the provisions of Community law are sufficient in
                themselves." '

Decision

   88. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   89. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18 August 2016
