
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00402/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 October 2018                            |On 6 November  2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                Muhammad Inam
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ayodele of Goodfellows Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 13 December 1989.  On  8
    January  2016  the  Respondent  refused  to   grant   the   Appellant's
    application for further leave to remain on the basis of his marriage to
    a British citizen registered in April 2015.



The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 2. The appeal has had a difficult  history  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    following judicial review proceedings which resulted in the  Respondent
    making a fresh decision giving the Appellant an in-  country  right  of
    appeal. By a decision promulgated on 16  February  2017  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Majid allowed the appeal. The  Respondent  obtained
    permission to appeal and by a decision promulgated on 6  December  2017
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia remitted the  appeal  for  hearing
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal. By a decision promulgated on 29 June
    2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Keane dismissed the appeal. On 21
    September 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison granted
    the Appellant permission to appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 3. On 10 October 2018 the Respondent wrote to the Upper  Tribunal  stating
    that the Appellant's application  was  not  opposed  and  inviting  the
    Tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing.




 4. I agree that Judge Keane's decision should be set  aside.  It  did  not
    take account of the provisions of paragraph Gen.3.1 of Appendix FM  and
    their impact on Section EX.1(b).




 5. It was evident that Mr Ayodele was not in a position to proceed at once
    to a substantive re-hearing of the appeal. In the circumstances I  find
    it appropriate to remit the appeal for hearing afresh with no  findings
    of fact preserved before me, sitting as a Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    at Taylor House.

Anonymity

 6. There was no request for an anonymity direction and having the  appeal,
    I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  25.
x. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

