
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00092/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2019                               |On 1 April 2019               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr Gurmeet Singh
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Popal, instructed by ATM Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although the Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State I
    refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision made by the Secretary of State on 7th May 2014  to
    refuse his application for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under the  points-based  system.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dhaliwal allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State  now  appeals
    to this Tribunal with permission granted by Designated Judge  Peart  on
    27th November 2018.

 3. The Secretary of State's decision to refuse leave to remain  was  based
    on the conclusion by the Secretary of  State  that  the  Appellant  had
    obtained a TOEIC certificate from Educational Testing Services (ETS) by
    deception and the application was refused under  paragraph  322(1A)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State indicated on the reasons
    for refusal letter that there was  no  right  of  appeal  against  that
    decision and served at the same time a decision to remove the Appellant
    indicating that he had a right  of  appeal  under  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  after  he  had  left  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. It appears that the Appellant took no action against  this  until  2018
    when, under a covering letter from  his  solicitors  dated  25th  April
    2018, he lodged a Notice of Appeal against that decision.  The covering
    letter contended at the outset that the Appellant was entitled to an in-
    country right of appeal and  requested  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accept jurisdiction.  According to the Tribunal file, on 16th May  2018
    the Appellant's solicitors wrote to  the  Tribunal  seeking  an  urgent
    decision in relation to jurisdiction given that the Appellant was to be
    removed that day.  According to the papers on the Tribunal file a  Duty
    Judge made a decision on 22nd May 2018  that  there  is  an  in-country
    right of appeal in light of the decision in Ahsan  and  Others  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.  The parties were advised on a notice of  hearing
    issued on the same date that there would be a hearing on  12th  October
    2018.

 5. It appears from the papers  before  me  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    requested that the Tribunal give urgent consideration to the matter  of
    the validity of the appeal and a direction  was  issued  by  Designated
    Judge McCarthy on 6th June  2018  to  both  parties  stating  that  the
    Tribunal was satisfied that there was a  valid  in-country  appeal  and
    that the hearing would take place as listed in light of the decision in
    Ahsan.

 6. The hearing took place on 12th October 2018 before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Dhaliwal.   In  her  decision  she  addressed   the   issue   of
    jurisdiction at paragraph 3 stating the background to  the  lodging  of
    the appeal and confirming that the Tribunal  accepted  the  Appellant's
    appeal as being a valid appeal and extended time.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Dhaliwal went on  to  consider  the  evidence
    before her and concluded that the Secretary of State had not discharged
    the burden of proving that the Appellant  had  practised  deception  in
    relation to the TOEIC certificate.  The judge  allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

 8. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State seeks to challenge that
    decision on one ground only.  It is contended that the  Tribunal  erred
    in accepting that there was jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal  in  the
    circumstances.  It is contended that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    its approach to the decision in Ahsan which, it is  contended,  is  not
    authority for the proposition that any decision certified under Section
    94(1) or Section 10 which involves ETS can be appealed in-country.   It
    is contended that Ahsan finds that current arrangements in place for an
    out-of-country appeal do not provide an effective remedy and  therefore
    a breach of the right to a fair hearing or effective remedy and that it
    does not automatically follow  that  a  court  is  entitled  to  assume
    jurisdiction contrary to a statutory provision.  It  is  asserted  that
    the Secretary of State may put in  place  measures  to  ensure  a  fair
    hearing takes place for evidence to be taken through video conferencing
    or may withdraw the decision and issue a decision that does  confer  an
    in-country right of appeal.  It is contended that it does not  allow  a
    Tribunal to assume jurisdiction where it does not have jurisdiction.

 9. Although she did not concede the appeal Ms Jones felt  unable  to  make
    any submissions in relation to the matter.  Ms Popal pointed out  that,
    in circumstances such as this where the Appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal asking for a decision in relation to  jurisdiction  which
    the First-tier Tribunal subsequently made, it is up to  any  party  who
    disagrees with that decision to challenge that decision  by  way  of  a
    judicial review in accordance with the Cart  principles.   She  further
    relied on the decision in Saqib Zia Khan v Secretary  of  State  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 424 paragraph 18 and 19.  She pointed out that  the  Secretary
    of State had failed to exercise this remedy and that in  light  of  the
    timeframe was now out of time for seeking to exercise this remedy.  She
    submitted that the Secretary of State is using the error of  law  stage
    to challenge the decision of  jurisdiction  when  it  could  have  been
    challenged at an earlier stage.  She highlighted that the Secretary  of
    State was not challenging the substantive aspects of this decision  but
    simply the jurisdictional issues.  In her submission this was  not  the
    correct forum.  She submitted further that the Secretary of State  only
    raised this issue in the application for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal after the appeal had been allowed  this  amounts  to  an
    abuse by the Secretary of State.  She referred to the cases  of  Ahsan,
    Kiarie and Byndloss v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    UKSC 42 and submitted that these decisions all indicate that an out-of-
    country appeal is not a sufficient remedy.  She also  referred  to  the
    case of Khan v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1684.  She submitted that  in  all  of  these  authorities  it  was
    accepted that there would be human rights decisions  with  a  right  of
    appeal issued but that did not happen in this particular case.  In  any
    event in  her  submission  the  Secretary  of  State's  remedy  was  to
    challenge the original decision and it is not clear why he  had  failed
    to do so.

10. Ms Jones relied on the cases  of  TM  (S94  certificate:  jurisdiction)
    Zimbabwe [2006] UKAIT 00005 and Rahman v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1572.  She accepted that  the  case  of
    Rahman related to the issue of costs.  She accepted that this was a two-
    stage process.

Error of Law

11. I accept the submission put forward by Ms Popal  that  the  appropriate
    remedy for the Secretary of State was to challenge the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to admit  jurisdiction  following  receipt  of  the
    Appellant's appeal.  This decision was notified on 6th June 2018 and is
    a clear decision that the First-tier Tribunal considered  that  it  had
    jurisdiction in relation to this appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  did
    not challenge that decision.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on  to
    hear the appeal noting that  the  issue  of  jurisdiction  was  not  in
    dispute at paragraph 3.  The Secretary of State was not represented  at
    that hearing and did not challenge the jurisdiction issue.  In my  view
    it is not appropriate for the Secretary of State to seek  to  challenge
    now the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal by way of an appeal  on
    a point of law to the Upper Tribunal.   This  is  not  the  appropriate
    forum.  In any event the First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  There is no challenge to the basis on which  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did so.  I see no merit in the  Secretary  of
    State's challenge in these circumstances.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 27th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 27th March 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
