
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/00545/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 21st November 2017                 |           On 22nd December 2017      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                             Jemilat Adeola okin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, Counsel instructed by Kristal Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Traynor promulgated on 7th July 2017 in  which  decision
    he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    dated 15th January 2016 to refuse her claim on human rights grounds.

 2. Within the decision of Judge Traynor he noted that at the start of  the
    appeal hearing Mr Reynolds on behalf of the Appellant acknowledged that
    she could not succeed in an application either under Appendix FM family
    life or paragraph 276ADE, and was asking for the case to be  considered
    outside of the rules on Article 8 grounds.

 3. Judge Traynor did not accept that the children had contact  with  their
    father to the extent claimed.  He noted that the children were now aged
    7 and 5 years old, but found that they were young enough  to  adapt  to
    life in Nigeria, the country of their mother's birth  where  they  also
    had a maternal grandmother living, and he found in  paragraph  50  that
    there was no reason other than age being advanced as to why the  mother
    could not assist in accommodating  her  and  the  children  upon  their
    return.  He found there was  no  threat  to  the  children  from  their
    father's family in Nigeria and that the  Appellant  was  a  resourceful
    woman and was capable of reintegration back into  the  country  on  her
    return, which he found in paragraph 51 were all factors  that  he  took
    into account in finding that were no circumstances  of  an  exceptional
    nature which warranted the Appellant being granted  leave  outside  the
    Rules.

 4. He went on in paragraph 52 to find that even if he was  wrong  in  that
    consideration he had borne in mind the  obligation  to  consider  as  a
    primary matter the impact of the Respondent's decision upon the welfare
    of the Appellant's children, who would be expected to leave  with  her.
    He noted it was said that the Appellant was the primary  carer  of  the
    children and it was said that she was maintaining them to the  best  of
    her ability, but he gave no weight to the claim that she was  suffering
    from depression and that she was likely to be stigmatised or the  claim
    that the children would be at risk of being taken away  on  account  of
    that.

 5. The judge went on to say that he had regard to  the  terms  of  Section
    117B of the  2002  Act  in  considering  the  public  interest  in  the
    Appellant's removal, but found at paragraph 52 that  he  was  satisfied
    there was no ongoing contact between the Appellant's children and their
    father which was likely to result in an adverse effect upon  them,  and
    found that the children were young enough to adapt to life  in  Nigeria
    with their mother and her family who speak  the  local  languages.   He
    found the Appellant  reluctantly  agreed  at  the  end  of  the  cross-
    examination that  English  is  one  of  the  main  languages  in  which
    education is delivered in Nigeria, and therefore the mere fact he found
    that the children only  speak  English  would  not  act  towards  their
    detriment.  It was found that the Appellant had given no reason why the
    children could not be educated in Nigeria.  He found that the situation
    where both children were in good  health,  the  Appellant  was  not  in
    receipt of any medication, that she and the children  were  capable  of
    returning to Nigeria and the  decision  was  not  in  breach  of  their
    Article 8 rights  and  therefore  in  consequence  he  dismissed  their
    appeal.

 6. At the appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Appellant had  been
    represented  by  Mr  Sowerby  of  Counsel  and  the  Respondent   being
    represented by Ms Willocks-Briscoe, a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

 7. The Grounds of Appeal themselves have been drafted by the Appellant and
    to a large extent amount to an attempt to re-argue  the  case  and  put
    forward further submissions in respect of  the  primary  findings  that
    were made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  However,  as  was  noted
    within the grant of permission to appeal by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Pickup on 21st September 2017,  although  he  noted  that  the  lengthy
    grounds did largely take issue with the findings of the judge and  were
    simply a disagreement with the judge's findings, he  found  that  there
    was a point that the Appellant's eldest child was born in the UK on 1st
    May 2010 and at the date of the hearing had been resident in the UK for
    a period of seven years.  He found it was arguable that  there  was  no
    consideration of the effect of paragraph  276ADE  in  relation  to  the
    reasonableness of expecting that child to leave the UK,  and  similarly
    the judge's consideration outside the Rules under  Article  8  arguably
    omitted to consider Section 117B(6) and the issue as to  reasonableness
    when assessing proportionality of the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  He found that it may ultimately be  the  decision  may  be  the
    same, but it is arguable that the judge's  assessment  was  incomplete.
    Therefore, he granted permission to appeal.

 8. Within the Rule 24 reply dated 3rd October 2017 it  is  argued  by  the
    Secretary of State that the judge directed  himself  appropriately  and
    did refer to Section 117B in paragraph 52 of the decision and addressed
    the position of the children from paragraph 50 to 54.

 9. I have also been assisted this morning by the helpful submissions by Mr
    Sowerby of  Counsel  and  by  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State.

10. Mr Sowerby  in  his  submissions  largely  concentrated  on  the  issue
    regarding Section 117B(6) and the question as to what is  in  the  best
    interests of the children for the purposes of Section 55.  He  conceded
    at the start of  the  appeal  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements or criteria under paragraph 276ADE on the basis  that  the
    Appellants' eldest child, H, who was born on 7th May 2010, had not been
    resident in the UK for seven years as at the date of  the  application.
    Indeed, in that regard I note that, as I stated earlier in my judgment,
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  at  paragraph  40  noted  that  Mr
    Reynolds on behalf of the Appellant at the First-tier Tribunal conceded
    that the Appellant could not succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules. In that regard therefore the  potential  issue  noted  by  Judge
    Pickup does not actually apply.  Mr Sowerby however did argue  that  in
    effect the judge had not properly considered  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that the eldest child,
    H, had been in continuous residence for a period of seven years  as  at
    the date of the hearing before Judge Traynor  and  that  therefore  the
    child was a qualifying child for the  purposes  of  Section  117D.   He
    argued that pursuant to Section 117B(6) in the case of a person who  is
    not liable to deportation the public  interest  does  not  require  the
    person's removal where:-

      a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
         a qualifying child; and

      b) it will not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United
         Kingdom.

11. A qualifying child is defined in Section 117D as meaning a  person  who
    is under the age of 18 and who is either:-

      a) a British citizen; or

      b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  seven
         years or more.

12. Mr Sowerby argues that  Judge  Traynor  has  made  no  proper  findings
    regarding Section 117B(6) and made no finding as to whether or  not  it
    was reasonable to expect the  qualifying  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  He also argues that regarding the question as to what  is  in
    the best interests of the children for the purposes of  Section  55  of
    the 2009 Act, he argues that the judge has not made any clear  findings
    regarding what is actually in the best interests of the  children.   As
    to whether that is to remain in the United  Kingdom  or  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom or to remain with either or both of their parents.

13. In reply Ms Willocks-Briscoe relies upon the Rule 24 reply  and  argues
    that the judge has properly considered the  position  of  the  children
    between paragraphs 52 and 55 and within those paragraphs she argues has
    adequately dealt with Section 117B(6).  She argues that the  judge  had
    noted and found that the Appellant was the primary carer in respect  of
    her children and argues that at paragraph  52  the  judge  had  made  a
    finding that it was in the best interests of the children for  them  to
    leave with their mother.  She refers me also, as both  parties  do,  to
    the case of MA (Pakistan) & Ors v Upper Tribunal [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705
    and the lead judgment of Lord Justice Elias.  She also refers me to the
    previous case of EV (Philippines) & Ors v  Secretary  of  State  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874.  She argues that there it was made clear by the Court  of
    Appeal that  the  Tribunal  had  to  look  at  these  cases  using  the
    considerations of the real world.

14. Although Mr Sowerby also did raise an argument regarding whether or not
    the judge made adequate and sufficient findings regarding  the  contact
    that was had between the  children  and  their  father,  Mr  Okin,  and
    referred me to  the  statement  from  Mr  Okin  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in which he said that he had  maintained  a  relationship  and
    contact with his children, the judge at paragraph 47 had noted that  Mr
    Okin was not present in order to answer questions regarding his claimed
    relationship and found that there were only  limited  contributions  to
    the welfare since the year of his child was born  in  2012.  The  judge
    gave no weight to the Appellant's claim Mr Okin  had  any  significant,
    real financial responsibility towards them,  or  was  discharging  such
    financial responsibility.  The judge found the  parenting  was  limited
    and Mr Okin did not actually have financial commitment to the  children
    as had been claimed.  The judge further found that he did  not  believe
    the Appellant's claim that Mr Okin was  in  regular  contact  with  the
    children by seeing them two to three times per week  as  the  Appellant
    said that she did not actually know where he lived.   I  note  what  Mr
    Sowerby says regarding the contents of Mr Okin's statement that he says
    he was enjoying a relationship with  his  children,  but  he  does  not
    actually set out within that statement the actual level of  contact  as
    claimed.  However, the judge was entitled, I find,  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's children were not in contact with their father in  the  way
    that the Appellant had described and that that was a  finding  actually
    open to the judge on the evidence before him.

15. However, in respect of the question regarding Section 117B(6),  I  find
    that it is clear that the eldest child, H, who  was  born  on  7th  May
    2010, was actually then 7 years old as  at  the  date  of  the  hearing
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Although  Judge  Traynor  has   at
    paragraph 52 stated that he had regard to the terms of Section 117B  of
    the 2002 Act in considering public interest in the Appellant's removal,
    in this respect he found that there was no ongoing contact between  the
    Appellant's children and their father and it was likely  to  result  in
    adverse effect upon them.  He found the children were young  enough  to
    adapt to life in Nigeria with their mother and family speak  the  local
    languages and that education is taught in  the  English  language,  and
    therefore children who would  only  speak  English  would  not  have  a
    detrimental effect upon them if they only spoke English.

16. However, Judge Traynor has  not  actually  specifically  considered,  I
    find, Section  117B(6).   As  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  properly  concedes,
    Section 117B(6) was considered by the Court of Appeal in the case of MA
    to effectively be a freestanding consideration and, although as clearly
    the Tribunal has to consider all of the public interest  considerations
    when considering 117B(6),  and  in  particular  as  to  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom,  including
    as found by the Court of Appeal  in  MA  any  adverse  public  interest
    considerations in terms of the immigration history of the Appellant and
    the wider public considerations not simply limited to  a  consideration
    of the children themselves.

17. Judge Traynor has not actually made any findings regarding the question
    as to whether it was reasonable to expect the oldest  child  who  is  a
    qualifying child to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   There  has  been  no
    adequate consideration of the eldest child's private life within the UK
    or consideration of the extent of his  relationships  with  friends  or
    schooling or other aspects of the child's  private  life.  Although  in
    that regard Ms Willocks-Briscoe refers me to the case  of  Azimi-Moayed
    and the fact that the Upper Tribunal in that  case  did  consider  that
    there was a difference as to the weight to be attached to a seven  year
    period as to whether it was the first seven years of life or the period
    between the ages of 4 and 11, the fact still remains that if a child is
    7 years old then the child is a qualifying child and therefore  Section
    117B(6) does have to be considered.  I do not find that the  judge  has
    adequately explained why it would not be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the UK in paragraph 52 through to 55 or elsewhere  within  his
    decision,  and  in  that  regard  there  has  not  been   an   adequate
    consideration of the extent of the child's private life within  the  UK
    to factor into the positive signed of the scales in that regard.

18. Although it is argued by Ms Willocks-Briscoe on behalf of the Secretary
    of State at paragraphs 52 and 55  the  judge  has  properly  considered
    Section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
    regarding what is in the best interests of the  children,  in  fact  at
    paragraph 52, although the judge says that:-

         "Even if I am wrong in the above conclusion,  I  have  nevertheless
         borne in mind in reaching my decision the obligation to consider as
         a primary matter, the impact of the Respondent's decision upon  the
         welfare of the Appellant's children who will be expected  to  leave
         with her".

    I do not accept as argued by Ms Willocks-Briscoe that that is  actually
    a finding that it is reasonable to expect the children to leave.  It is
    simply a statement that the children would be expected  to  leave  with
    her given his findings that he did not accept that they were in contact
    with the father as claimed.

19. Although the judge clearly does not have to set out every single factor
    in his consideration, he clearly has to take  into  account  the  major
    statutory criteria and give adequate and  sufficient  reasons  for  his
    findings in that regard so that the losing party knows  why  they  have
    lost on those issues.  Sadly, in this case he has failed to do  so.   I
    therefore do find that there is a material error of law in the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor and I therefore find  that  it  is
    appropriate in the circumstances of this case to set aside the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor  and,  as  agreed  by  both  legal
    representatives, it is appropriate for the case to be remitted back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  does  contain  a
    material error of law and is set aside.  The case is remitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor.

21. No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and no
    statutory direction has been sought before me today and therefore I  do
    not make any anonymity direction in this case.


Signed                                  Date 22 December 2017

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty




