
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00009/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th December 2017                         |On 8th January 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                          MR BASHIR OLAITAN ADEBAYO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Riaz, Manchester Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Bashir Olaitan Adebayo against the decision  of
    Judge Lever, promulgated on the 28th  February  2017,  to  dismiss  the
    appeal against refusal of his application for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on private and family life grounds.

 2. At the oral hearing of the appeal, which took place on the 17th January
    2017, Judge Lever had indicated that he would allow the appeal. He  did
    so after hearing brief submissions  from  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer. He thereafter  indicated  that  it  was  unnecessary  to  hear
    submissions from the representative of the  appellant  because  he  had
    decided to allow the appeal. However, as the judge candidly  admits  at
    paragraph 11 of his decision, he  subsequently  realised  that  he  had
    overlooked a material factor that might cause him to change  his  mind.
    Entirely properly, therefore, he wrote to the representatives  of  both
    parties, acknowledging his error, and inviting  them  to  make  written
    submissions within a period of 10 days. The judge acknowledged  receipt
    of the respondent's submissions at paragraph 12  of  his  decision.  He
    thereafter continued -

         "I have not  received  submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.
         Sufficient time has now been allowed for those  submissions  to  be
         made and I now provide a decision in writing in this case."

 3. In fact, Ms Riaz had sent her further submissions by facsimile  message
    at 14:38 on the 31st January 2017 as is confirmed by the  receipt  that
    is attached to the grounds of appeal. The failure to place them  before
    Judge Lever must therefore be ascribed to an administrative  error.  It
    would thus  have  been  preferable  for  the  current  application  for
    permission to appeal to have been placed before the Resident  Judge  at
    Manchester for consideration of the setting aside of the decision under
    Rule 32 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014. As it is, the  matter  is
    now before me in the Upper Tribunal and it is  no  longer  possible  to
    adopt that procedure.

 4. The main ground of appeal is based upon the  procedural  unfairness  of
    determining this appeal without the  appellant's  representative  being
    given an opportunity to be heard. This ground  must  obviously  succeed
    given that not only was Judge Lever apparently  unaware  of  Ms  Riaz's
    written submissions but also the  fact  that  he  had  not  heard  oral
    submissions from her at the original hearing of the appeal on the  28th
    February 2017. The remaining grounds of appeal essentially contain  the
    arguments that were set out in the written submissions that Judge Lever
    did not consider. It would be inappropriate for me to comment upon  the
    merit of those arguments given that fairness requires that they are  in
    the first instance adjudicated upon by the First-tier Tribunal

 5. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit
    the appeal to be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal, preferably  by
    Judge Lever if he is available. All Judge Lever's findings of fact  are
    preserved.



Notice of Decision

 6. The decision to dismiss the appeal  is  set  aside  for  error  of  law
    (procedural unfairness) and is remitted to be reheard by any  judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, including Judge Lever if he is available.





Listing directions

 7. All the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal are preserved.  The
    time estimate and format of the rehearing (oral or written submissions)
    is to be decided by the Resident Judge at Manchester.

No anonymity direction is made.


Judge Kelly                             Date: 5th January 2018

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
