
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00147/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 20th March 2015                  |On: 28th April 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                            Ms Asha Lumbu Kerung
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Jesuram, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a national of Nepal date of  birth  25th  December
         1982.   She appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         (Judge Fox) to dismiss her appeal against a decision to  refuse  to
         vary her leave to enter and to remove her from the UK  pursuant  to
         s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

      2. The basis of the Appellant's application to remain the UK was  that
         the Secretary of State should have exercised her discretion in  her
         favour and granted her leave to remain in line with  the  published
         policy on dependent family members of  Gurkhas;  alternatively  the
         case was put on Article 8 grounds.

      3.  The  Respondent  considered  whether   the   Appellant   met   the
         requirements of paragraph 317 of the Rules and found that  she  did
         not.  Consideration was then given to the policy expressed  in  the
         Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions   to   the   effect   that
         dependents over the age of 18  would  normally  need  to  meet  the
         relevant criteria for settlement under the Rules (ie paragraph 317)
         but "in exceptional  circumstances"  the  Secretary  of  State  may
         exercise her discretion in their favour.   The  letter  notes  that
         this policy was directed at the children of Gurkhas who had reached
         majority and therefore no longer qualified for leave  as  children;
         return would leave them as "stranded siblings".  The  Appellant  is
         thirty years old and has siblings in Nepal. As for Article  8,  the
         Respondent did not accept that the Appellant's father was dependent
         upon her for care, as claimed. If  she  was  financially  dependent
         upon him for her studies,  as  claimed,  this  did  not  constitute
         exceptional circumstances.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant,  her
         mother and father. Having done so it was not  accepted  that  there
         was a dependency as claimed. In particular the Tribunal  considered
         the evidence of the Appellant to be inconsistent with that given by
         her mother about the level of care required by her father.  It  was
         not accepted that there was a "family  life"  for  the  purpose  of
         Article 8, nor that the Rules were met, nor  that  there  were  any
         "exceptional circumstances" for the Secretary of State to  consider
         in line with her policy.  At paragraph 54 there is a  finding  that
         the Appellant perpetrated deception when she entered as a student.

      5. Permission was sought to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.  This  was
         refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on the 24th June 2014 and
         upon renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on the 1st August 2014.
          The Appellant successfully sought judicial review of the decision,
         with Mr Justice Popplewell granting permission on the 18th November
         2014, and the decision to refuse permission being  quashed  on  the
         15th December 2014 by Master Gidden. On the 21st January 2015 Judge
         Ockelton, Vice President of the Upper  Tribunal,  formally  granted
         permission.

         Error of Law

      6. I find, for the reasons that follow, that the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal contains an error of law such that  it  must  be  set
         aside in its entirety.

      7. The Appellant came to the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant
         in 2011. She subsequently made this application for leave to remain
         on the grounds set out above. As a matter of law, she was perfectly
         entitled to do  this,  and  I  am  happy  to  accept  Mr  Jesuram's
         explanation that she only made her application when developments in
         the law gave rise to some hope that she would be entitled to remain
         here with her parents. The Respondent never  took  any  issue  with
         that chronology. It was never  suggested  that  the  Appellant  had
         somehow acted inappropriately in entering the country as a student,
         and indeed it was the accepted facts (as  found  at  paragraph  50)
         that the Appellant  had  completed  her  post-graduate  diploma  in
         Health and Social Care whilst here.  There  was  no  suggestion  in
         cross-examination that the Appellant had entered the  UK  illegally
         (ie  by  lying  about  her  intentions).  There  was  therefore  no
         evidential basis for  the  finding,  at  paragraph  54,  that  "the
         Appellant deceived the Respondent when she represented herself as a
         temporary migrant upon entry to the UK".

      8. Mr Jesuram rightly  identifies  this  as  a  matter  of  procedural
         unfairness. The Appellant  was  not  at  hearing  asked  about  her
         intentions upon entry. As a matter of fairness she was entitled  to
         be given an opportunity to address an allegation of deception.   In
         his very erudite grounds and submissions Ms Jesuram points out that
         where such procedural unfairness  in  established  it  matters  not
         whether the outcome of the appeal will be the same in the  end,  or
         would have been the same but for that unfairness. That is no  doubt
         arguable so.  In this case however there is a clear indication that
         the finding of deception played a central  role  not  just  in  the
         Judge's  evaluation  of  the  Appellant's  evidence,  but  of   the
         substantive decision  on  proportionality:  see  for  instance  the
         comment at 54 "it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  a  prospective
         migrant who seeks to rely upon the respondent's discretion must  do
         so with clean hands".  I am not satisfied that the  flawed  finding
         can be extricated from the decision as a whole.

      9. The parties agreed that where a matter is set aside for  procedural
         unfairness, and where extensive findings of fact are  required,  it
         is appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
         re-making. I agree that in this case that is the  most  appropriate
         course.

         Decisions

     10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of  law
         and it is set aside.

     11. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  re-made  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

     12. I make  no  direction  for  anonymity  because  neither  party  has
         requested one and on the facts I do not consider such an  order  to
         be necessary.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             20th March 2015
