
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00066/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 August 2019                    |On 25 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Sohel Amin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes of Counsel instructed by Diplock
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh,  has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of Judge S H Smith of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  sent
    on 13 May 2019 dismissing the appeal against the decision made  by  the
    respondent on 9 March 2018 refusing leave to remain:


    (i)  because she was satisfied that the appellant had used deception in
         a TOEIC test at Westlink College in 2012;


    (ii) because the appellant did not have a valid CAS  and  so  possessed
         insufficient funds to meet the requirements of Appendix  A  of  the
         Rules.


2.   I am grateful to both representatives for their succinct submissions.


3.   The appellant's first and principal  ground  contends  that  the  judge
    failed  to  take  into  account,  when  assessing  the  issue  of   his
    proficiency in the English language and its relevance to the  issue  of
    whether the appellant used deception in a TOEIC test in 2014, the  fact
    that he had obtained an IELTS certificate in 2009 and  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer took no issue regarding this when granting him  entry
    clearance as a student at that time.  Mr Symes  pointed  out  that  the
    letter  from  the  college  also  indicated  that   the   college   was
    independently satisfied as to the  level  of  the  appellant's  English
    language proficiency.


4.   I would accept that the judge did  not  expressly  refer  to  the  2009
    IELTS certificate and that (despite reference at paragraph  14  to  the
    evidence that the appellant passed other language tests), I  cannot  be
    sure the judge took  it  into  account  at  all.   However,  I  am  not
    persuaded that this gives rise to any material error.


5.   What the judge concluded at paragraphs 36 and 37 was as follows:


         "36. I accept that the appellant  is  now  proficient  in  English.
             However, my attention has not  been  drawn  to  any  materials
             which  demonstrate  that  the   appellant   had   successfully
             completed an English language test administered by an approved
             test centre before his reliance on  the  impugned  certificate
             issued by ETS in respect of the April 2012 test.  At  page  23
             of his bundle, there is a certificate dated 12 July 2014 of an
             international English language test administered by  Cambridge
             English  language  assessment,  part  of  the  University   of
             Cambridge;  such  documents  are  often   known   as   "IELTS"
             certificates.  I accept that, at page 24 of  his  bundle,  the
             CAS from  the  London  School  of  Commerce  states  that  the
             appellant  had  successfully  completed   "the   pre-sessional
             academic English part of the programme", and a number  of  the
             course modules.  However, that was not a formal test, and  the
             CAS itself relies on the appellant's certificate  provided  by
             ETS.  It also  added  that  ill-health  had  necessitated  the
             appellant taking  additional  time  to  complete  the  course,
             suggesting that limited significance should be ascribed to his
             attendance at the course modules.


         37.  If follows, therefore, that the appellant has not demonstrated
             that he enjoyed a level of proficiency in English of the level
             he  claims  to  have  had  at  the  point  he  took  his  test
             administered by ETS.  By the time the appellant took his IELTS
             test in July 2014, and obtained his BA in 2015,  he  had  been
             immersed in this country for some years.  The  fact  he  spoke
             English  then  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  he  was  as
             proficient in the language at the time of the impugned test in
             2014."


6.   What I observe from  the  above  is  that  the  matter  the  judge  was
    assessing was the level of the appellant's proficiency in English.  The
    fact that the appellant had successfully completed an English  language
    test administered by an approved test centre before his reliance on the
    impugned certificate issued by ETS in respect of the  April  2012  test
    does not on its own demonstrate proficiency to the requisite level.  At
    most the UWC document of 30 May 2009 demonstrates that one of the bases
    for admission was "IELTS scores."  The document  does  not  state  what
    this score was nor has the appellant  produced  evidence  of  what  his
    score was (despite voluminous documents provided).   It  must  also  be
    borne in mind that the context of the judge's inquiry was  whether  the
    appellant had shown that in 2012  that  his  level  of  proficiency  in
    English was such that his recorded test results were consistent with  a
    demonstrated level of proficiency.


7.   The appellant's second ground takes issue with the judge's findings  at
    paragraph 31-34.  At paragraphs 32-34 the judge stated:


         "32. I accept that the test is now a considerable  period  of  time
             ago.   The  delay  by  the  respondent  in   considering   the
             appellant's 2014  application  means  that  he  has  lost  the
             benefit of some of the ability he would  have  had  to  recall
             those events.   However,  I  consider  the  inability  of  the
             appellant  to  recall  even  basic  details  of  the  speaking
             assessment to give rise to  credibility  concerns  surrounding
             the  account  he  provided  in  his  witness  statement.   For
             example, at [32] of his statement, the appellant describes  in
             more detail than he was able to under  cross-examination  what
             took place.  He outlines, in broad terms,  the  difficulty  in
             recalling events from that long ago, but was able  to  provide
             far more detail in his statement,  which  as  dated  18  April
             2019.  If it  were  the  case  that  the  appellant  genuinely
             experienced such  difficulties  in  recalling  the  test,  his
             statement would not have featured the detail that it does.  He
             is unlikely to have remembered matters such as  the  route  he
             took, and the public transport  links  he  used.   Still  less
             would he have been able to  remember  details  concerning  the
             fact that he was asked to comment on pictures (as outlined  at
             [32]), that he was provided with time to prepare his  answers,
             and the automatic expiry of one phase of  the  speaking  test,
             before the computer advanced to the next phase.  Similarly, he
             was able to provide a reasonable degree of  detail  concerning
             the other parts of the test in his statement, in a  way  which
             gives rise to credibility concerns surrounding his now claimed
             inability to recall any details over and above those  outlined
             above.


         33.  The level of detail one would expect someone in  the  position
             of the appellant to recall, given the detail provided  in  his
             statement, surpasses that which  the  appellant  was  able  to
             provide for me.  The appellant's statement, given  its  detail
             surpasses that of his oral evidence, could  easily  have  been
             prepared with the benefit of assistance or coaching.   Whereas
             it is relatively easy to find out what should have happened at
             a test centre, being able to speak with detail orally about  a
             test is something which would have required genuine attendance
             and participation.


         34.  The appellant is a man of intelligence;  his  bundle  features
             details of his academic studies in the fields of marketing and
             business  studies.   Under  the  circumstances,  I  find   his
             inability to provide any details about the  speaking  test  he
             claimed participating to undermine his case that  he  did,  in
             fact, attend and participate in the test.  I bear in mind  the
             weighty nature of an allegation of deception, and the inherent
             improbability which may be said to characterise the likelihood
             of someone attempting to engage in such notice (although,  the
             evidence suggests that at the Westlink College,  cheating  was
             the norm, rather than the exception)."


8.   The grounds submit that the judge erred in treating as adverse  to  the
    credibility  of  the   appellant's   attempted   explanation   of   the
    circumstances in which he undertook the TOEIC test  in  2012  the  fact
    that he could not in oral evidence replicate the detail he had provided
    in his witness statement.  As put by Mr Symes in  oral  submissions,  a
    witness cannot always match the degree of detail contained in a witness
    statement, especially one prepared in order to get everything  down  in
    the one place. That, he submitted, was to be expected.  The  difficulty
    with this ground is that it amounts to a  mere  disagreement  with  the
    judge's assessment of the appellant's evidence.  Clearly in the judge's
    assessment the appellant failed to come up to proof and  there  was  an
    inability evinced by his oral evidence to recall even basic details  of
    the  speaking  assessment.   In  counting  against  the  appellant  his
    inability in oral evidence to recall even basic details of the speaking
    test, the judge properly took account  of  his  evidence  as  a  whole,
    making allowances for the fact he was being asked to  recollect  events
    from seven years ago.  It was open to  the  judged  to  find  that  the
    contrast between the detail given by the appellant at paragraphs  24-30
    (paragraphs 27-28 in particular)  of  his  witness  statement  and  the
    meagre details  he  gave  in  oral  evidence  amounted  to  a  material
    inconsistency.


9.   The appellant's third ground assails the judge's reliance on  the  fact
    that the respondent had refused the appellant's application  under  the
    substantive requirements of the Rules on the basis of an absence  of  a
    CAS.  It was submitted that given the failure of the respondent to make
    a decision in respect of his application  for  four  years,  the  judge
    should have found that it was procedurally unfair of the respondent  to
    rely on the absence of a CAS which was  an  inevitable  result  of  the
    respondent's delay.  There is a  suggestion  in  paragraph  18  of  the
    appellant's grounds that this third ground was capable of succeeding on
    its own.  I cannot agree.  This ground is dependent on there  being  an
    error in the judge's treatment of the deception  issue.   Having  found
    that the judge did not materially err in her handling of the  deception
    issue, the appellant could not have succeeded under the  Rules  in  any
    event.


10.  Permission was not granted on ground 4 and in  any  event  the  judge's
    decision on the falsity of this document had no bearing on the  judge's
    assessment of the issue of deception in taking the TOEIC test.


11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 23 September 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

