
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00894/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 April 2018                   |On 30 April 2018                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                           SHAIKH MAHFUJUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby (counsel) instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  M  J  Gillespie  promulgated  on  23  October  2017,  which
dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 18 July 1982 and is a national  of  Bangladesh.
On 2 February 2016 the respondent decided to revoke an  EEA  residence  card
issued to the appellant on 29 January 2014 on the understanding that he  was
the spouse of an EEA national who was exercising treaty rights in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  M  J  Gillespie  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  19  February  2018  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Rintoul gave permission to appeal stating

      It is (just) arguable that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  MJ  Gillespie
      erred in failing to make proper findings as to the intentions  of  the
      parties at the date of the marriage; it  is  not  entirely  clear  how
      their intentions on the date of  marriage  were  assessed,  given  the
      focus on future intentions.


      All grounds are arguable.

The Hearing

6. (a) For the appellant, Mr Sowerby moved the grounds of  appeal.  He  told
me that the fundamental flaw in the decision is twofold. The first  is  that
the Judge does not apply his mind to the intention of the appellant and  the
EEA national at the time of marriage. The second is that the  principles  in
Papagorjii (EEA Spouse- marriage of convenience) Greece  [2012]  UKUT  00038
(IAC) have not been correctly applied. He then  went  through  each  of  the
Five grounds of appeal.

(b) Mr Sowerby  told  me  that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself  about  the
appropriate time for an assessment of a marriage  of  convenience  and  that
the Judge's focus had  been  entirely  on  the  circumstances  at  the  date
immigration officers visited the appellant's home.

(c) Mr Sowerby be told me that throughout [15] of  the  decision  the  Judge
finds that there is mutual affection  between  the  appellant  and  the  EEA
national, but does not apply those findings to the question  of  whether  or
not they are parties to a genuine marriage.

(d) Mr Sowerby referred me to the appellant's  supplementary  bundle,  which
contains witness statements. He told me that there  was  evidence  that  the
property occupied by the appellant was being refurbished; he  told  me  that
there was an abundance of evidence that the appellant and EEA  national  had
lived at two addresses together, but he told me that none of  that  evidence
was reflected in findings of fact made by the Judge. He  argued  that  there
has been an inadequate analysis of the evidence.

(e) Mr Sowerby turned to the Judge's treatment  at  [13]  of  the  sponsor's
trip to  Bangladesh  and  told  me  that  the  Judge's  findings  there  are
unsustainable. He then moved to the fifth ground of appeal and told me  that
the Judge has not given adequate reasons for rejecting the evidence  of  the
appellant and his witnesses  who  include  the  EEA  national  and  the  EEA
national's sister. Mr Sowerby  reminded  me  that  the  test  in  Papajorgii
requires consideration of an explanation given by the appellant. He told  me
that crucial part of the guidance in Papajorgii has  not  been  followed  by
the Judge and that,  although  a  plausible  explanation  is  given  by  the
appellant which is supported by his  witnesses,  that  explanation  has  not
been considered by the Judge.

(f) Mr Sowerby urged me to allow the appeal and to set the decision aside.

7. For the respondent, Miss Kiss told me that the decision does not  contain
material errors. She took me to paragraph 41 of Rosa  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  and
told me that the Judge's consideration of the  facts  and  circumstances  at
the date of the visit by immigration officers and the  date  of  the  appeal
hearing was the correct way to assess intentions at the  time  of  marriage.
She took me to [11] of the decision and told me that, there, the Judge  sets
out adequate reasons for rejecting the evidence of  the  appellant  and  his
witnesses.  She  reminded  me  that  at  [5]  of  the  decision  the   Judge
specifically takes guidance from Papajorgii. She  told  me  that  the  Judge
carefully considered all of the evidence before reaching  a  decision  which
is well within the range of decisions available to the Judge. She  urged  me
to dismiss this appeal and to allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ it was held that  the  focus  in  relation  to  a
marriage of convenience ought to be on the intention of the parties  at  the
time the marriage was entered  into,  whereas  the  question  of  whether  a
marriage was subsisting looked to whether the  marital  relationship  was  a
continuing one. Nonetheless, the First-Tier  was  correct  to  look  at  the
evidence concerning the relationship between the Claimant  and  the  Sponsor
after the marriage itself, since that was capable of casting light on  their
intention at the time of marriage.

9. It was said in Sadovska v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  54  that  the  objective  to
obtain the right of entry and residence must be the predominant purpose  for
the marriage  to  be  one  of  convenience  and  a  marriage  could  not  be
considered to be a marriage of convenience  simply  because  it  brought  an
immigration advantage.  "Should the tribunal  conclude  that  Mr  Malik  was
delighted to find an EU national with whom he could form a relationship  and
who was willing to marry him, that does  not  necessarily  mean  that  their
marriage was a "marriage of convenience" still less  that  Ms  Sadovska  was
abusing her rights in entering into it".

10. In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ it was held that the legal  burden  was  on  the
SSHD  to  prove  that  an  otherwise  valid  marriage  was  a  marriage   of
convenience so as to justify the refusal of a residence card under  the  EEA
Regulations. The legal burden of proof in relation to marriage  lay  on  the
Secretary of State, but if she adduced evidence capable of pointing  to  the
conclusion that the marriage was one of convenience, the  evidential  burden
shifted to the applicant (paras 24 - 27). That the burden  of  proof  is  on
the respondent is now put beyond doubt by Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54

11. The Judge's findings of fact lie between [7] and [16] of  the  decision.
At [5] the Judge correctly takes guidance from Papajorgii, and  at  [6]  the
Judge takes guidance from Sadovska. At [7] the Judge explains why  he  finds
the evidence of the immigration officers  visit  to  the  appellant's  house
persuasive. He concludes [7] by saying

      It is necessary for the appellant  to  give  a  satisfactory  innocent
      explanation of the matter.

12. The Judge  moves  on  to  consider  whether  or  not  the  determinative
evidence amounts to a satisfactory innocent explanation.  At  [9]  and  [10]
the Judge says that there are two main reasons for  rejecting  the  evidence
for the appellant.  The  first  is  the  EEA  national's  view  of  marriage
expressed in  a  witness  statement;  the  second  is  that  the  house  the
appellant lived in contain none of the EEA national's possessions.  At  [11]
the Judge details inconsistency in the evidence of the EEA national.

13. [9] contains an incomplete reference to the  witness  statement  of  the
EEA national. At [9] the Judge quotes from part of paragraph 20 of  the  EEA
national's witness  statement.  The  Judge  interprets  the  EEA  national's
evidence is being that she sees no significance in marriage,  when  in  fact
what she says is that her marriage as  more  important  than  the  piece  of
paper which forms a marriage certificate. The Judge has  misinterpreted  her
evidence.

14. At [11] the Judge focuses on the conflict  between  the  EEA  national's
account of her possessions remaining in the property  which  she  viewed  as
home with the appellant, and the immigration officer's report that  none  of
her possessions were there. The Judge does not  adequately  explain  why  he
prefers  the  immigration  officer's  contemporaneous  notes  to   the   EEA
national's evidence.

15. The Judge's findings at [9] [10] and [11] of the decision  are  (in  the
Judge's mind) determinative of the appeal. Between [13] and [16]  the  Judge
sets out factors which weighed in the appellant's favour. At [13] the  Judge
records that the appellant and EEA national visited Bangladesh together.  At
[14] the Judge finds that the documentary evidence is consistent with  joint
occupation, which  he  distinguishes  from  evidence  of  permanent  marital
commitment. At [15] the Judge finds that  there  is  evidence  of  affection
passing between the appellant and the EEA national.

16. In his witness  statement  the  appellant  gives  his  account  of  what
happened when an immigration officer visited his  home.  The  decision  does
not contain an analysis of that  evidence  and  does  not  explain  why  the
immigration officer's notes are given greater weight than  the  evidence  of
the appellant, the evidence of the EEA national  and  the  evidence  of  the
appellant's other witnesses. The  Judge  does  not  adequately  explain  why
evidence of  joint  occupation  &  of  mutual  affection  (which  may  be  a
significant challenge to the immigration officer's account) is rejected.

17. In the final sentence of [5] of the decision the  Judge  identifies  his
task, but the judge does not analyse "the explanations  and  information  of
the claimant". Instead the Judge places weight on  an  immigration  officers
notebook and at [11] is critical of the EEA national's evidence.

18. The result is that the Judge  falls  into  material  error  of  law  for
failing to give  reasons  for  rejecting  the  explanation  offered  by  the
appellant. It is hard to find any analysis of the explanation given  by  the
appellant in the decision.

19. The Judge made findings about the appellant's circumstances at the  date
the immigration  officers  visited.  Even  though  the  appellant,  the  EEA
national and the  marriage  witness  gave  evidence  about  the  appellant's
circumstances at the  date  of  marriage,  the  decision  does  not  contain
meaningful analysis of that evidence. The appellant's current  circumstances
have relevance and can shed light on the intention at the date of  marriage,
but some consideration must be given to the available evidence of  intention
at the date of marriage. Rosa draws a clear distinction between  a  marriage
of  convenience  and  the  question  of  whether  or  not   that   marriages
subsisting.

20.    In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it
was held that (i) It was axiomatic that a  determination  disclosed  clearly
the reasons for a  tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral
evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or  a  document  to  be
worth no weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination
and for such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare  statement  that  a
witness was not believed or that a  document  was  afforded  no  weight  was
unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

21.  As the decision is tainted by material errors of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.





Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

22. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

23. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

24. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge M J Gillespie.

Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

26. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  23  October  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date  23 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


