
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: IA/00048/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard On: 11th September 2020        |On: 16th September 2020              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                              Zagham Abbas Butt

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder counsel instructed by JKR Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.



 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Pakistan with date of birth given as
    1.1.87, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 30.12.19, dismissing on
    human rights grounds his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State, dated 24.2.15, to refuse his application for Leave to  Remain
    in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 2. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was lodged  remarkably  late,  on
    9.5.19. However, in  a  decision  promulgated  6.9.19,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal noted the explanation for delay, namely the appellant's  claim
    that he unaware of and not  served  with  notice  of  the  respondent's
    decision until 25.4.19. In the premises, the judge was  satisfied  that
    time should be extended, so that the appeal was admitted.

 3. Before the appeal was heard, the appellant served  further  grounds  of
    appeal (undated) asserting that he was by then entitled  to  Indefinite
    Leave to Remain on the basis of 10 years' continuous  lawful  leave  in
    the UK, pursuant to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dean) dismissed the appeal on  30.12.19,
    finding the respondent's decision to refuse his Leave to Remain student
    application proportionate. The judge then went  on  to  find  that  the
    appellant had failed to demonstrate that his  immigration  status  from
    2008 onwards was lawful for a continuous period of 10 years. The  judge
    again conducted a proportionality balancing exercise, finding  that  it
    fell heavily  against  the  appellant  and  in  favour  of  the  public
    interest. The appeal was, therefore, dismissed.

 5. The appeal having been dismissed, the appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. In the  meantime,  in  January  2020  the
    appellant's representatives served further grounds of appeal, though it
    is not clear if permission to amend the grounds had  been  granted.  In
    any event, the First-tier Tribunal granted permission on all grounds on
    3.4.20, it being considered arguable that Judge Dean was  in  error  to
    find that all of the appellant's various applications had been  refused
    and appeals dismissed and to hold this against  the  appellant  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise. However, this was on the basis that
    the First-tier Tribunal in 2012 had in fact  allowed  the  appeal.  The
    judge granting permission also considered it arguable that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to reach a conclusion as to  the  service  of  the
    refusal letter, dated 24.2.15, and that it was arguable that  this  had
    been accepted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shanahan) in  extending
    time for the appeal.



Consideration of the Error of Law Issue

 6. I have carefully considered the impugned  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the light of the submissions and the grounds of application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. In particular,  I  have
    taken into account Ms Pinder's skeleton argument of  18.6.20,  together
    with the oral submissions made at the hearing before me.

 7. At the outset of the hearing the two representatives appeared to be  in
    agreement that there was sufficient error in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to require it to be set aside. The Rule 24 Reply  of  the
    respondent appeared to accept that, though without  any  reasons  being
    provided. It was in the light of that  approach  that  the  appellant's
    representatives attempted to short circuit matters by  writing  to  the
    Tribunal under cover  of  letter  dated  2.9.20,  suggesting  that  the
    hearing listed before me should be vacated and the  matter  immediately
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  Tribunal  responded  to  the
    effect that although the parties may be  agreed  there  is  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  this  was  a
    matter for the Upper Tribunal Judge to decide himself. Further,  if  an
    error of law is found, it would be for  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  to
    decided where the decision should be remade.

 8. In order to assist the two representatives, I explained to them that my
    provisional view was that Judge Cohen  had  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal in 2012, and invited them to address me on that issue.

 9. It is clear that some confusion was caused by the earlier  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 28.6.12 (Judge Cohen).  At  [29]
    of the 2019 decision Judge Dean took as a factor against the  appellant
    in  the  proportionality  balancing   exercise   that   "every   single
    application made by the Appellant has been refused and  any  appeal  he
    has chose to make has been dismissed which I find  weighs  against  the
    Appellant." At [7]  and  again  at  [17]  the  judge  stated  that  the
    appellant's Tier 4 appeal had been dismissed under  the  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds by Judge Cohen in 2012, although Judge Dean  noted
    that judge had made a recommendation  that  the  respondent  grant  the
    appellant 60 days leave to remain in order to register with a new  Tier
    4 sponsor.

10. However, at [11] of the 2012 Tribunal decision, relying  on  Sapkota  &
    Anor (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1320,  Judge  Cohen  found  that
    the respondent's decision to refuse his Tier 4 application was  not  in
    accordance with the law and there purported to allow the appeal "to the
    limited extent of remitting the  same  to  the  respondent  to  act  in
    accordance  with  appropriate  case  law,  reconsider  the  appellant's
    application and if maintaining the  refusal  promptly  issuing  removal
    directions." It was for that reason that Judge  Cohen  recommended  the
    grant of 60 days temporary leave. Nevertheless, it is important to note
    that the decision concluded by dismissing the appeal.

11. In the meantime, the appellant went on to make  a  further  application
    for Leave to Remain outside the  Rules,  refused  without  a  right  of
    appeal in December 2013. The following year he made  an  EEA  Residence
    Card application, which was also refused. Neither of those applications
    are particularly relevant to the issues in the appeal.

12. For the reasons set out below, and after taking into consideration  the
    arguments of Ms Pinder, I am satisfied that given the way in which  the
    Tribunal's decision in 2012 was drafted the appeal cannot  be  said  to
    have been allowed, although that may have been the intention  of  Judge
    Cohen.

13. I first note that the respondent clearly understood that the appeal had
    been dismissed, stating as much  in  the  subsequent  refusal  decision
    letter of 24.2.15. As set out below, I have reached the conclusion that
    the 2012 appeal was indeed dismissed and, therefore,  that  Judge  Dean
    was factually correct in 2019 to  state  as  he  did  at  [29]  of  the
    decision, as set out above.

14. The Court of Appeal recently considered a similar situation in  SSHD  v
    Devani [2002] EWCA Civ 612, where the  body  of  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal purported to allow the appeal under article 3 but  the  Notice
    of Decision dismissed the appeal on article 3  grounds.  The  Court  of
    Appeal considered the Upper Tribunal's decision in Katsonga [2016] UKUT
    228 (IAC), which held that whilst Rule 31 could be used  to  correct  a
    misprint or make the judge's meaning clear, it could  not  be  used  to
    change the substance of a  judgement  or  reverse  a  decision  at  the
    instance of the losing party. The Court of Appeal  held  that  Katsonga
    was wrongly decided and that Rule 31 can be used to  express  what  the
    court in question actually intended. "In the case of a  simple  failure
    of expression - most obviously a straightforward slip of the pen -  the
    error can and should be corrected even if it  alters  the  outcome  (as
    initially expressed) by 180�".  The  Upper  Tribunal  in  MH  (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]  UKUT  00125  (IAC)
    reached a similar conclusion, pointing out that a  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge considering an application for permission to  appeal  can  review
    the decision under Rule 35 and, where a decision concludes  by  stating
    an outcome which is clearly at odds with the intention  of  the  judge,
    correct the obvious error under Rule 31.

15. It follows that it would have been open to the appellant  to  apply  to
    have the obvious slip in the 2012 decision corrected  under  the  'slip
    rule' of Rule 31 of the Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and
    Asylum Chamber) Procedure Rules 2014, or  to seek permission to  appeal
    the 2012 decision on the basis that there had been an obvious  slip  in
    dismissing the appeal. Neither action was pursued. In consequence, I am
    satisfied the appeal remained dismissed.

16. Although I am satisfied that the  appeal  was  dismissed  in  2012,  on
    14.11.14, the respondent issued the appellant  with  a  60-day  letter,
    apparently  implementing  Judge  Cohen's  recommendation  in  the  2012
    decision. Reading that decision, I accept that the  respondent  appears
    to have treated the appellant's 2011 application as still  outstanding,
    purporting to suspend consideration of the application  for  a  further
    period of 60 calendar  days  to  enable  him  either  to  withdraw  his
    application and make a new application in a different category,  or  to
    obtain a new CAS and  submit  a  variation  of  his  2011  application.
    However, the 60-day period of grace expired in  January  2015,  without
    the appellant providing either a valid CAS letter from a Tier 4 sponsor
    or any new application.  In  consequence,  on  24.2.15  the  respondent
    refused the Tier 4 application made in December 2011.

17. Ms Pinder's skeleton argument and her oral submissions made a number of
    inaccurate assertions. First,  she  asserted  that  the  November  2014
    letter granted the appellant 60 days' leave. That is not the  case.  It
    does not necessarily follow that a discretionary period of grace within
    which to put his house in order amounts to the grant  of  a  period  or
    leave or extension of leave. No such reference to a grant or  extension
    of leave appears in the November  2014  letter.  As  further  explained
    below,  that  the  respondent  was  willing  to  reconsider  the   2011
    application does not amount to granting leave whilst that  decision  is
    made. Ms Pinder also inaccurately submitted  that  after  the  November
    2014 letter the appellant made an application. He did not; he  provided
    no CAS and made no new application.

18. The history is that the appellant had entered the UK in September  2008
    with a Tier 4 visa valid until 31.12.11. He made an in-time application
    to extend that leave, which was refused. He then made an in-time appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal, so it follows that his leave  was  extended
    by virtue of s3C until the 28.6.12 dismissal of  his  appeal.  Although
    the respondent was prepared  to  treat  the  appellant's  2011  Tier  4
    application as remaining open up and until  its  decision  of  24.2.15,
    refusing  the  application,  that   exercise   of   discretion   on   a
    recommendation of the First-tier  Tribunal,  does  not  equate  to  the
    extension of leave, or  render  his  previous  leave  valid  until  the
    outcome of the reconsideration, the 2015  refusal  decision.  That  the
    respondent was still prepared to give consideration to the  application
    did not. extend his leave beyond the 3C cut off  when  his  appeal  was
    dismissed on 28.6.12.

19. It follows that the appellant's valid leave ended on 28.6.12 and he has
    had no further period of leave since. In the  premises,  he  cannot  be
    entitled to Indefinite Leave to  Remain  on  the  basis  of  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence, regardless  as  to  whether  and  when  he
    became aware of the 2015 refusal decision.  To that extent, Judge Deans
    was strictly correct to state that all the appellant's applications had
    been refused and all his appeals dismissed, so that no error of law can
    arise from that assertion.

Was it necessary to decide when the  appellant  became  aware  of  the  2015
decision?

20. It is the respondent's  February  2015  decision  which  the  appellant
    claims to have been unaware of  until  2019,  resulting  in  his  late-
    submitted appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  May  2019.  For  the
    reasons set out above, whether or  not  the  claim  of  non-receipt  is
    accepted, the appellant cannot demonstrate continuous lawful leave from
    2008 through to 2019, a period in  excess  of  10  years.  Whenever  he
    received the February 2015 decision  refusing  to  extend  his  Tier  4
    leave, the fact is that his valid leave expired in June 2012.

21. Further, even if the appellant had received the February  2015  refusal
    decision and made an  in-time  appeal  against  it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, even a decision in his favour could not have  extended  leave
    which had already expired in 2012. Also, given that his  Tier  4  leave
    had expired, and that he neither  provided  no  new  CAS,  nor  made  a
    further application on an alternative basis within the  60  days  limit
    provided, there was absolutely  no  basis  upon  which  he  could  have
    succeeded in an appeal based on the Immigration Rules. In this  regard,
    Ms Pinder pointed out that as the 2015 refusal related to a decision on
    an application made in 2011, the appellant was entitled  to  appeal  on
    both Immigration and Human Rights grounds.

22. Although the judge granting permission considered it arguable that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had not  reached  a  decision  on  service  of  the
    February 2015 refusal decision, at [22] of the impugned  decision,  the
    judge did rehearse the competing arguments and concluded at  [23]  that
    Judge Shanahan's decision extending time was limited to  the  issue  of
    whether to  grant  an  extension  of  time  and  did  not  address  the
    substantive issue of service of the February 2015 refusal decision,  or
    the appellant's awareness of the decision. I do not accept the argument
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was bound by the decision  extending
    time to appeal, as suggested, and agree that that decision did not make
    a finding as to whether and when service of the  refusal  decision  had
    been made. Although the First-tier Tribunal extended time and  admitted
    the appeal in its preliminary issue decision 6.9.19, I am not satisfied
    that that decision was a finding that the appellant had not been served
    with the 2015 decision until 2019.

23. At [24] Judge Dean noted the appellant's  claim  that  he  only  became
    aware of the February 2015 refusal decision when it was  referenced  in
    the refusal of his EEA Residence Card application. However, at [26]  of
    the  impugned  decision  the  judge  concluded  that  on  the   limited
    information and immigration history available, it was not  possible  to
    establish that the appellant's presence since 2008 had been lawful. "In
    addition, I find  the  evidence  submitted  by  the  appellant  is  not
    sufficiently  detailed  or  accurate  to  provide  information  to  the
    required standard which establishes a period  of  10  years  continuous
    lawful residence." This was repeated at [27]: "...without more, I  find
    it cannot be determined on the information before  me  that  there  has
    been 10 years continuous lawful residence in this country. I  therefore
    find that the appellant's mere presence in this  country  carries  very
    little weight in the appellant's favour in this human rights appeal and
    is outweighed by the public interest."

24. At [21] of the impugned decision, the judge referenced the decision  of
    the High Court in R (on the application of Rahman) v SSHD  [2019]  EWHC
    2952 (Admin). There the court noted that, pursuant to s4  of  the  1971
    Act, the burden of proving that notice in writing had been  "given"  to
    the applicant lay with the respondent. However,  8ZA  and  8ZB  of  the
    Immigration (Leave to Enter  and  Remain)  (Amendment)  Order  2000  as
    amended in 2013, provides for notice to be given by (inter alia)  being
    "sent by postal service to a postal address provided for correspondence
    by the person or the person's representative." Article 8ZB states  "(1)
    where a notice is sent in accordance with  article  8ZA,  it  shall  be
    deemed to have been given to the person affected, unless  the  contrary
    is proved." It follows that provided the respondent can demonstrate  on
    the balance of probabilities that the letter was sent  to  the  address
    provided  by  the  applicant  for  correspondence,  the  respondent  is
    entitled to presume that it has been received by him  and  that  he  is
    aware of its contents. The burden is on the  appellant  to  prove  non-
    receipt.

25. I am satisfied that the correct interpretation of the above is that the
    First-tier Tribunal found, and was entitled to find, that the appellant
    had failed to demonstrate that he had accumulated a period of 10 years'
    lawful residence. The burden was for the appellant to discharge but  on
    the facts of the case as I find them to be, the appellant could not, in
    any event, have demonstrated 10 years' continuous lawful residence,  as
    his  leave  expired  in  2012.  Properly  understood,  the   chronology
    demonstrates that whether or not the appellant received or became aware
    of the February 2015 refusal decision when it was sent, or in  2019  as
    claimed, and although time was extended  so  that  he  was  allowed  to
    appeal the decision to the First-tier Tribunal,  he  could  never  have
    demonstrated 10 years' continuous lawful residence under paragraph 276B
    of the Immigration Rules, as his leave expired in 2012.

26. Further, even if the issue remains material, the burden was on  him  to
    demonstrate that he had not been 'given' the decision  in  2015.  There
    seems little doubt from the decision notice itself that it was sent  to
    him at the address he had authorised  for  correspondence,  namely  his
    then legal representatives, SHN Solicitors at their address in  London.



27. Given that no CAS was provided and he had no educational  sponsor,  the
    appellant could not succeed under the Rules on the appeal  against  the
    2015 Tier 4 refusal decision. In  passing,  I  note  that  one  of  his
    arguments at the First-tier Tribunal was that he could not get a  place
    at an educational establishment because  he  was  unable  to  take  the
    requisite English language test because the Home  Office  had  retained
    his passport. However, he could have either asked for the return of his
    passport or asked for arrangements to be made for it to be provided  to
    an English language test provider. In the  premises,  the  argument  is
    without merit.

28. In summary, whilst complaint is made that the judge does not appear  to
    have reached a decision as to whether to accept the  appellant's  claim
    that he neither received nor was aware of  the  February  2015  refusal
    decision until 2019, I have to conclude the issue was not  material  as
    it transpires a resolution of that issue could not be material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal on immigration grounds with reference to the long
    residence qualification. In the premises, no error of law is  disclosed
    by this ground.

The Human Rights Appeal

29. The other right of appeal was on human rights grounds,  in  respect  of
    which the extent to which the appellant met the Rules would be relevant
    to any article 8 proportionality balancing exercise. However, it has to
    be borne in mind that the appellant came to the  UK  with  leave  as  a
    student which is not a route to settlement.  Further,  his  only  human
    rights claim is in respect of his private life; he claims no partner or
    child. Pursuant to section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, little weight is to be given to private life developed
    in the UK whilst immigration status is precarious or unlawful. Whatever
    view is taken of the history set out below, the appellant's immigration
    status was always unlawful.

30. Ms Pinder raised in her submissions that because of Judge Cohen's slip,
    the  appellant  was  unfairly  deprived  of  reaching  the  10   years'
    continuous lawful residence qualification. However, even had the appeal
    been allowed to the limited extent of remitting it to  the  respondent,
    it is not clear that the appellant could have reached that threshold.

31. Perhaps the strongest argument of those raised by  Ms  Pinder  is  that
    Judge  Dean  failed  to  accord  the  appellant  any  credit   in   the
    proportionality balancing  exercise  for  the  fact  that  Judge  Cohen
    intended to allow the appeal in 2012 and that the appellant was thereby
    prejudiced.

32. For this purpose, I leave out of account the claim not to  have  become
    aware of the 2015 refusal decision until 2019, which  carries  its  own
    conundrums, including why the appellant never pursued the  matter  with
    the respondent. Proceeding as if the appellant had  received  the  2015
    when it was sent, it is difficult to put oneself into the  shoes  of  a
    judge considering a hypothetical appeal in 2015 with such a  convoluted
    history as set out above. However, I accept in principle that it  would
    have been open to a judge  to  take  into  account  in  the  article  8
    proportionality  balancing  exercise  that  in  2012  Judge  Cohan  had
    intended to allow the appeal to the limited extent of remitting  it  to
    the Secretary of State to make a lawful decision, recommending a 60 day
    period to enable the appellant to obtain  a  CAS  from  an  educational
    sponsor. It is, therefore,  worth  considering  what  weight  could  or
    should have been given to that fact.

33. First, it is now practically impossible now to wind the clock back  and
    determine in any objective way what the appellant would or  might  have
    done had the appeal been allowed in 2012 by remitting for  remaking  of
    the decision by the Secretary of State and then  been  allowed  his  60
    days. However, I  can  only  observe  that  the  appellant  effectively
    demonstrated by his failure to act within time  on  the  November  2014
    grant of 60 days to find an educational sponsor (a  decision  which  he
    admits he did receive) that he was unable or unwilling to continue with
    educational studies in the UK. There is no credible evidence to suggest
    that his behaviour would have  been  any  different  in  2012  to  that
    exhibited in 2014. The appellant's argument is effectively a series  of
    'ifs'. If Judge Cohen had allowed  the  appeal  his  leave  would  have
    remained extant,  and  if  the  respondent  had  back  then  given  the
    appellant 60-days, and if he had provided a CAS, and if he had received
    the 2015 refusal decision in 2015, he would have been  able  to  appeal
    with his leave extant. However, none of that would have got him  to  10
    years' long residence then. He would in addition have had  to  rely  on
    proving that he had not become aware of the 2015 decision  until  after
    he qualified for 10 years' long residence, which it  is  not  clear  he
    would have  been  able  to  do.  Frankly  there  are  simply  too  many
    ponderable or variables to reach a conclusion that Judge  Cohen's  slip
    caused the appellant any prejudice that could carry material weight  in
    a  subsequent  article  8  proportionality  balancing   exercise.   The
    appellant was given  the  opportunity  to  find  a  CAS  but  evidently
    squandered that so that on reconsideration his application made in 2011
    was refused in 2015. When he received or became aware of that  decision
    is not material to the proportionality assessment as it does not affect
    the length of his lawful leave.

34. Having carefully considered the judge's assessments  between  [16]  and
    [18] and between [27] and [29], I am satisfied that the  judge  made  a
    lawful consideration of  all  relevant  factors  for  and  against  the
    appellant in an article 8 proportionality balancing exercise where  the
    appellant was relying on private life only against the public  interest
    in immigration control. The judge was not wrong to  conclude  that  all
    the  appellant's  applications  had  been  refused  and   his   appeals
    dismissed. It is also relevant that the appellant  had  not  sought  to
    either appeal or have corrected the 2012 dismissal of his appeal.  Even
    though Judge Cohen may well have intended to allow the appeal  in  2012
    to the limited extent of remitting the decision  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to be remade,  as  it  turns  out  the  respondent  followed  the
    recommendation in 2014, allowed the 60-days grace period, and  made  an
    effective reconsideration of the  decision  in  2015.  In  effect,  the
    appellant  was  not  prejudiced  by  reconsideration  of  his  Tier   4
    application, the requirements of which he  could  not,  in  any  event,
    meet.  I  find  no  error  of  law  in  respect  of   the   article   8
    proportionality assessment.

35. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.

    I make no anonymity direction.




Signed: DMW Pickup


Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Date:    14 September 2020

