

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00188/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 August 2013                             |On 2 September 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     MHA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah instructed by A K Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity direction under  rule  14(1)(b)
      of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)
      prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead
      directly or indirectly to the appellant's children  being  identified.
      The appellant and any member of his family should only be referred  to
      by the initials used in this determination.


   2. The appellant who  was  born  on  4  January  1978  is  a  citizen  of
      Bangladesh.  The appellant, his wife and daughter  ("A")  entered  the
      United Kingdom on 29 May 2006.  "A" was one month short of her  second
      birthday on  that  date  having  been  born  on  24  June  2004.   The
      appellant's wife was then six  months  pregnant.   They  were  granted
      leave until 14 November 2006.  Since that  date,  the  appellant,  his
      wife and "A" have overstayed.  Since the appellant and his  wife  have
      been in the UK they have had two sons, "Y1" and "Y2" born respectively
      on 1 August 2006 and 22  January  2010.   They  are  all  citizens  of
      Bangladesh.

   3. On 17 September 2010, the appellant applied for leave to remain in the
      UK outside the Rules.  On 29 March 2011 that application  was  refused
      without a right of appeal.  Thereafter  there  were  further  dealings
      between the parties including a Judicial Review application.   In  the
      result, in a decision letter dated 7 December 2012  the  Secretary  of
      State refused the appellant's application under the Immigration  Rules
      and Article 8 of the ECHR. On 19 December 2012, the Secretary of State
      made a decision to remove  the  appellant  by  way  of  directions  to
      Bangladesh under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

   4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      promulgated on 7 March 2013, Judge McLachlan dismissed the appellant's
      appeal.  The Judge found that the appellant's removal  (together  with
      his wife and three children) would not breach Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
      Following the initial refusal of permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal by the First-tier Tribunal, on 2 May 2013 the Upper  Tribunal
      (UTJ Latter) granted the appellant permission to appeal on  the  basis
      that the Judge may have erred in law:

           "In her assessment of where the best interests of  the  children
           lay and how  they  weighed  in  the  balance  along  with  other
           relevant factors against the interest of immigration control  as
           an aspect of one or more of the legitimate aims  within  Article
           8(2)."

   5. The appeal first came before me on 4 July 2013.  In a  decision  dated
      12 July 2013, I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  did
      involve the making of an  error of law  in  that  the  Judge  had  not
      adequately dealt with the "best interests" of the appellant's children
      (in particular "A") in  reaching  her  finding  that  the  appellant's
      removal would be proportionate.  As a consequence, I  set  aside  that
      decision and directed that the appeal should be relisted before me  to
      remake the decision in respect of Article 8.  The  appeal  was  listed
      for a resumed hearing on 14 August 2013.

   6. At the outset of the hearing,  on  the  appellant's  application,  and
      without objection from Mr Deller who  represented  the  respondent,  I
      admitted into evidence a number of documents not previously before the
      First-tier Tribunal under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008. Ms Jegarajah also sought permission to rely upon
      additional grounds namely that the appellant met the  requirements  of
      Appendix FM in particular, on the basis that two of his children  ("A"
      and "Y1") had resided in the UK for a continuous period of seven years
      so that EX.1 applied.

   7. At his request, I granted Mr Deller a short adjournment  in  order  to
      consider the new documents and the appellant's  application  to  amend
      the grounds upon which the appeal was to be decided.   Following  that
      short adjournment, Mr Deller informed me that  he  was  conceding  the
      appeal on the Secretary  of  State's  behalf  in  the  light  of  that
      documentation and the fact that two of the  appellant's  children  had
      been continuously resident in the UK now for seven years.  He  invited
      me to allow the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   8. Mr Deller indicated that the consequence  of  the  appellant's  appeal
      being  allowed  would  be  that  the  appellant   would   be   granted
      discretionary leave.  It  is  clear  that  the  appellant's  wife  and
      children's claims were considered to be dependent upon  the  appellant
      (see letter  dated  27  February  2013  from  UKBA  addressed  to  the
      appellant). Mr Deller indicated that it was,  as  a  consequence,  his
      belief that the appellant's  family  would  be  granted  discretionary
      leave in line with that of the appellant.  That must follow, it  seems
      to me, since the appellant's claim to remain in the UK under Article 8
      rests upon the impact upon his children, "A" and "Y1" that their  best
      interests are to remain in the  UK.   In  reality,  if  the  appellant
      cannot be removed then none of  his  family  can  be  removed  without
      breaching Article 8.

Decision

   9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal involved the making of an error of law and is set aside.

  10. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under Article  8
      of the ECHR.










                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:








