
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00998/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Orally at Field House              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 September 2013                          |On 23 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                              Anil kumar baraju

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Mr Baraju was successful before the First-tier Tribunal in  his  appeal
    against a decision by the Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  very  his
    leave from a student to Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.   He  was
    successful on two bases.  First of all that he met the  criteria  under
    the Immigration Rules in the light of the case of  Khatel  [2013]  UKUT
    0044 (IAC) and secondly, in the  alternative,  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had not had regard to her own flexibility policy  such  that  the
    decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   Mr   Baraju   was
    unsuccessful in his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on  human  rights
    grounds.  The Secretary of State had at the hearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  withdrawn  her  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  in
    accordance with Section 47.

2.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal, in essence  on
    the basis that Khatel had been  overturned  by  the  Court  of  Appeal.
    There is no dispute that Khatel has been overturned and it  was  agreed
    by the parties before me that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to allow the appeal as not being in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    Rules was an error and I therefore set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination insofar as allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules is concerned.  I re-make that decision  and  dismiss  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

3.   There was no challenge  by  Mr  Baraju  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision to dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  and  that
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore  stands.   There  was  no
    challenge by the Secretary of State to the First-tier Tribunal decision
    that the decision was not in accordance with the  law  because  of  the
    failure by the Secretary of State  to  apply  her  flexibility  policy.
    That decision therefore stands.

4.   Ms Kiss, very valiantly, tried to persuade me to  allow  her  to  amend
    her grounds of appeal arguing that the application  by  Mr  Baraju  was
    premature as per Raju & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 754.  I  took  the  view
    that it was not a premature application.  He  was  able  to  make  that
    application which he made just over a  month  before  his  leave  as  a
    student ran out.  The fact that it was refused was not because  it  was
    premature but because he did not meet the criteria under the Rules.   I
    therefore did not grant permission to the Secretary of State  to  amend
    her grounds but, even if I had, I would not have allowed the appeal  on
    that basis.


    In summary the First-tier Tribunal decision that the appeal is  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules is set aside and in remaking dismissed; the
    decision that the decision of the Respondent was not in accordance with
    the law stands.



Signed on 20th September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
