
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01179/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 July 2014                                  |On 29th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           Mohammad Rofiqul islam
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bhuiyan, AK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mohammad Rofiqul Islam, was born on 16 July 1984 and  is
    a citizen of Bangladesh.  The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on
    23 October 2012 as the spouse of Husna Begum with leave to enter  until
    26 December 2014.  On  18  November  2013,  Husna  Begum  informed  the
    Secretary of State that her relationship  with  the  appellant  was  no
    longer subsisting and that she did not intend to live with him  as  her
    spouse in the future.  There are no children of the relationship and Ms
    Begum claimed that the appellant had been violent and  abusive  towards
    her.  In consequence, on 9  December  2013,  a  decision  was  made  to
    curtail the appellant's leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Devlin) which, in a determination promulgated on 18 March  2014,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  proceeded
    without a hearing ("on the papers").  The  judge  had  before  him  the
    communications which the respondent had received  from  Ms  Begum.   At
    [35], the judge found that he was satisfied that Ms Begum had sent  the
    documents including an email to the respondent which had, in turn,  led
    to the respondent curtailing the appellant's leave.  The appellant  had
    claimed that he and Ms Begum were "in the process of reconciling  their
    differences".  He produced no evidence in support of that  claim  which
    was rejected by the judge.  At [45], the judge found:

         It follows that the factual basis upon which the appellant's  leave
         to enter was granted has  been  radically  undermined  and  I  have
         little doubt that had the Entry Clearance Officer known that within
         one year of issuing the  appellant's  visa  the  parties  would  be
         living separately and Ms Begum would be  demanding  a  divorce,  he
         would [not] have issued it.

 3. The judge found  that  grounds  for  curtailment  had  been  proved  in
    accordance with paragraph 323(ii) of HC 395.

 4. Mr Bhuiyan, for the appellant,  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  had
    sought a "paper"  determination  of  his  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal.
    However,  the  appellant  had   been   let   down   by   his   previous
    representatives who had failed to inform the Tribunal and the Secretary
    of State that the appellant had been a victim of domestic  violence  at
    the hands of his wife.  He submitted that the  respondent  should  have
    made enquiries which would have discovered these facts and  could  have
    given the appellant a basis for remaining in the United Kingdom as  the
    victim of domestic violence.

 5. This appeal is entirely without merit.  The appellant does not  suggest
    that Judge Devlin had any knowledge whatever of the claim which he  has
    now made of domestic violence.  The appellant acknowledges that he  was
    invited by the Tribunal to submit further evidence but chose not to  do
    so.  There is no evidence that he  has  made  any  complaint  or  claim
    against his previous solicitor.  The judge determined the appeal on the
    basis of the evidence he had before him and, in doing so, I cannot  see
    that he made any error in his approach to or analysis of that evidence.
     It was open to the judge to accept that the documents on the file  had
    been written by Ms Begum and for him to conclude  in  consequence  that
    the appellant's marriage  with  Ms  Begum  was  no  longer  subsisting.
    Indeed, the only submission made by the appellant  in  writing  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal was that he was attempting  to  reconcile  with  Ms
    Begum, a claim which does not sit easily with the account which he  now
    advances that he has been  the  victim  of  domestic  violence.   I  am
    satisfied that the judge has not erred in law either as asserted in the
    grounds of appeal or at all.  I find that this is an  appeal  in  which
    permission should never have been granted at all.  The suggestion  made
    by Judge P J  M  Hollingworth  who  granted  permission  that  "enquiry
    appeared necessary in the effect of analysing  the  intentions  of  the
    parties and the context of the subsistence or otherwise of the marriage
    (sic)" was wholly unfounded.

DECISION

 6. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

