

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01796/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool County Court               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2018                               |On 7 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                          Mr MUHAMMAD SHAHID NADEEM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, Counsel, instructed by Rayan Adams
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1     This is an appeal brought by the Appellant  against  the  decision  of
      the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Frankish  dated  12.6.17.  The
      Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan had appealed against the decision  of
      the Respondent dated 6.4.16, refusing to vary the Appellant's leave to
      enter or remain and making a decision to remove. The Appellant had  on
      7.10.14 made an application for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 1
      General migrant under para 245CD of  the  Immigration  Rules,  relying
      upon five years past residence in the United Kingdom under the points-
      based scheme.

2     As the decision was made on or after 6.4.15 to refuse  an  application
      to vary leave to enter or remain made  before  2.3.15  and  where  the
      person was seeking leave to remain as a  Tier  1  Migrant,  Article  9
      (1)(b) of the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No.  3,  Transitional
      and Saving Provisions) Order 2014 (as amended by The  Immigration  Act
      2014 (Commencement No.  4,  Transitional  and  Saving  Provisions  and
      Amendment) Order 2015)  results  in  the  'saved'  appeal   provisions
      continuing to apply to the present appeal, including the  availability
      of a ground of appeal that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with
      immigration rules.  Although I had expressed a  view  at  the  hearing
      before me that the notice of immigration  decision,  referring  as  it
      does to such 'old' rights of appeal, may have been in  incorrect  form
      for a decision taken on 6.4.16, it would appear, considering the terms
      of the abovementioned Commencement Orders, that in fact the appeal did
      stand to be allowed or dismissed on the basis of whether Appellant met
      the requirements of immigration rules, rather than, as for  post  2014
      Act appeals, merely whether the decision was unlawful under s.6  Human
      Rights Act 1998.

3     It is also to be  noted  that  the  notice  of  decision  contained  a
      requirement under s.120 NIAA that the Appellant provide a statement of
      any additional grounds on which he claimed a right to  reside  in  the
      UK.

4     In the separate reasons for refusal  letter  also  dated  6.4.16,  the
      Respondent refused the application for indefinite leave to  remain  on
      the following grounds:

      (i)   in an earlier application for leave to remain, made on  14.9.09,
           the Appellant had made  false  representations  as  regards  his
           level of income (the Respondent having conducted enquiries  with
           HMRC  about the Appellant's declared level  of  income   in  the
           years 2008 to 2015), and the Respondent finding that there  were
           therefore  general  grounds   for   refusing   the   Appellant's
           application for leave to remain under paragraph 322 (2) in  Part
           9 of the Immigration Rules, and the application  also  therefore
           falling to be refused under paragraph 245CD(b),  which  requires
           that the application must not fall  for  refusal  under  general
           grounds for refusal; and

      (ii)  that the Appellant had failed to provide documents specified  in
           para 245CD - SD of the rules in respect of his absences from the
           UK during the five-year period prior to the date of application.

5     The Appellant appealed to the First tier. When the matter came  before
      the Judge, Ms Rutherford, Counsel for the Appellant  provided  in  her
      skeleton argument a statement of additional grounds in response to the
      section  120  notice,  asserting  that  the  Appellant  also  met  the
      requirements for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  grounds  of  long
      residence under paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  on  the
      grounds that he had 10 years continuous lawful residence  in  the  UK,
      although the Judge noted that 276B also  contained  a  requirement  at
      (iii) that an applicant does not fall for refusal  under  the  general
      grounds for refusal (eg 322(2)).

6     The Appellant's case before the Judge was that,  in  relation  to  the
      discrepancies between his self employed income in 2009/10, this  arose
      from the dishonest actions of a former accountant; the  Appellant  had
      since submitted an amended tax return for that year declaring a higher
      income than in the original  return.  In  relation  to  the  specified
      evidence issue, the Appellant submitted that he had in  fact  provided
      the relevant specified evidence.

7     In his decision, the Judge held at [15] that there  was  no  merit  in
      the Respondent's second ground for refusing the  application  relating
      to lack of specified documents.

8     In relation to the first ground, the Judge considered the  Appellant's
      explanation for the discrepancies  in  his  declared  income  at  [17]
      onwards. The Judge made certain observations regarding  the  perceived
      plausibility of the Appellant's explanations in the last four lines of
      [20], and in a number of factors which the Judge  described  as  'side
      issues' at [22].

9     In the last 2 lines of  [22],  the  Judge  states  'The  key  problem,
      however, is that I simply do not believe  that  the  Appellant  had  a
      genuine business'.

10    The Judge sets out at [23]  that  the  Appellant  was  cross  examined
      about which tax returns he had seen or not seen, and  the  Judge  held
      that 'As a  businessman,  I  find  it  totally  implausible  that  the
      Appellant would have failed to keep  a  copy  of  the  return  he  had
      approved, if only to compare when he came to  file  a  return  in  the
      following year.'

11    The Judge then sets out at  [24]  that  the  Appellant  was  asked  to
      clarify the nature  of  his  business.  The  questions  posed  to  the
      Appellant, and his responses, are recorded at [24] to [29].

12    At [30], the Judge finds:

           "30 For his original applications,  the  Appellant  relied  upon
           income from  consultancy  services  including  the  year  ending
           5.4.10. For his current  application,  he  relies  upon  amended
           figures for that income from consultancy services. My conclusion
           concerning  his  evidence  in  relation  to  his  work   as   an
           educational  and  immigration  consultant  is  that  it   is   a
           masterclass in flannel. What he has to say about the services he
           was providing is  complete  and  utter  rubbish.  There  was  no
           pyramid, as the appellant describes, with Trading 4 Help at  the
           top acting as an educational and immigration  consultant  paying
           the Appellant as an educational and  immigration  consultant  to
           train others as  educational  and  immigration  consultants  and
           meeting  the  Appellant's  invoices   thereto   for   "Marketing
           Services" in respect of some 25 individuals per invoice who,  as
           stated, also said to be training as educational and  immigration
           consultants.

           31 Having concluded  that  the  Appellant  relies  upon  a  sham
           business, I conclude that the objection under 322  is  made  out
           and the Appellant fails to qualify under 245 CD.

           32 Miss Rutherford  says  that  it  is  irrelevant  whether  the
           Appellant fails under 245 CD because he is entitled  to  qualify
           under 276B. I disagree. Having failed under 245 CD via  322  for
           false  information,  he  also  fails  under  276B(iii).  It  was
           confirmed that no particular personal relationships  are  relied
           upon. That being so, there are no exceptional  circumstances  to
           justify consideration of article 8 outside of the rules.'

13    The appeal was dismissed.

14    In grounds of appeal dated  26.6.17,  the  Appellant  avers  that  the
      Judge materially erred in law in his decision by proceeding  unfairly,
      the Appellant's credibility being assailed  in  the  determination  in
      circumstances where no credibility issues  were  raised  in  the  Home
      Office refusal; he had no opportunity to gather  evidence,  or  indeed
      his thoughts,  demonstrating  that  his  business  was  credible;  his
      Counsel  had no  opportunity  to  consider  the  position  as  regards
      credibility or to take instructions; the Judge proceeded in breach  of
      guidelines in MNM (Surendran guidelines for adjudicators) Kenya [2000]
      UKIAT 00005 and ST (child asylum seekers) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT  00292
      (IAC). Further, the Appellant asserts that the  tribunal  appeared  to
      take into account speculation as  to  the  likely  results  of  online
      research denied to it as a result of AM  (fair hearing)  Sudan  [2015]
      UK UT00656.  If  undertaking  research  outside  the  context  of  the
      evidence before the parties  was  impermissibly  unfair,  reliance  on
      speculation as to the likely results  of  that  research  was  grossly
      unfair.

15     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the   First-tier   Tribunal
      Nightingale on a 13.12.17 on the basis that the grounds of appeal were
      arguable, and additionally, given that the Respondent relied upon  one
      of the general grounds for refusal, it was  arguable  that  the  Judge
      also fell into error at paragraph  1  of  his  decision  in  directing
      himself that the burden of proof was on the Appellant, rather than  on
      the Respondent to make out the alleged fraud.

16    Before me,  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  Parkin  (not  Ms
      Rutherford), and the Respondent by Mr  McVeety.  I  heard  submissions
      from both parties, which are recorded in my record proceedings.

17    During the proceedings, I raised the question as  to  whether  it  was
      known who had asked the questions  regarding  in  the  nature  of  the
      Appellant's business at [24] to  [29].  As  procedural  unfairness  is
      asserted in the grounds of appeal, it may have been of  assistance  to
      have received a witness statement from Ms Rutherford setting out  what
      the Appellant asserts actually transpired during the hearing.  However
      there is no such statement. Mr McVeety stated that the notes taken  by
      Mr Malcolm, Presenting Officer before Judge, did not establish who the
      questions about the Appellant's business were asked by. He  suggested,
      without objection from Mr Parkin, that I consult the Tribunal file  to
      see if the Judge's own record proceedings made matters any clearer.  I
      did so.

18    There is on file a typed record signed by the Judge. Copies were  made
      for the parties to consider.

19    I am of the view, and both parties were  in  agreement,  that  it  was
      sufficiently clear from the  record that:

      (i)   the questions regarding the nature of the  Appellant's  business
           were asked by the Judge himself;
      (ii)  the  Judge's  summary  of  the  submissions  made  by  both  the
           Respondent  and  the  Appellant  indicated  that   no   argument
           regarding the genuineness of the Appellant's business  was  made
           by either party;
      (iii) there  was  nothing  within  the  record  of  proceedings  which
           indicated that the Judge invited any submission to  be  made  to
           him regarding the genuineness of the Appellant's business.

      Relevant rules:

20    Immigration Rules part 6A: the points-based system


           "Tier 1 (General) Migrants

           245C. Purpose
           This route is now closed except for indefinite leave  to  remain
           applications.

           245CD. Requirements for indefinite leave to remain

           To qualify for indefinite leave to remain, a  Tier  1  (General)
           Migrant  must  meet  the  requirements  listed  below.  If   the
           applicant meets these requirements, indefinite leave  to  remain
           will  be  granted.  If  the  applicant  does  not   meet   these
           requirements, the application will be refused.

           Requirements:
           (a) DELETED
           (b) The applicant must not fall for refusal  under  the  general
           grounds for refusal (except that  paragraph  322(1C)  shall  not
           apply if the applicant  meets  the  conditions  in  (f)(i)-(iii)
           below), and must not be an illegal entrant.
           (c) The  applicant  must  have  spent  a  continuous  period  as
           specified in (d) lawfully in the UK, of which  the  most  recent
           period must have been spent with leave as  a  Tier  1  (General)
           Migrant, in any combination of the following categories:
                 (i) as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant,
                 (ii) as a Highly Skilled Migrant,
                 (iii) as a Work Permit Holder,
                 (iv) DELETED
                 (v) DELETED
                 (vi) DELETED
                 (vii) as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant, a Tier 2 (Minister  of
                 Religion) Migrant or a Tier 2 (Sportsperson) Migrant, or
                 (viii)  as  a  Tier  2  (Intra-Company  Transfer)  Migrant,
                 provided the continuous period of 5 years spent lawfully in
                 the UK includes a period of  leave  as  a  Tier  2  (Intra-
                 Company Transfer) Migrant granted under the Rules in  place
                 before 6 April 2010, or as a Work Permit Holder  where  the
                 work permit was  granted  because  the  applicant  was  the
                 subject of an Intra-Company Transfer.
           (d) The continuous period in (c) is:
                 (i) 4 years, if the applicant:
                       (1)  received  a  Highly  Skilled  Migrant  Programme
                       approval letter issued on the basis of an application
                       made before 3 April 2006,
                       (2) was subsequently granted entry clearance or leave
                       to remain on the basis of that letter, and
                       (3) has not since been  granted  entry  clearance  or
                       leave to remain in  any  category  other  than  as  a
                       Highly Skilled Migrant or Tier 1  (General)  Migrant;
                       or
                 (ii) 5 years, in all other cases.
           (e) If the applicant has or has had leave as  a  Highly  Skilled
           Migrant or as a Tier 1 (General)  Migrant  under  the  Rules  in
           place before 19 July 2010, and has not been granted leave in any
           categories other than these under the Rules in  place  since  19
           July 2010, the applicant must have 75 points under paragraphs  7
           to 34 of Appendix A.
           (f) Where the applicant:
                 (i) received a Highly Skilled  Migrant  Programme  approval
                 letter issued on the basis of an application made before  7
                 November 2006,
                 (ii) was subsequently granted entry clearance or  leave  to
                 remain on the basis of that letter, and
                 (iii) has not since been granted entry clearance  or  leave
                 to remain in any category other than as  a  Highly  Skilled
                 Migrant or Tier 1 (General) Migrant, the applicant must  be
                 economically active in  the  UK,  in  employment  or  self-
                 employment or both.
           (g) in all cases other than those referred  to  in  (e)  or  (f)
           above, the applicant must have 80 points under paragraphs  7  to
           34 of Appendix A.
           (h) The applicant must have sufficient knowledge of the  English
           language and sufficient  knowledge  about  life  in  the  United
           Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL of these Rules, unless
           the applicant meets the conditions in (f)(i)-(iii) above.
           (i) The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
           laws except that, where paragraph 39E of  these  Rules  applies,
           any current period of overstaying will  be  disregarded,  unless
           the applicant meets the conditions in (f)(i)-(iii) above.
           (j) The  applicant  must  provide  the  specified  documents  in
           paragraph 245CD-SD to evidence the reason for the  absences  set
           out  in  paragraph  245AAA,  unless  the  applicant  meets   the
           conditions in (f)(i)-(iii) above.
           (k) DELETED
           (l) DELETED
           (m) The application for indefinite leave  to  remain  must  have
           been made before 6 April 2018."

21    Appendix A:

           "Attributes for Tier 1 (General) Migrants
           7 ...
           Previous earnings: notes
           18 ...
           19 ...
                 (i) The Secretary of  State  must  be  satisfied  that  the
                 earnings are from genuine employment. If the  Secretary  of
                 State is not satisfied, points for those earnings will  not
                 be awarded.
                 (j) In  making  the  assessment  in  paragraph  19(i),  the
                 Secretary  of  State  will  assess  on   the   balance   of
                 probabilities and  may  take  into  account  the  following
                 factors:
                       (i) the evidence the applicant has submitted;
                 (ii) whether the money appears to have been earned  through
                       genuine  employment,  rather  than  being   borrowed,
                       gifted,  or  otherwise  shown  in   the   applicant's
                       financial  transactions  or  records  without   being
                       earned;
                       (iii) whether the business from  which  the  earnings
                       are claimed can be shown to exist and be lawfully and
                       genuinely trading;
                       (iv) verification of previous  earnings  claims  with
                       declarations made in  respect  of  the  applicant  to
                       other Government Departments, including  declarations
                       made in respect of earnings claimed by the  applicant
                       in previous applications;
                       (v) the applicant's previous educational and business
                       experience (or  lack  thereof)  in  relation  to  the
                       claimed business activity;
                 (vi)  the  applicant's  immigration  history  and  previous
                       activity in the UK;
                       (vii) where the nature of the applicant's  employment
                       or  business   requires   him   to   have   mandatory
                       accreditation,  registration  or  insurance,  whether
                       that accreditation,  registration  or  insurance  has
                       been obtained;
                       (viii) any payments made by the  applicant  to  other
                       parties; and
                       (ix) any other relevant information."

22    Paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules provides:


           "Grounds on which leave to remain  and  variation  of  leave  to
           enter or remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused
           (2) the making  of  false  representations  or  the  failure  to
           disclose any material fact for the purpose of obtaining leave to
           enter or a previous variation of leave or  in  order  to  obtain
           documents from the Secretary of State or a third party  required
           in support of the application for leave to enter or  a  previous
           variation of leave.

      Discussion

23    The Respondent's case in its  decision  letter  was,  in  relation  to
      322(2),  only  that  false  representations  had  been  given  by  the
      Appellant in relation to his application for leave to remain  made  on
      14.9.09, thus entitling the Respondent to  invoke  the  provisions  of
      322(2), which in turn resulted in the Respondent finding that 245CD(b)
      not being satisfied.

24    It would appear that the genuineness of the business  relied  upon  on
      an application for ILR under para 245CD of the Rules can be a relevant
      consideration in the application, as the awarding of  points  required
      under para 245CD(e) or (g) may depend on whether the  requirements  of
      paragraphs 19(i) or (j)(iii) of Appendix A are met, which require that
      the Secretary of State must be satisfied that the  earnings  are  from
      'genuine   employment',  and  whether  the  business  from  which  the
      earnings are claimed can  be  shown  to  exist  and  be  lawfully  and
      'genuinely trading'.

25    However, no reference to points, or Appendix A of  the  rules,  or  to
      the genuineness of  the  Appellant's's  business,  is  raised  by  the
      Respondent in the decision.  Rather, it appears to  the  be  the  case
      that the Judge has of his own motion disputed the genuineness  of  the
      Appellant's business. The  questions  put  about  the  nature  of  the
      business were from the Judge, and the Judge does not  appear  to  have
      have specifically invited submissions from the parties on  the  point,
      and no submissions on the point are recorded from the parties.

26    Was that course of action procedurally unfair to the Appellant?

27    I find that it was, for the following reasons.

28    The Grounds of appeal refer to the  starred  case  of  MNM  (Surendran
      guidelines for Adjudicators) Kenya*[2000] UKIAT 0005,  which  provided
      guidance as to the appropriate manner for Judges to raise  issues  and
      ask questions if the Respondent Secretary of State is not represented.
      Those guidelines are as follows, insofar as relevant:

      "4.   Where matters  of  credibility  are  raised  in  the  letter  of
           refusal,   the   special   adjudicator   should   request    the
           representative to address these  matters,  particularly  in  his
           examination of the Appellant or, if the Appellant is not  giving
           evidence, in his submissions. Whether or not these  matters  are
           addressed by the representative, and whether or not the  special
           adjudicator has himself expressed any particular concern, he  is
           entitled to form his own view as to credibility on the basis  of
           the material before him.

      5.    Where no matters of credibility are  raised  in  the  letter  of
           refusal  but,  from  a  reading  of  the  papers,  the   special
           adjudicator  himself  considers  that  there  are   matters   of
           credibility arising therefrom, he should similarly  point  these
           matters out to the representative and ask  that  they  be  dealt
           with, either in examination of the Appellant or in submissions.

      6.    It is our view  that  it  is  not  the  function  of  a  special
           adjudicator to adopt an inquisitorial  role  in  cases  of  this
           nature. The system  pertaining  at  present  is  essentially  an
           adversial system and the special  adjudicator  is  an  impartial
           Judge and assessor of the evidence before him.  Where  the  Home
           Office does not appear the Home Office's argument and  basis  of
           refusal, as contained in the letter  of  refusal,  is  the  Home
           Office's  case  purely  and  simply,  subject   to   any   other
           representations which the Home Office may make  to  the  special
           adjudicator. It is not the function of the  special  adjudicator
           to expand upon that document, nor is it his  function  to  raise
           matters which are not raised in it,  unless  these  are  matters
           which are apparent to him from a reading of the papers, in which
           case these matters should be  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the
           Appellant's representative who should then be  invited  to  make
           submissions or call evidence in relation thereto. We  would  add
           that this is not necessarily the same function which has  to  be
           performed by a special  adjudicator  where  he  has  refused  to
           adjourn a case in  the  absence  of  a  representative  for  the
           Appellant, and the Appellant is  virtually  conducting  his  own
           appeal. In such event, it is the duty of the special adjudicator
           to give every assistance, which he can give, to the Appellant.

      7.    Where, having received the evidence or submissions  in  relation
           to  matters  which  he  has  drawn  to  the  attention  of   the
           representatives, the special adjudicator considers clarification
           is necessary, then he should be at liberty to ask questions  for
           the purposes  of  seeking  clarification.  We  would  emphasise,
           however, that it is not his function to raise  matters  which  a
           Presenting Officer might have raised in cross-examination had he
           been present.

      8.    There might well be matters which are not raised in  the  letter
           of  refusal  which  the  special  adjudicator  considers  to  be
           relevant and of importance. We have in mind,  for  example,  the
           question of whether or  not,  in  the  event  that  the  special
           adjudicator concludes that a Convention ground exists,  internal
           flight is relevant,  or  perhaps,  where,  from  the  letter  of
           refusal and the other documents in the file, it appears  to  the
           special adjudicator that the question  of  whether  or  not  the
           Appellant is entitled to Convention protection by reason of  the
           existence of civil war (matters raised by the House of Lords  in
           the case of Adan). Where these are  matters  which  clearly  the
           special adjudicator considers he may well wish to deal  with  in
           his  determination,  then  he  should  raise  these   with   the
           representative and invite submissions to  be  made  in  relation
           thereto.

      9.    There are documents which are now available on the Internet  and
           which can be considered to be in the public  domain,  which  may
           not be included in the bundle before the special adjudicator. We
           have in mind the US State Department Report, Amnesty Reports and
           Home  Office  Country  Reports.  If  the   special   adjudicator
           considers that he might well wish to refer to these documents in
           his  determination,  then  he  should   so   indicate   to   the
           representative and invite submissions in relation thereto."

29    It is  to  be  noted  of  course  that  in  the  present  appeal,  the
      Respondent was represented.

30    I also have  regard  to  WN  (Surendran;  credibility;  new  evidence)
      Democratic Republic of Congo [2004] UKIAT 00213 in which the following
      was stated:

      "29.   Third,  it  is  necessary  to  say  something  here  about  the
           significance of the Surendran guidelines. Too often  there  have
           been challenges to Adjudicators'  conduct  of  a  hearing,  both
           during the hearing and subsequently on appeal to us  and  indeed
           as here, on a further application for  statutory  review,  based
           upon asserted breaches of these guidelines. The  guidelines  are
           guidelines and guidance; they are not rules of law. They are not
           a strait-jacket. They do not represent black and  white  answers
           to all the situations, many and varied as they are, which  arise
           before an Adjudicator where the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
           is not present. The object behind them is to provide guidance as
           to how to ensure a fair hearing and how to  avoid  circumstances
           arising in which  a  fair-minded  and  informed  observer  would
           conclude that there was a real possibility or a real danger that
           the Adjudicator was biased; Porter  v  Magill  [2001]  UKHL  67,
           [2002] 2WLR 37.


      30.   The real test to be applied, however, is whether the hearing was
           fair or unfair and whether a fair-minded and  informed  observer
           would conclude that  there  was  a  real  possibility  that  the
           Adjudicator was  biased.  In  each  case  where  there  is  non-
           compliance with  the  guidelines,  it  remains  for  the  person
           asserting the unfairness or apparent unfairness to show that the
           actual or apparent unfairness was present. It is not  sufficient
           merely to assert that the guidelines were not complied with.  It
           is not by itself  an  error  of  law  not  to  comply  with  the
           guidelines.  The  point  rather  is  that  compliance  with  the
           guidelines will make it very difficult, if not  impossible,  for
           an Appellant to  show  that  the  Adjudicator  acted,  or  could
           properly be thought to have acted, unfairly.  If  they  are  not
           complied with, it plainly assists an argument as  to  actual  or
           apparent unfairness. But it is not conclusive as to it  at  all.
           The statement in MNM paragraph 19 that they must be observed was
           never intended to elevate the guidelines into a distinct set  of
           rules  which  had  to  be  complied  with,  regardless  of   the
           underlying  effect  of   any   non-compliance.   The   Surendran
           guidelines should never be the means, and were never intended to
           be the means, whereby the proper and fair conduct of the hearing
           by the Adjudicator and the  proper  raising  of  issues  by  the
           Adjudicator should be prevented.

      31.   The guidelines now need to be read  in  the  light  of  the  two
           decisions in Koca and Maheshwaran where, as here, credibility is
           generally at issue. The obligation is on the Appellant  to  deal
           with obvious points which  relate  to  his  credibility  without
           necessarily being asked to comment on them by  the  Adjudicator.
           The  Appellant  cannot  expect  to  be  able  to  make  tactical
           decisions as to whether he should deal with an issue  or  ignore
           it, later to complain successfully if  an  Adjudicator  has  not
           raised it with him.  An  Appellant  cannot  simply  say  that  a
           question was  not  put  and  therefore  it  was  unfair  for  an
           inference to be drawn adversely to him on that point, where  his
           credibility has been put at issue and the issue  dealt  with  by
           the  Adjudicator  in  the  determination  goes  to  credibility.
           Whether it is unfair depends on the circumstances in the case.

      32.   Guideline four is clearly sound; there remains, in the light  of
           those two decisions, an obligation on the Appellant  to  address
           issues of credibility raised in the letter of refusal. But it is
           clearly not inappropriate for the issue of concern to be  raised
           in questions by the Adjudicator. It may be more useful  for  the
           Adjudicator  to  put   those   questions   than   to   ask   the
           representative  to  do   so.   This   can   all   be   seen   as
           "clarification", for that emphasises that the task is not one of
           cross-examination and is subject to the caveats  as  to  timing,
           manner, length and content which we deal with later.

      33.   Where guideline five applies because no matters  of  credibility
           have been raised in the refusal letter,  and  there  is  no  new
           material before the Adjudicator, the  Adjudicator  should  raise
           any issues which concern him, as guideline  five  says.  But  as
           with guideline four, it is proper for the issue to be raised  by
           the Adjudicator himself directly  in  questions  of  a  witness,
           subject to the same caveats as to timing,  content,  manner  and
           length. The Adjudicator must here be especially careful  not  to
           invent his own theory of the case and must deal  with  what  are
           significant problems,  not  minor  points  of  detail.  In  this
           situation, it is much less likely that  an  Appellant  would  be
           aware that his credibility was under consideration  if  it  were
           not raised with him, and it is unlikely to be fair for the issue
           to be raised in the determination for the first  time.  This  is
           rather different from Koca and Maheshwaran.

      34.   Guideline five also needs to cover the position where  no  issue
           of credibility has been raised in the Refusal Letter and yet  it
           may be obvious that further material provided to the Adjudicator
           raises issues of credibility. Issues of credibility which  arise
           from the new material should be raised or put by the Adjudicator
           to the Appellant so that he may answer it, but it does not  mean
           that the hearing has been unfair, where that is not  done.  That
           depends on the degree to which the issue of credibility was  one
           which an advocate ought properly to have realised needed  to  be
           dealt with on the  material  which  he  was  presenting  to  the
           Adjudicator, in the light of the Secretary of State's  decision.
           Obvious points are: why the  material  had  not  been  mentioned
           before; why there were contradictions between that and what  had
           been  said  before;  and   how   obvious   implausibilities   or
           improbabilities in it are to be answered. For  an  unrepresented
           Appellant, the  Adjudicator  is  likely  to  have  to  draw  his
           attention explicitly to the point, in order fairly to be able to
           rely on it.

      35.   Guideline six does not  confine  the  Adjudicator  to  questions
           arising out of the Secretary of State's material. But as  it  is
           the Secretary of State's material  which  an  Appellant  usually
           seeks to answer, often with further evidence, it  is  right  for
           Adjudicators to put questions on it and on the further  evidence
           as the total case put forward by the Appellant emerges.

      36.   As  to  guideline  seven,  clarification  goes  beyond  checking
           whether something has been understood or for confirmation  of  a
           fact. It is legitimate for an Adjudicator to raise the questions
           relevant to the Secretary of State's decision  letter  or  later
           material to which the Adjudicator considers he needs answers  if
           he is to deal  fairly,  adequately  and  intelligibly  with  the
           material upon which he is being asked to adjudicate. He  is  not
           obliged to be the silent recipient of whatever an Appellant puts
           forward. If obvious points are not dealt with,  the  Adjudicator
           can deal with them in his  determination  and  it  is  generally
           better that he should do  so  having  given  the  Appellant  the
           chance to answer them.

      37.   The last sentence of guideline seven can be  misleading.  It  is
           designed to prevent cross examination or the appearance of cross
           examination, rather than to prevent a question being asked if it
           was a question which the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  could
           have put if he had been present. The risk of cross-examining  or
           appearing to cross-examine can be avoided by an  Adjudicator  in
           the manner,  style  or  length  of  questions,  which  he  asks.
           Generally, questions other than those designed to  clarify  what
           was said or intended to be said are better left until after  the
           conclusion of evidence where no Home Office  Presenting  Officer
           is  present  and  (after  re-examination  where  a  Home  Office
           Presenting Officer is present but see K (C�te  D'Ivoire)  [2004]
           UKIAT 00061.

      38.   Questions should not be asked in a hostile tone. They should not
           be leading questions which suggest the answer which is  desired,
           nor should they disguise what is the point of concern so  as  to
           appear like to a trap or a closing of the net.  They  should  be
           open ended questions, neutrally phrased. They can  be  persisted
           in, in order to  obtain  an  answer;  but  they  should  not  be
           persisted in for longer than is necessary for the Adjudicator to
           be clear that the question was understood, or to  establish  why
           it was not being answered, or to pursue so far as necessary  the
           detail underlying vague answers. This will be a matter  for  the
           judgment of Adjudicators and it should  not  usually  take  more
           than a  few  questions  for  an  Adjudicator  to  establish  the
           position to his own satisfaction. An advocate should  always  be
           given the chance to  ask  questions  arising  out  of  what  the
           Adjudicator has asked, which will enable him to follow up, if he
           wishes, the answers given thus far. The Adjudicator can properly
           put, without it becoming a  cross-examination,  questions  which
           trouble him or inferences from answers given which he might wish
           to draw adversely to a party.  These  questions  should  not  be
           disproportionate in length to  the  evidence  given  as  to  the
           complexity of the case, and, we repeat, an Adjudicator should be
           careful to avoid developing his own theory of the case.

      39.   There  is  a  tension,  reflected  in  the  guidelines,  between
           fairness in enabling a party to know  the  points  on  which  an
           Adjudicator may be minded to reach conclusions  adverse  to  him
           where they have not directly otherwise been raised, and fairness
           in  the  Adjudicator  not  appearing  to  be  partisan,   asking
           questions that no-one else has thought it necessary to ask. This
           has proved troublesome on a number of occasions.

      40.   The tension should  be  resolved,  so  far  as  practicable,  by
           recognising the following:


                 (1) It is not necessary for obvious points  on  credibility
                 to be put, where credibility is generally at issue  in  the
                 light of the refusal letter or  obviously  at  issue  as  a
                 result of later evidence.
                 (2) Where the point is important to the  decision  but  not
                 obvious or where the issue  of  credibility  has  not  been
                 raised or does not obviously  arise  on  new  material,  or
                 where an Appellant is unrepresented, it is generally better
                 for the Adjudicator  to  raise  the  point  if  it  is  not
                 otherwise raised. He can do so by direct questioning  of  a
                 witness in an appropriate manner.
                 (3) We have set out the way in which such questions  should
                 be asked.
                 (4) There is no hard and fast rule embodied in (1) and (2).
                 It is a question in each case for a judgment as to what  is
                 fair and properly perceived as fair.
           The Surendran guidelines and MNM should be  read  with  what  we
           have set out above."

31    Following WN, it may not be procedurally unfair for a  judge  to  rely
      upon certain matters relating to the  genuineness  of  an  appellant's
      business, even without putting them to the  appellant,  if  they  were
      deemed obvious. However, businesses vary widely in their  nature,  and
      in the present appeal, the  matter  not  having  been  raised  by  the
      Respondent in this or other prior applications for  further  leave  to
      remain,  I struggle to see that it was  an  obvious  matter  that  the
      Appellant's business was not genuine, such that a judge would  not  be
      obliged to put certain matters  before  relying  on  the  alleged  non
      genuine nature of the business.

32    However, it is to be acknowledged that  the  Judge  did  in  fact  ask
      questions about the nature of the business, and received replies.

33    Was this sufficient, proceeding fairly, to put the Appellant  and  his
      representative on notice that there  was  an  issue  which  the  Judge
      required to be addressed in submissions, even if not invited? I  find,
      on balance, that it was not.

34    I find that the Respondent's  raising  the  question  of  whether  the
      Appellant had made false  reputations  in  relation  to  his  asserted
      income for the tax year 2009 to 2010 is a  distinct  matter  from  the
      question  of  whether  the  entirety  of  his  business  was  genuine.
      Different evidence may have been produced  to  respond  to  those  two
      different allegations. The former  may  have  been  capable  of  being
      addressed by evidence relating specifically to the period in question,
      whereas an allegation that the Appellant's whole business was a  sham,
      and not genuine, might have been rebutted by the Appellant by reliance
      upon different, and probably more voluminous evidence.

35    It is to be noted from the Judge's record of  proceedings,  that  upon
      the Judge commencing questions about the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
      business, the Judge recorded that 'docs showing clients  and  invoices
      not in bundle'. With respect  to  the  Judge,  that  was  only  to  be
      expected, the matter of the genuineness of  the  Appellant's  business
      not having been raised by the Respondent in the decision letter.

36    The genuineness of the Appellant's business (aside from  the  specific
      allegation made in the present decision that there were  discrepancies
      in his tax returns) was a matter that had not troubled the  Respondent
      within  the  decision  letter  or  in  previous  decisions.   Further,
      questions might be asked by a Judge by way of clarification only as to
      the nature of an Appellant's business without it being apparent to the
      Appellant or their representative that  the  Judge  had  such  serious
      concerns about the genuineness of the business that they  intended  to
      rely on those concerns in dismissing the  appeal.  The  Appellant  was
      clearly taken  aback,  unprepared,  by  the  Judge  questions  -it  is
      apparent from [24] and [25] that the  Appellant  started  to  hand  up
      documents piecemeal.

38    Another indicator that the Appellant and his  representative  may  not
      have realised that the  genuineness of his business was being disputed
      by the Judge, even in light of the questions asked by  the  Judge,  is
      that  the  Respondent  did  not  appear  to  realise  it  either,   no
      submissions being made by the Presenting Officer  on  the  genuineness
      issue.

39    Although, as per WN, it will not be every case that a Judge must  give
      notice to a party that they are concerned with a  specific  issue  and
      require submissions to be made on it, I find in the particular context
      of the present appeal, that such notice was required, and the  Judge's
      reliance on the alleged non genuine nature of the Appellat's  business
      was unfair.

40    Mr McVeety argued that even if the Judge  had  not  been  entitled  to
      take issue with the genuineness of the Appellant's  business,  without
      giving more notice that he intended to do so, this was not a  material
      error, as it was clear, he said,  that  the  Judge  had  made  adverse
      findings of fact at  paras  [20],  [22],  and  [23]  of  the  decision
      relating to the disputed tax payment which meant that  the  Judge  was
      entitled to find that false  representations  had  been  made  by  the
      Appellant.

41    Whilst the Judge does state at [23] that it  was  totally  implausible
      that  the  Appellant  would  not  have  retained  copies  of   certain
      documents, I find that at paras [20] and [22] there are no findings of
      fact; merely a list of issues or indeed  side  issues.  The  last  two
      lines of [22] are telling: "The key problem, however, is that I simply
      do not believe that the Appellant had a genuine  business".  At  [31],
      the Judge then clearly uses his negative finding on the 'key  problem'
      of the genuine business issue to support  his  conclusion  that  false
      representations had been made in the application of 14.9.09.

42    Further, where the Judge has relied on the alleged non genuine  nature
      of the Appellant's  business to  support  the  conclusion  that  false
      representations had been made in the earlier application, I find it is
      also material to note that the Judge failed to direct himself  in  law
      appropriately at [1] by failing to direct himself that in relation  to
      all the general grounds contained in part 9 of the  immigration  rules
      (which included 322(2)), the burden of proof rests on  the  Respondent
      to establish any contested precedent  fact  (see  JC  (Part  9  HC395-
      burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027). Such burden being  on  the
      Respondent would arguably have made it less obvious to  the  Appellant
      or his representative that an issue not raised in the refusal  letter,
      but now being used to support the  finding  of  false  representation,
      was being taken against him by the Judge.

43    Finally, even if the Judge was correct in finding that  the  Appellant
      had used false representations in 2009,  the  Judge  errs  in  law  in
      failing to consider that such a matter  should  'normally'  result  in
      refusal of leave to remain under para 322(2);  refusal  would  not  be
      mandatory  under  that  provision,  and  there  was  no  exercise   of
      discretion by either the Respondent or the Judge in that regard.

44    I therefore find that the Appellant was not afforded a  fair  hearing.
      I also find that the Judge's error was material to the outcome of  the
      appeal; had the Appellant had adequate notice  of  the  issue  of  the
      genuineness of his business being taken against him, it is  likely  he
      would have adduced different evidence in support of his appeal.

      Decision

45    I find that the decision involved the making of a  material  error  of
      law.

46    I set aside the Judge's decision, except that the Judge's  finding  at
      [15] that there was no failure by the Appellant to  provide  specified
      evidence, is retained, such finding not being vitiated by any error of
      law.

47    In light of the extent of fact finding that will be  required  in  the
      remaking of the  decision,  I  remit  the  matter  for  fresh  hearing
      (subject to paragraph 46 above).


Signed:                                            Date: 6.3.18
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan





