
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/01432/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Varghese Jiss
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent




                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Varghese Jiss, was born on 20 May 1987  and  is  a  male
    citizen of India.  The  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    student visa in May 2011.  He was subsequently granted leave to  remain
    until 27 October 2014.  On 16 October 2014, he was served with  removal
    directions having been found in breach of employment restrictions.   He
    subsequently sought to obtain a residence card as the unmarried partner
    of a Lithuanian citizen but his application was refused  on  the  basis
    there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  a  durable   relationship.    A
    subsequent application on the same grounds was refused  by  a  decision
    dated 29 December 2014.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge M Davies) which, in a decision promulgated on 29  April
    2015, allowed the appeal.  The respondent now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds rely on Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340.
     The judge did not have the jurisdiction to allow  outright  an  appeal
    where there remained a discretion to be exercised by the  Secretary  of
    State as regards the issue of a residence card under paragraph 17(4) of
    the 2006 Regulations.  The second ground of appeal concerns the alleged
    failure of the  judge  accurately  to  set  out  the  position  of  the
    Secretary of State in the appeal.  At [24], the judge noted that  there
    was "clear evidence, has been  accepted  by  Mr  Richardson  [the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer] the appellant and sponsor have been residing
    together in a durable  relationship  akin  to  marriage  for  the  last
    eighteen  months."  The  Secretary  of  State  asserts  that  no   such
    concession had been  made  either  prior  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing or by the Presenting Officer who represented the  Secretary  of
    State at that hearing.

 3. I find the first ground has merit.  It was not for the judge  to  allow
    the appeal outright.  He should instead have allowed the appeal to  the
    limited extent that the matter was remitted to the Secretary  of  State
    to consider exercising her discretion to issue a residence  card  under
    Regulation 17(4).

 4. As regards the other ground, I find that this does not succeed.  I have
    read Mr Richardson's attendance note of the First-tier Tribunal hearing
    and I am prepared to accept that  Judge  Davies  did  err  at  [24]  by
    wrongly recording that the evidence of cohabitation had  been  accepted
    by the Presenting Officer.   However,  separately  from  that  supposed
    concession, the judge has himself assessed the evidence and found  that
    the appellant, the sponsor and the sponsor's mother had given  truthful
    evidence and that he was prepared to accept that the  couple  had  been
    residing together in a durable relationship akin  to  marriage  for  at
    least the last eighteen months prior to the  hearing.   Had  the  judge
    left the matter at that point, the Secretary of State would have had no
    reason for complaint.  Likewise, if the judge  had  not  made  his  own
    assessment of the  credibility  of  the  evidence  but  relied  on  any
    "concession" then he may well have erred in law.  The fact remains that
    the "concession" adds nothing to the  judge's  own  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dated 29 April 2015  is  set  aside.
I have remade the decision.  The appeal against  the  respondent's  decision
dated 29 December 2014 is allowed to the limited extent that the  matter  is
returned to the Secretary of State so that she may exercise  her  discretion
as to the issuing of a residence card  to  the  appellant  under  Regulation
17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 20 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
