
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01423/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th September 2016                        |On 8th November 2016          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              MR Rohit Aggarwal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dineen, promulgated on 16th February 2016, following a hearing at
    Hatton Cross.  In the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal  of
    Rohit Aggarwal, whereupon the latter applied  for,  and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  India,  who  was  born  on  3rd
    October 1986.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    1st August 2014, refusing his application for leave to remain in the UK
    on the basis of his relationship with a Tehmina Mehalban,  a  Pakistani
    national, born on 30th October 1986, who was granted official status in
    the UK on 29th June 2015.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge noted how the Appellant and Miss Mehalban met at a  party  on
    14th April 2013 and entered into a relationship leading to  an  Islamic
    marriage taking place on 12th October 2015 between them.  At  the  date
    of the hearing before the judge, Miss Mehalban was pregnant  with  the
    Appellant's child, which was expected on 14th May 2016,  and  has  now
    been born.   The  main  issue  was  where  there  were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to family life between the two  of  them  continuing,  given
    that the Appellant was  an  Indian  national,  but  his  partner,  Miss
    Mehalban, was a Pakistani national who had been granted refugee  status
    in the UK, and who claims to be subject to  adverse  attention  by  the
    Indian authorities  were  she  to  accompany  the  Appellant  to  India
    (paragraph 17).

 4. The judge observed that no concrete  evidence  or  expert  opinion  was
    presented to show the  difficulties  of  people  with  religious  mixed
    marriages in India and that when this difficulty was pointed out to the
    Appellant's representative in his closing  submissions,  he  asked  for
    time to search for country guidance, and although he  did  so,  he  was
    "unable to find any material supportive of his case  on  insurmountable
    obstacles"  (paragraph   27).    The   judge   felt   that   the   mere
    "unwillingness" of Miss Mehalban to go to India with the Appellant did
    not constitute insurmountable obstacles.  In  any  event,  the  parties
    would not have to go to a part of India where the  Appellant's  family,
    who disapproved of  the  relationship,  could  inflict  any  unpleasant
    behaviour upon them because "in a country of the size and population of
    India internal relocation would be reasonable" (paragraph 29).

 5. The judge ended with the conclusion that,  "I  am  not  satisfied  that
    there is any material on  which  it  could  be  found  that  there  are
    compelling circumstances outside the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and in particular Appendix FM, which could result in  the  appeal
    being allowed" (paragraph 33).

 6. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Ahmed,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant,  asserted  that  the  observation  made  by  the  judge,  at
    paragraph 33 that there was no material on which it be found  that  the
    are  compelling  circumstances  outside  the  Immigration   Rules   was
    unsustainable, given that the judge gave no reasons for coming to  this
    conclusion.  Second, at paragraph 27 the judge stated that there was no
    objective  evidence  that  people  of  mixed   marriages   would   face
    difficulties, but the Appellant's partner, Miss Mehalban, has spent two
    years getting refugee status in the UK, and had that status until 2020,
    and this fact  alone  constituted  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  her
    relocating to a  country  like  India,  which  may  have  less  than  a
    favourable view of nationals of Pakistan.  Third,  given  the  approach
    adopted by the judge, it  was  clear  that  he  was  taking  a  "asylum
    approach" rather than a "Article 8 approach"  and  this  could  not  be
    defended.

 7. For his part, Mr Bramble submitted that it was futile to criticise  the
    judge in  relation  to  his  observation  of  the  lack  of  compelling
    circumstances at paragraph 33 because the judge did  not  consider  the
    situation outside the Immigration Rules.  The judge had found in favour
    of the Appellant at paragraph 23 the relation to the relationship being
    a genuine and subsisting one, although he found the Appellant  to  have
    been untruthful in other respects.  Once the basis  of  there  being  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship had  been  established,  the  judge
    moved on  to  consider  whether  there  would  be  any  "insurmountable
    obstacles"  to  the  Appellant  returning  to  India  and   making   an
    application from there.  This does not  exhibit  a  "asylum  approach".
    Brevity was not a problem so long as all the points were considered and
    they had been considered by the judge here.  Miss Mehalban had  refugee
    status, but this was in relation to Pakistan, it was not in relation to
    her going to India, in respect of which her evidence had been  produced
    before the judge.  It had been maintained that there would be a medical
    impact but in the Appellant's bundle there  was  no  medical  evidence.
    The judge's treatment  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  was  clear  and
    comprehensive at paragraphs 16 to 17.  Consideration had been given  to
    the "unwillingness" of Miss Mehalban to go to India, but this was  then
    rejected.  To conclude, therefore, at paragraph 32 that the appeal must
    be dismissed under Appendix FM,  was  entirely  in  order.   The  judge
    cannot be required to consider the situation outside the  Rules  if  no
    attention is drawn to "exceptional circumstances", and given  what  has
    been set out above, none existed, and none had been properly put to the
    judge.  Of course, there was in existence now a child of  the  parties,
    but this would be a matter for  a  new  claim,  given  that  there  was
    nothing  intrinsicly  improbable  that  a  couple  in  a  genuine   and
    subsisting relationship, being required to go to another country with a
    very young child.

 8. In reply, Mr Ahmed submitted that the case of  MF  (Nigeria)  makes  it
    clear that Article 8 issues are not a complete code in a situation such
    as this and that a second stage needs to be considered.

No Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) TCA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

10. First, the judge invited  the  Appellant's  representative  to  provide
    objective evidence of difficulties for western women in India and  this
    evidence was not forthcoming (paragraph 27).  Mr Ahmed, to  his  credit
    at the hearing before me, accepted that he would have to  concede  that
    no such evidence could be referred to.  The judge, therefore, concluded
    that there were no "insurmountable obstacles" to  a  Hindu  man  and  a
    Muslim woman returning to India.

11. If there was a risk of adverse attention  from  close  relatives,  then
    internal relocation was a reasonable possibility (paragraph 29).  These
    finding were entirely open to the judge to make.

12. Second, there were no "compelling circumstances", as the  judge  found,
    "outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  in  particular
    Appendix FM" (paragraph 33).  The Court of Appeal  in  Singh  &  Khalid
    [2015] EWCA 74 confirmed the correctness  of  the  two  stage  approach
    explained in the judgment of Sales J. in Nagre [2013] EWHC  7200.   The
    correctness  is  whether   there   a   compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules to require  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules on the basis of Article 8.  If not, it is  sufficient
    to say so and there is no need to make a full assessment of the Article
    8 situation outside the Rules.

13. This is what the judge did  in  this  case.   Had  there  been  medical
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle or had there been objective evidence
    showing that a person of Pakistani nationality, or  of  Muslim  origin,
    married to an Indian national, would find ill-treatment and persecutory
    treatment, the judge would have been obliged to consider this matter as
    a "compelling circumstance", but no such evidence was  put  before  the
    judge.  There is accordingly, no irrationality in the determination  by
    the judge.

Notice of Decision

14. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss             5th October 2016

