
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/01545/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6 March 2018                          |  On 12 March 2018                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 RAJNI DEVI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. Badar, Connaughts Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid, promulgated on 24 July 2017, in  which
     he allowed Ms Devi's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
     to remove her from the United Kingdom.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to  Ms  Devi  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds assert that the Judge erred in that there are no  adequate
    reasons as to why the appeal was allowed and on what basis.


    The grounds disclosed arguable errors of law."


 4. I heard brief submissions from both representatives.  I stated  that  I
    found that the grounds were made out, and that  the  decision  involved
    the making of material error of law  as  inadequate  reasons  had  been
    given.  I set aside the decision and remitted the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Error of law


  5. The grounds of appeal quoted from the case of MK (duty to give reasons)
     Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC).  The headnote states:


     "(1) It is axiomatic that a determination discloses clearly the reasons
     for a tribunal's decision."


  6. The Judge states at [8] that, with reference to  "superior  precedents"
     he is obliged to give "sufficient and adequate reasons", and that he is
     "not under a duty to refer  to  each  and  every  piece  of  evidence".
     However, none of the evidence is set out.   The  only  paragraph  which
     contains something which could be described as a  finding  and  reasons
     for the decision is [16], where the Judge states:


     "I found the Appellant's evidence to be credible.  She  had  tried  her
     best conduct herself within  the  rules  but  the  Respondent  kept  on
     increasing her troubles.  In her witness statement it is clear that she
     was prompt in informing the Home Office that she was filing a  modified
     application, which had left no  doubt  that  she  was  studying  at  an
     establishment recognised by it."


  7. The rest of the decision is concerned with general points  of  law  and
     discourse.


  8. I find that simply to state that the Appellant's evidence was found  to
     be credible, without giving adequate  reasons  for  this,  and  without
     explaining  how  therefore  the   Appellant's   appeal   succeeds,   is
     inadequate.  I find that the Judge has failed to  address  the  reasons
     why  the  application  was  refused.   The   Respondent   refused   the
     application both because a valid Certificate of  Sponsorship  reference
     number had not been provided, and also  because  false  representations
     had been made.  There is no  reference  to  either  of  these  specific
     points in the Judge's decision.


  9. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
     law, as the Judge has failed to  give  any  adequate  reasons  for  his
     decision, or to explain on what basis he has allowed the appeal.


 10. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  There are no findings of fact  in  the  decision,
     and therefore given the nature and extent of the fact-finding necessary
     to enable this appeal to be remade, having  regard  to  the  overriding
     objective, I find that it is appropriate to  remit  this  case  to  the
     First-tier Tribunal.


 11. I do not make an anonymity direction.


Decision


 12. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.




Signed                                  Date 9 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

