
[pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/01748/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 15 November 2013          On 25 November 2013

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                Adil Noushad
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Noushad in person.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Coutts  promulgated
      on 7 June 2013, allowing Mr Noushad's appeal against the  Respondent's
      decision dated 31 December 2012 to refuse leave to remain as a Tier  1
      (Post Study Work) migrant.


   2. Although in the proceedings before me the Secretary of  State  is  the
      appellant,  and  Mr  Noushad  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
      consistency with the proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
      shall hereafter refer to Mr Noushad as the Appellant and the Secretary
      of State as the Respondent.


   3. I pause to note that the Respondent had also made a decision to remove
      the Appellant pursuant to section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006, but this decision was withdrawn  at  the  appeal
      hearing before Judge Coutts: see determination at paragraphs 3 and 9.


Background

   4. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 6 September  1976.  He
      was granted leave to enter the UK as a student in  February  2004  and
      thereafter  obtained  subsequent  grants  of  leave  to  remain,  most
      recently on 8 September 2010 as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  until  26
      March 2012. During the currency of this  latter  leave  the  Appellant
      pursued studies at the London College of Business in Barking, Essex on
      their MBA (University of Wales) course.


   5. By way of an application made on an application  form  signed  by  the
      Appellant on 23 March 2012, and recorded by the Respondent as made  on
      23 March 2012, the Appellant sought variation of leave to remain as  a
      Tier 1 (Post Study Work) migrant.


   6. At the date of making his application he did not have available to him
      a degree certificate, and so did not enclose one: see application form
      at G5. Instead he ticked the box on the application under the  wording
      "If the applicant has been unable to submit their original certificate
      of award because it has not yet been issued, tick the box to show that
      the applicant has sent an original letter from the institution  giving
      details of the awarding body, and confirmation  that  the  certificate
      will be issued". The Appellant enclosed with his application a  letter
      from the London College of Business dated 12 March 2012: however  this
      letter did not confirm that the certificate of award would be  issued,
      merely stating that the Appellant had submitted his dissertation on 12
      March 2012 "for which the results  are  still  awaited".  It  was  not
      indicated that the Appellant had been successful and that he therefore
      would be awarded his degree.


   7. In due course the Appellant obtained a further letter from the  London
      College of Business indicating that the dissertation had been approved
      securing 55%, and that the Appellant had thereby completed his  course
      on 9 May 2012, and would  be  awarded  a  degree  certificate  by  the
      University of Wales in July 2012.


   8. In the meantime the Post Study Work migrant scheme was closed  by  the
      Respondent with effect from 5 April 2012.


   9. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for reasons set out
      in a combined 'reasons for refusal letter' and Notice  of  Immigration
      Decision dated 31 December 2012 with reference to paragraph  245FD  of
      the Immigration Rules, with particular reference to the  date  of  the
      Appellant's application and the date of the award of his degree.


  10. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. His appeal was allowed for  reasons
      set  out  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's   determination,   in
      particular with reference to the decision in Khatel and others  (s85A;
      effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC).


  11. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. This
      was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 26 June
      2013, but was then granted on 12 August 2013 by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Allen. Judge Allen  identified  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was
      "clearly arguable" in light of the decision in Raju and others  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 754.


Adjournment Application

  12. There was on file a letter dated 11 October 2013 from  the  solicitors
      who had represented him hitherto,  stating  that  they  did  not  have
      instructions to attend the hearing today. The letter contained no sort
      of application.


  13. The Appellant appeared in person. He  sought  an  adjournment  of  the
      appeal, not so that he could obtain representation,  but  because  the
      appeal had previously been adjourned to await  decisions  in  similar,
      cases.


  14. I note that this appeal was previously adjourned on 7 October 2013  to
      await the promulgation of similar decisions that were due to be  heard
      in the Upper Tribunal on 8 October 2013.


  15. I recognise that in light  of  the  change  of  understanding  of  the
      applicable law represented by the different bases of the decisions  in
      Khatel and Raju there are likely to be a number of  cases  similar  to
      the Appellant's to  be  heard  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  However,  of
      necessity any such decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  not  have
      authority greater than the decision in Raju. Further, I consider  that
      I have no difficulty in understanding the decision in Raju, and,  with
      respect, do not feel that I require further guidance as to its meaning
      in the context of the instant appeal. It may well be  that  there  are
      some cases which raise particular issues on their facts that may  give
      rise to a basis to seek to distinguish Raju, or to have its principles
      applied in a particular way. Some guidance from a  brother  or  sister
      judge may be of assistance in  this  regard,  although  would  not  be
      binding. However, I detect no such potential idiosyncrasy on the facts
      of this particular case, which appears to be 'squarely on  all  fours'
      with the circumstances  of  the  applicants  considered  in  Raju  and
      others. In such circumstances I am unable to  envisage  that  anything
      new or of  particular  value  may  emerge  from  other  cases  pending
      consideration in the Upper Tribunal.


  16. Accordingly in all of the circumstances,  and  having  regard  to  the
      overriding objective set out in  Rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, which includes at  2(2)(e)  the  need  to
      avoid delay so far as compatible  with  proper  consideration  of  the
      issues,  I  refused  the  Appellant's  application   for   a   further
      adjournment.


  17. The Appellant did not thereupon  seek  an  adjournment  on  any  other
      basis, including wishing to have the benefit of representation.


Error of Law

  18. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  identified  the  key  basis  of  the
      Respondent's decision to refuse the Appellant variation  of  leave  to
      remain at paragraph 10 of his determination  (save  that  there  is  a
      factual error as to the date of the Appellant's application which  was
      23 March 2012, not 3 April 2012).


  19. The Judge concluded that the Respondent was in error in rejecting  the
      Appellant's application on the basis that he was  awarded  his  degree
      subsequent to the making of his application, relying upon the decision
      in Khatel to the effect that the application should have been "treated
      as a continuing application, starting with the date when it was  first
      submitted and ending on the date when it is decided" (determination at
      paragraph 11).


  20. In light of the decision in  Raju,  which  rejects  the  notion  of  a
      continuing application and holds that an application is  made  on  the
      date that it is received, the Judge's  reliance  upon  Khatel  was  in
      error.


  21. Necessarily as it was the determinative point in the appeal, this  was
      a material error of law. In the  circumstances  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge requires to be set aside and re-made.


Remaking the decision

  22. The decision can be remade without hearing  further  evidence  on  the
      basis of all of the available evidence. The facts are  straightforward
      and uncontroversial.


  23. Pursuant to the decision in Raju the Appellant's application was  made
      on 23 March 2012. At this date he had not been awarded the degree upon
      which he seeks to place reliance in support  of  his  application  for
      variation of leave to remain. In the circumstances he was not entitled
      to the points claimed by  virtue  of  that  degree.  The  Respondent's
      decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules.


  24. I note that no claim  was  made  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
      respect of Article 8 of the ECHR: see determination  at  paragraph  3.
      That remains the case: nothing was advanced by the  Appellant  and  no
      supporting evidence has been filed in relation to  a  family  /private
      life claim.


  25. I can otherwise detect no basis for concluding that  the  Respondent's
      decision was not in accordance with the law.


Decision

  26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.



  27. I re-make the decision. The appeal of Mr Noushad is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     15 November 2013




