
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01270/2012
                                                               IA/01271/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the Papers at Bradford            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th July 2012                                |On 12th July 2013          |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                           j j f (first appellant)
                        j s x r m (second appellant)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  of  Immigration
    Judge Chohan made following a hearing at Birmingham  on  14th  February
    2012.

Background

 2. The first Appellant arrived in the UK on 26th June 2002 with  leave  to
    enter as a visitor and overstayed.  On 3rd October 2006  her  daughter,
    the second Appellant, was born.  The first  Appellant  and  the  second
    Appellant's father are now separated  and  the  father  is  in  another
    relationship from which he has a 3 year old son.

 3. On 10th August 2008 the Appellants made an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK for a purpose not covered  by  the  Immigration  Rules
    which was refused on 29th July 2009.  She then requested her case to be
    considered under the ECHR, particularly Article 8 and  the  application
    was refused again in a notice of decision dated 4th January 2012.

 4. The Immigration Judge accepted that the Appellants enjoyed family  life
    in the UK and that Article 8 was engaged.  He said that  the  Appellant
    had a working relationship  with  her  ex-partner  who  had  a  pending
    application before the Home Office and therefore had no status  in  the
    UK but was in a relationship with a British citizen and had  a  British
    citizen son.  The Immigration Judge considered the  relevant  case  law
    namely ZH Tanzania v SSHD [2011] UKSC.  The  second  Appellant  attends
    nursery school and the oral evidence was that her father  collects  her
    from school and every other weekend she stays with him and his  family,
    although there was no independent evidence to verify it.  There  was  a
    letter from the school confirming the arrangement but he did not  treat
    the letter as independent because the contents appeared to be based  on
    information provided by the Appellant himself.  He then  said  that  he
    was prepared to accept that  the  father  collects  his  daughter  from
    school and that she resides with him at the weekends  but  he  was  not
    satisfied that the father actually had a son since there was  no  birth
    certificate and no evidence from his present partner.  Even if  he  did
    accept that there was a new partner and son, the  Appellant's  and  her
    daughter's removal would not have much impact on him because he is only
    3 years of age and adaptable.  They could keep in contact by telephone,
    letter and email and visits could  be  made  as  and  when  financially
    possible.  The decision in ZH was dealt with on its own facts and  each
    case  has  to  be  decided  on  its  own  merits.   He  considered  the
    Appellants' private life in the UK but counted it against the principal
    Appellant that there was no evidence that she had sought to  regularise
    her stay and the daughter with the support of her mother should have no
    difficulties in establishing herself in Jamaica.

 5. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. The Appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Immigration Judge had failed to consider or reach any findings  on  the
    issues relating to Section 55 and the impact of that decision upon  the
    child and had consequently erred in carrying out the balancing exercise
    of proportionality.  The Judge fails to consider  correctly  and  apply
    the principles set down by the Supreme Court in  ZH  which  establishes
    that the interests of the children is a factor that  has  to  be  given
    primary consideration.  There was no detailed and anxious consideration
    of the effect on the second Appellant or her father of her removal. Nor
    has he considered the fact that the Appellants  face  exclusion  for  a
    minimum period of five years, a  relevant  factor  in  determining  the
    appeal.  The Immigration Judge heard oral evidence from the  father  of
    the second Appellant who was  present  in  court  and  had  given  oral
    evidence.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  E
    B Grant on 3rd April 2012 who stated that  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge had  erred  in  law  in  distinguishing  the  second  Appellant's
    circumstances from those of the child referred to in ZH and in  failing
    to go on and consider the best interests of the second Appellant.

 8. Directions were sent out with the grant of permission stating that  the
    Appellant must inform the Tribunal  within  21  days  whether  an  oral
    hearing is required and putting the parties on notice that a failure to
    comply may lead the Upper Tribunal to proceed on the basis that nothing
    further is to be said or advanced  in  support  of  that  party's  case
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 9. There was no response to those directions and, on 9th May 2012 Judge of
    the Upper Tribunal P D King stated that the appeal should be determined
    on the papers.  Should the Upper Tribunal find there to be  a  material
    error of law it may proceed to determine the substantive merits of  the
    appeal also on the papers or issue further directions.

10. On 11th May 2012 the Appellants'  representatives  requested  that  the
    matter be heard orally.  A further letter on 16th May 2012 stated  that
    there was no further information available to them at the time that the
    directions were sent out but they had since been  instructed  that  the
    minor Appellant's father had been granted leave to remain.   There  was
    now a problem between the mother and the father who abducted the  child
    and the first Appellant had to resort to the police to  get  the  child
    back.  She has now lodged an application to the family court.

11. In response, on 1st June 2012, Upper Tribunal Judge Latter stated  that
    there was no adequate reasoning why the appeal should not be determined
    without a hearing since the directions made it clear that if  an  error
    of law is found the judge will either  remake  the  decision  or  issue
    further  directions.   The  Appellants'  representatives   were   given
    permission to file further written submissions  and  evidence  updating
    the position as far as the minor Appellant was concerned.

12. On 7th June 2012 the representatives submitted  the  following  further
    submissions:

         "We rely on the grounds of application to the  First-tier  Tribunal
         and we are grateful that an error of law is found.

         In light of recent circumstances we have  been  instructed  that  a
         prohibited steps order  has  been  lodged  by  our  client  in  the
         Birmingham family courts in respect of the recent abduction of  the
         minor Appellant by her father.  The matter is now being dealt  with
         by the Family Courts Division and I herewith enclose copies of  the
         Order.

         We have also been instructed that the minor Appellant's father Mr M
         M has been granted leave to remain  in  the  UK.   However  as  the
         courts will appreciate we are in some difficulty in  providing  the
         relevant proof in the light

         of the recent issues surrounding the minor Appellant.   However  we
         feel that the Home Office are better placed to find  an  answer  to
         this vital point.

         The family courts have ruled on page 1 of the order that Mr M M  is
         prohibited from removing the minor Appellant from the care  of  the
         mother.  The matter  has  been  referred  to  CAFCASS  for  further
         investigations and reports.  The  family  court  would  be  mindful
         about allowing contact with the father of the minor  Appellant  and
         this outcome is still open.

         In light of the above issues and the pending family court matter it
         is my respective submissions that the  following  outcomes  of  the
         case should be considered:

         (i)  The SSHD withdraws her decision with a view  to  granting  the
             Appellants six months'  leave  to  remain  whilst  the  family
             courts deal with the matter.

         (ii) The Upper Tribunal set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal with a view to remaking the decision in favour of the
             Appellants by allowing the appeal under Article 8 ECHR."

Consideration of Whether there is a Material Error of Law

13. The Immigration Judge, at paragraph 10 of the determination, said  that
    the Supreme Court in ZH said that the best interests of the child  must
    be a primary consideration and that meant that they must be  considered
    first.

14. However, at paragraph 14 he wrote as follows:

         "Mr  Peer  submitted   a   High   Court   decision   (case   number
         CO/15561/2009) which deals with ZH Tanzania and Section 55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  I  have  considered
         that decision but it does seem that that case was dealt with on its
         own facts and there seems to be a general discussion  regarding  ZH
         Tanzania and the 2009 Act.  The bottom line is that each  case  has
         to be decided on its own merits, facts and circumstances.   On  the
         evidence before me for the  reasons  outlined  above  I  find  that
         Article 8 would not be infringed by the removal  of  the  Appellant
         and her daughter."

15. The observation that each case must depend on its own merits is plainly
    not an adequate consideration of the duty to consider the interests  of
    the second Appellant  first.  As  the  Immigration  Judge  who  granted
    permission stated, that is not an adequate consideration of the case of
    ZH.  She quoted Baroness Hale who said

         "This is a binding obligation in international law and the  spirit,
         if not the precise language, has  also  been  translated  into  our
         national law.  Section 11 of the Children Act 2004  places  a  duty
         upon a wide range of public bodies to  carry  out  their  functions
         having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the  welfare  of
         children.  The immigration authorities were at first  excused  from
         this duty because the UK had entered a general reservation  to  the
         UNCRC concerning immigration matters.   But  that  reservation  was
         lifted in  2008  and  as  a  result  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 now provides that, in relation
         among other things  to  immigration,  asylum  or  nationality,  the
         Secretary of State must make arrangements for ensuring  that  those
         functions 'are discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard
         and promote the welfare of children who are in the UK'."

16. On the evidence before the Immigration  Judge,  which  he  appeared  to
    accept, the second Appellant was collected by her  father  from  school
    and every other weekend she stays with him and his family.  Whilst  the
    Immigration Judge said that there was no independent evidence to verify
    it, commenting that the evidence from the school was  not  independent,
    he did say that he was prepared to accept that the arrangement  was  as
    claimed.

17. The Immigration Judge said that there was no evidence before  him  that
    the father had a 3 year old  son  but  he  did  not  believe  that  the
    daughter's removal would have such a great impact on him because he was
    only 3 years of age and adaptable.  They could keep in contact  through
    telephone etc.

18. It is not entirely clear whether the Immigration  Judge  accepted  that
    the second Appellant had a half brother and clearly this  is  a  matter
    upon which a finding should have  been  made.   Assuming  that  he  did
    accept that there was a half brother the  Immigration  Judge  was  then
    obliged to consider the best interests of the  second  Appellant  as  a
    primary consideration in considering  whether  the  severance  of  that
    relationship was proportionate to the  legitimate  aims  sought  to  be
    achieved.  There is no such consideration in this determination.

19. Accordingly the decision is set aside.

20. Since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal events have  moved  on
    and there are outstanding matters in the Birmingham County Court.

21. In RS (Immigration and Family  Court  Proceedings)  India  [2012]  UKUT
    00218 the Tribunal held

         "1.  Where a claimant appeals  against  a  decision  to  deport  or
             remove and there are outstanding family  proceedings  relating
             to a child of the claimant, the judge of the  Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber should first consider:

             (i)  Is the outcome of  the  contemplated  family  proceedings
                  likely to be material to the immigration decision?

             (ii) Are there compelling public interest reasons  to  exclude
                  the claimant from the UK irrespective of  the  outcome  of
                  the family proceedings or the best interests of the child?

             (iii)    In the case of contact proceedings  initiated  by  an
                  Appellant in an immigration appeal is there any reason  to
                  believe that the family proceedings have  been  instituted
                  to delay or frustrate removal and not promote the  child's
                  welfare?

         2.   In assessing the above questions the judge will normally  want
             to consider: the degree of the claimant's previous interest in
             and contact with the child, the timing of contact  proceedings
             and the commitment with which they have been progressed,  when
             a decision is likely to be reached, what materials if any  are
             already  available  or  can  be  made  available  to  identify
             pointers to where the child's welfare lies?

         3.   Having considered these matters the judge will  then  have  to
             decide:

             (i)  Does the claimant have at least an  Article  8  right  to
                  remain until the conclusion of the family proceedings?

             (ii) If so should the appeal be allowed to  a  limited  extent
                  and a discretionary leave be directed as per the  decision
                  in MS Ivory Coast [2007] EWCA Civ 133?

             (iii)    Alternatively is it  more  appropriate  for  a  short
                  period of an adjournment to be granted to enable the  core
                  decision to be made in the family proceedings?

             (iv) Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a
                  view on the present state  of  knowledge  of  whether  the
                  Appellant would be allowed to remain in the event that the
                  outcome of the family proceedings is  the  maintenance  of
                  family contact between him or her and the  child  resident
                  here?"

22. Although the Appellant in RS was  seeking  contact  as  a  non-resident
    parent nevertheless the same principles apply.  In this case there  are
    no compelling public interest reasons to exclude  the  Appellants  from
    the UK irrespective of the outcome of the  family  proceedings  and  no
    reason to believe that the proceedings have been instituted to delay or
    frustrate removal and not to promote the child's welfare.  The  contact
    arrangements here appear to be of long standing.  In this case it seems
    that  the  most  appropriate  course  is  for  a  short  period  of  an
    adjournment to be granted so that the outcome in the family proceedings
    is known, since that  will  inform  the  decision  in  where  the  best
    interests of the  second  Appellant  lie.   Accordingly  the  following
    directions are made.

      i) The Respondent is to produce evidence  of  the  second  Appellant's
         father's status within fourteen days of these directions.

     ii) The Appellant is to adduce evidence of the outcome of  the  hearing
         on 11th June 2012 at Birmingham County Court  in  relation  to  the
         prohibited steps order.

    iii) The matter is to be set down for a resumed  hearing  before  Mrs  D
         Taylor at Field House not before three months of the date of  these
         directions.


The Resumed Hearing

23. Although the hearing had been adjourned for a period of  three  months,
    in fact there was a delay of some eleven months before this  case  came
    back before me. In the interim  the  Family  Court  in  Birmingham  had
    concluded its proceedings. Mr Peart told me  that  his  firm  had  been
    liaising with the Family Court in Birmingham who were  mindful  of  the
    immigration proceedings in this matter and had made the relevant orders
    in the full knowledge of the immigration status  of  both  parties.  He
    produced a draft order stating that the second Appellant is  to  reside
    with her mother, the first Appellant, save for specified occasions when
    she will reside with  her  father,  namely  every  other  weekend,  and
    specified weeks within the school holidays.

24. Miss Everett, when she had had an opportunity to look at the order  did
    not make any submissions save to raise a rather forlorn hope  that  the
    matter might be adjourned so that  the  Respondent  could  decide  what
    action should be taken.

Findings and Conclusions

25. There is no justification for an adjournment of this case.

26. The second Appellant's father has been granted discretionary  leave  to
    remain until May 2015 on the basis of his relationship with  a  British
    citizen and their British child.

27. I am satisfied that the second Appellant enjoys family  life  with  her
    natural father whom she stays with on a regular  basis,  and  with  her
    half brother, his son. It is implicit in the order  of  the  Birmingham
    Family Court that the judge in  that  case  considered  that  the  best
    interests of the second Appellant were to live with her mother  but  to
    have extensive and residential contact with her father.

28. Removal of the  second  Appellant  would  clearly  interfere  with  her
    ability to enjoy family life with her father  and  half  brother.   The
    best interests of the second Appellant are for  her  relationship  with
    her father and his family to be allowed to continue and the  respondent
    did not  seek  to  argue  otherwise.  No  reliance  was  put  upon  any
    countervailing argument to suggest  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    second Appellant should not be followed. It has not  been  argued  that
    the first Appellant, as the primary carer of her  daughter,  should  be
    separated from her.

Decision

29. The decision of the original judge has been set aside. It is remade  as
    follows.  The appeals of the first and second Appellants are allowed on
    Article 8 grounds.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

