

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01581/2016

                                              IA/01582/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision issued            |
|On 27th September 2018                     |On 17th October 2018       |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MRS AQSA KASHIF
                              MR KASHIF FAYYAZ
                        (No anonymity direction made)

                                                                 Respondents



For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This appeal is brought by the Secretary of State against a decision by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Debra Clapham.  The appellants before
      the First-tier tribunal is hereinafter referred to as "the claimants".

   2. The claimants are nationals of Pakistan.  The first-named claimant
      appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against refusal of leave as a Tier
      4 (General) Student Migrant.  The reason for refusal was that the
      Secretary of State maintained that the first-named claimant had
      fraudulently obtained a TOEIC certificate from ETS (Educational
      Testing Service).  The second-named claimant appealed against refusal
      of leave as a dependant.

   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal stated that there was a burden on
      the Secretary of State to show fraud.  In this case, however, the
      judge found the Secretary of State's concerns were based on "no more
      than speculation and supposition and there is nothing apart from the
      generic evidence which has been lodged and the look up tool."  The
      burden of proof was not discharged and the appeal was allowed.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had
      arguably confused who bore the burden of proof and to what extent.
      There was an arguable failure to provide sufficient reasoning as to
      why the first-named claimant's evidence was accepted.

   5. The claimants' rule 24 reply notice, prepared with considerable
      thoroughness by Mr Bryce, acknowledged that the application by the
      Secretary of State disclosed error of law by the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal.  The claimants sought a remittal of the appeals for a
      fresh hearing with an amendment to the grounds of appeal to include
      human rights grounds.

   6. Mrs O'Brien concurred with the proposal for remittal.

   7. There was a discussion about the proposed amendment to the grounds of
      appeal.  It was suggested that the claimants might have to make a
      human rights claim to the Secretary of State.  It was pointed out that
      the refusal decisions each contained a s 120 "one stop" notice but
      there had been no response to this by the claimants.  Mr Bryce was
      given a short adjournment to look into this matter.  On his return he
      stated that a human rights claim would be made within four weeks in
      response to the s 120 notice.  Mr Bryce expressed the view that the
      First-tier Tribunal would then have to consider any human rights issue
      raised, in terms of s 85 of the 2002 Act prior to its amendment by the
      2014 Act.

   8. Accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for
      error of law.  The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
      with no findings preserved for the appeals to be heard before a
      differently constituted tribunal.  It will be for the First-tier
      Tribunal to allow the grounds of appeal to be amended as appropriate.

   9. The tribunal rehearing the appeal will need to assess the evidence in
      accordance with the case law on the burden of proof, as referred to in
      the application for permission to appeal and the rule 24 notice.


Conclusions

  10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.



  11. The decision is set aside.


  12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
      preserved.




Anonymity

No anonymity direction has been made.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
      13th October 2018




