
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01097/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th June 2018                              |On 23rd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  BASRA [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr T Lindsay (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burret (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a Decision of Judge S D Lloyd of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    He heard the case at Birmingham on 18th December 2017 and in a Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 25th January  2018  allowed  the  appeal  on
    Human Rights grounds.

 2. For the sake of  continuity  and  clarity  in  this  Judgement  I  will
    continue to refer to Mrs [H] as the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.

 3. There is a considerable history to this appeal.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 1st March 1987.

 5. She entered the UK in 2002 as the dependent  of  her  husband  who  had
    entered the UK as a student in September 2001. The couple  subsequently
    had two children born in the UK.

 6. The Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain, on the  basis  of
    10 years lawful residence, on 15th August 2013.  That  application  was
    refused without a right of appeal. However, following  judicial  review
    proceedings the Secretary of State  reconsidered  the  application  but
    maintained the decision on 5th December 2015.

 7. Following judicial review proceedings, the Secretary of State agreed to
    reconsider the decisions of 15th August 2013 and 5th December 2013  and
    in a decision dated 10th February 2016 refused the application but this
    time with a right of appeal.

 8. Between 5th December 2015  and  decision  of  10th  February  2016  the
    Appellant applied, in time, for further leave to remain as a  dependent
    spouse on 23rd April 2015. The result of that application was that  she
    was granted discretionary leave to remain until 30th June 2018.

 9. In the 2016 decision the Secretary of State noted there were  two  gaps
    in her period of lawful residence. One was between 10th April 2009  and
    11th August 2009, a period of 123 days. The other was between 2nd April
    2010 and 12th May 2010, a period of 39 days. The Secretary of State was
    prepared to exercise discretion and discount the second, shorter period
    without leave but not the first. On  that  basis  the  application  was
    refused.

10. The refusal letter reads: - "We have considered  your  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain and refused it. Your human rights claim  has
    therefore been refused."

11. Before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant's representative  set  out
    in detail how the gaps in lawful residence occurred, arguing  that  the
    Appellant should not be held  responsible.  Unfortunately,  there  were
    gaps in the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in that not all the
    applications were before the Judge. The Judge did  not  find  in  terms
    however that the Appellant should have succeeded under the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis of 10 years lawful residence.

12. This being a human rights appeal, it was for the Judge to decide  human
    rights only, albeit through the lens of the Immigration Rules.  It  was
    appropriate therefore to consider whether in fact the Appellant met the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. He did not find that she did.

13. The Judge asked the Appellant's representative, then as now, Mr Burret,
    to address him on how the decision impacted upon the right  to  private
    and family life as the decision did not  require  the  removal  of  the
    Appellant as she had extant leave to remain.

14. The  argument  was,  and  remained  before  me,  that  the  Appellant's
    situation was more precarious than that of her husband and  her  rights
    more limited. She did not have the rights  associated  with  indefinite
    leave to remain. She remained a dependent spouse from Pakistan and  her
    lack of indefinite leave to remain affected her continuing integration.
    She was unable to travel freely and unable to  make  plans  beyond  the
    currency of her leave. It was argued  that  there  was  an  element  of
    unfairness  and  discrimination  in  the  way  she  had  been   treated
    differently from her husband.

15. The Judge found family and private life to  be  engaged  and  that  the
    decision  interfered  with  those   rights.   The   Judge   found   the
    precariousness of the Appellant's situation and the  disparity  between
    her own and her husband status created unfairness and in the absence of
    other adverse factors found the decision breached Article  8.  He  also
    made a recommendation that the Secretary  of  State  should  grant  the
    Appellant indefinite leave to remain

16. I find that the Judge has erred in his approach to Article 8.  I cannot
    see that Article 8 had application. The Judge ought  to  have  followed
    the guidance of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. Had he done  so  he  would  have
    asked himself the first question namely, will the proposed  removal  be
    an interference  by  a  public  authority  with  the  exercise  of  the
    applicant's right to respect for her private or (as the  case  may  be)
    family life? If the Judge had asked himself that  question  the  answer
    would inevitably have been  in  the  negative.  There  was  no  removal
    decision. The Appellant, at the date of decision still  had  two  years
    extant leave and indeed still had a significant period  of  leave  when
    the matter came before the Judge. The Appellant's  private  life  would
    continue as it had since she came to the UK and her family  life  would
    also continue. It would be open to her to make  a  further  application
    prior to the expiry of her discretionary leave.

17. I find that in allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds the Judge  made
    a material error of law and I set aside the Decision and  Reasons.  The
    recommendation that the Secretary  of  State  should  grant  indefinite
    leave to remain was also ill-advised. It is a matter for the  Secretary
    of State what leave she grants a successful Appellant.;  it  is  not  a
    matter for the Judge.

18. The facts not being in dispute, having so found I proceeded to redecide
    the appeal.

19. It is true to say that matters have moved on  significantly  since  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision. The most significant factor is that the
    Appellant's discretionary leave expired in June 2018. She still  enjoys
    the benefit of section 3C leave but if her appeal is dismissed she will
    be without any leave and liable to removal.

20. In redeciding the appeal, I have to consider human  rights  as  at  the
    date of hearing, namely for person with no extant leave in the UK.

21. Article 8 is clearly engaged and  without  going  through  all  of  the
    Razgar questions  this  case  is  clearly  about  proportionality.  The
    Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2002. She is the wife of
    a  British  citizen  and  the  mother  of  two  British  children.   In
    considering proportionality I am obliged to take into  account  section
    117B of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. That  instructs  that  the
    maintenance of immigration  control  is  in  the  public  interest.  Of
    critical importance however is section 117B 6) which states that  where
    a person is not liable to deportation, the  public  interest  does  not
    require that person's removal  where  the  person  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.  A
    British child is a qualifying child.

22. There is no suggestion of any poor  immigration  history  or  offending
    behaviour and nor is there any suggestion that the family are not self-
    sufficient.  There  are  no  adverse  matters  to   factor   into   the
    proportionality exercise when considering reasonableness.  Furthermore,
    both case law and the Secretary of State  's  policy  have  established
    that it is never reasonable to expect a  British  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. On that basis the  Appellant  is  entitled  to  succeed
    under Article 8 of the ECHR outwith the Immigration Rules.  Mr  Lindsay
    did not seek to argue otherwise.

23. As Mr Lindsay confirmed, the  Secretary  of  State  will  give  anxious
    scrutiny to the appropriate leave to give to the  Appellant,  no  doubt
    assisted by representations made by her advisers.

Notice of Decision

24. Having found the First-tier Tribunal made a material error  of  law  in
    its Decision and Reasons and having set that decision aside, I redecide
    the human rights appeal and on the basis of what I  have  already  said
    about the best interests of British children and the reasonableness  of
    expecting them to leave the UK I allow the appeal.

25. I allow the Human Rights appeal

26. There has been no application and I see no necessity for  an  anonymity
    order.

                [pic]
Signed                              Date 16th October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award because the appeal has been allowed on  Article  8
grounds solely as a result  of  the  passage  of  time  since  the  original
decision and not because Secretary of State's  decision  was  wrong  at  the
time she made it.


Signed   [pic]                  Date 16th October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Upper Tribunal Judge      |Mrs C J Martin                    |
|issuing approval:                 |                                  |
|Appellant's Name:                 |Adeel ahmad                       |
|Case Number:                      |IA/29622/2015                     |

Oral decision (please indicate)


I approve the attached Decision and Reasons for promulgation

Name:    C J Martin

Date:         13th June 2018


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |



