
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01092/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2016                          |On 20th January 2016          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           syed uzma anjum hashmi
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Timson of Counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of  Judge  McGinty
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 7th April 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 28th August 1983  who
    appealed against the decision to refuse  her  application  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom, the decision being made  by  the
    Secretary of State on 17th December 2014.  The application for leave to
    remain was based upon the Claimant's marriage to Shoaib Akhtar.

 4. The appeal was heard on 26th March 2015.   The  FtT  decided  that  the
    Claimant and her spouse, who is settled in the United Kingdom, are in a
    genuine and subsisting relationship,  and  had  entered  into  a  valid
    marriage.  The Claimant's appeal was therefore allowed  under  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the FtT had made a material
    misdirection in law, and had failed to resolve  conflicts  on  material
    issues.  The FtT had accepted that the Claimant  was  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with her settled spouse and on that basis had allowed  the
    appeal.  It was contended that this was a material error of law because
    the FtT had failed to consider section EX.1 of Appendix FM, and whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  outside
    the UK.  This was an issue that had been raised  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's reasons for refusal letter dated 17th December 2014.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted and directions were issued that  there
    should be an oral  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the FtT had erred in law such that the decision should  be  set
    aside.

 7. The appeal came before  me  on  2nd  November  2015  and  the  Claimant
    attended the hearing together with her spouse.  There was no difficulty
    in communication between the Claimant and interpreter, and the language
    used was Urdu.

 8. The Claimant confirmed that she was not  legally  represented  and  was
    content to proceed without legal representation.  I  explained  to  the
    Claimant the purpose of the hearing, which was to  decide  whether  the
    FtT had made an error of law in allowing the Claimant's appeal.

 9. The Claimant confirmed that she had seen the application  made  by  the
    Secretary of State, seeking permission to appeal, and she had seen  the
    grant of permission to appeal, and she had with her copies of  the  FtT
    decision, the application for permission to appeal, and  the  grant  of
    permission.

10. I heard oral submissions from Mr McVeety who relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal.   There  was
    no challenge to the FtT finding that the Claimant and her spouse are in
    a genuine relationship, but it was submitted that the FtT had erred  by
    failing  to  consider  section  EX.1(b)  and  whether  there  were  any
    insurmountable obstacles to family life between the  Claimant  and  her
    spouse continuing outside the UK.

11. The Claimant stated that the FtT had considered all the  evidence,  and
    was correct to conclude that she could  not  return  to  Pakistan,  and
    therefore there was no error of law  disclosed  in  the  FtT  decision,
    which should stand.

12. I explained my reasons at the hearing, and indicated  I  would  confirm
    these in a written decision, and I issued a written decision dated  3rd
    November 2015 setting out my conclusions and reasons for setting  aside
    the decision of the FtT.   For  ease  of  reference  I  set  out  below
    paragraphs 14-17 of my error of law decision and directions  dated  3rd
    November 2015;

         14.  Having reflected upon the oral submissions made, I found  that
             the FtT had materially erred in law.  Having decided that  the
             Claimant and her spouse are in a genuine relationship, the FtT
             should have gone on to consider  EX.1(b)  which  for  ease  of
             reference I set out below;

             (b)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
                  with a partner who is in the UK and is a British  citizen,
                  settled in the UK or in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
                  humanitarian  protection,  and  there  are  insurmountable
                  obstacles to family  life  with  that  partner  continuing
                  outside the UK.

         15.  The findings of the FtT commence at paragraph 21 and  conclude
             at paragraph 26.  There are no findings in relation to EX.1(b)
             and no  consideration  of  whether  there  are  insurmountable
             obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.  This  was
             an issue specifically  raised  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
             reasons for  refusal  letter,  and  was  referred  to  in  the
             submissions made to  the  FtT  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
             representative (see paragraph 19 of the decision).

         16.  The FtT erred  in  paragraph  26  in  finding  that  the  only
             effective ground for refusal of the Claimant's application was
             whether  the  parties  were  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
             relationship.  The FtT erred in finding that the Claimant  met
             all of the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  as  the  FtT  had
             neglected to consider EX.1(b).  The FtT  therefore  failed  to
             make findings on a material matter.

         17.  As there was  no  challenge  to  the  FtT  findings  that  the
             Claimant and her husband  are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship, that finding is preserved.

13. After I had announced that the decision of the FtT was set  aside,  the
    Claimant asked that the hearing be adjourned to another date to  enable
    her to prepare her case, and to give further evidence on the  issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles.  Mr McVeety agreed that an adjournment  would
    be appropriate.

14. I indicated that I did not propose to remit the appeal back to the  FtT
    to be reheard, and decided that it would be in the interests of justice
    to adjourn the hearing as requested by the Claimant.

15. The appeal came before me again on 12th January 2016.  The Claimant was
    legally represented and  her  solicitors  had  submitted  a  bundle  of
    documents comprising 71  pages,  which  included  a  witness  statement
    signed by the Claimant and dated 7th January 2016.

16. Mr Timson indicated the main issue to  be  considered  in  relation  to
    whether or not there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the UK, was the contention that the  Claimant  is  a
    Shia Muslim, and her spouse is a Sunni  Muslim,  and  their  respective
    families do not accept their marriage, and they fear  being  killed  if
    they return to Pakistan.  The Claimant had elaborated upon this in some
    detail in her witness statement, and stated in paragraph  16  that  she
    understood that the Secretary of State accepted  that  she  is  a  Shia
    Muslim and her husband is a Sunni Muslim.

17. Mr Timson indicated that he required an adjournment so that  a  witness
    statement could be prepared on behalf  of  the  Claimant's  spouse,  to
    support and confirm the account given by the Claimant  in  her  witness
    statement.  I was asked to take into account that the Claimant had  not
    been legally represented before the FtT nor at the earlier error of law
    hearing, and her solicitors were only instructed on 23rd December 2015,
    and their offices were  closed  between  24th  December  2015  and  4th
    January 2016.  Mr  Timson  also  requested  an  adjournment  to  obtain
    further objective evidence, to prove the difficulties that the Claimant
    and her spouse would face as Shia and Sunni Muslims who had married, if
    they had to return to Pakistan.

18. I was asked to accept that this was not a new issue,  as  although  the
    Claimant had not previously been legally  represented,  this  had  been
    raised before the FtT, and was referred to in paragraph 12 of  the  FtT
    decision, in which there is reference to the Claimant advising the  FtT
    that she feared being killed if returned to  Pakistan  because  of  her
    marriage, and that if her appeal failed,  she  intended  to  put  in  a
    further asylum claim.  The Claimant had previously made an asylum claim
    but had withdrawn this on legal advice.

19. Mr McVeety stated that  he  did  not  oppose  the  application  for  an
    adjournment, and clarified that it was not accepted that  the  Claimant
    was a Shia and her husband a Sunni Muslim and  that  this  would  cause
    them difficulties if returned to Pakistan, and so far as Mr McVeety was
    aware, this issue had not previously  been  put  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.  Mr McVeety indicated  that  there  would  be  extensive  cross-
    examination on this point, and commented that the Claimant was in  fact
    making a de facto asylum claim and the Upper Tribunal would  be  acting
    as the primary fact-finder on this issue.

20. Mr Timson submitted that it would  in  fact  be  appropriate,  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the FtT, so that the FtT could be the  primary
    fact-finder on this issue  rather  than  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  Mr
    McVeety agreed with this suggestion.

21. I decided that there had been a change of circumstances since the error
    of law hearing, and in view of the contents of the  Claimant's  witness
    statement, it would  not  be  appropriate  to  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision.  I decided that it would be appropriate  for  the  Claimant's
    spouse to be given the opportunity to prepare a witness statement,  and
    I took into account the fact that  the  Claimant  had  previously  been
    unrepresented, and her solicitors had only recently been instructed.

22. As both representatives now agreed that  it  would  be  appropriate  to
    remit this appeal back to the FtT, I took into account paragraph  7  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statements which provides as follows;

         7.1  Where under section 12(1) of  the  2007  Act  (proceedings  on
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper  Tribunal  finds  that
             the making of the decision concerned involved the making of an
             error on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside  the
             decision and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the
             First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i) or  proceed  (in
             accordance with the relevant Practice Directions)  to  re-make
             the decision under section 12(2)(b)(ii).

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made  is  that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

         7.3  Re-making rather than remitting will  nevertheless  constitute
             the normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of
             law is found, even if some further fact-finding is necessary.

23. In my view the requirements  of  paragraph  7.2(b)  are  met,  in  that
    substantial judicial fact-finding is required.   No  findings  of  fact
    were made by the FtT on the issue, in relation to the risk the Claimant
    and her spouse claim exists because of their marriage, if they returned
    to Pakistan.  Therefore, with the consent of both parties,  the  appeal
    is remitted to the FtT so that it may  be  decided  afresh.   The  only
    finding of fact that is preserved is that the Claimant and  her  spouse
    are in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

24. The appeal will be heard by the FtT at the  Manchester  Hearing  Centre
    and the parties will be advised of the time and  date  in  due  course.
    The time estimate is two hours.  An Urdu interpreter is required.   The
    appeal will be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge McGinty.

25. If the Claimant's spouse makes a witness statement that is to be relied
    upon, the witness statement must be submitted to the  FtT  and  to  the
    Secretary of State no later than 15th February 2016.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

There was no order for anonymity made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There
has been  no  request  for  anonymity,  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no
anonymity order.

Signed                              Date: 12th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The fee award will need  to  be
considered again when the First-tier Tribunal has heard this appeal.


Signed                              Date: 12th January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

