
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA011622015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15 June 2016                            |On 17 June 2016                |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller a Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed a Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the purpose of continuity with the determination in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal I will hereinafter refer to the Secretary of State  as
       the Respondent and KA as the Appellant.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the Appellant or any of his family members. This
       direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to
       comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
       proceedings. I do so in order  to  preserve  the  anonymity  of  the
       Appellant's step child ("JB") who is a minor and whose circumstances
       form the heart of this case.


    3. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       remain on 10 December 2014. His appeal against this was  allowed  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Gandhi ("the Judge") following  a  hearing
       on 15 July 2015.


The Judge's findings

    4. In summary the Judge found that it would be unreasonable for  JB  to
       be required to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  and  that  there  were
       insurmountable obstacles to family life with her mother (his spouse)
       continuing outside the United Kingdom. JB was born on 21 April 1998,
       is a British citizen, and was taking 'A' levels.  She  had  filed  a
       statement and gave unchallenged oral evidence [52] that they  had  a
       very close relationship, she considered him to  be  her  father,  he
       attends parent's evenings, and they go out  shopping  together.  She
       would be very upset if he went back to Bangladesh.


    5. The Judge found [163] that the family witnesses were  credible,  the
       Appellant and JB have a genuine and subsisting  relationship,  [164]
       JB is at a critical stage of her education as she is in  the  middle
       of her 'A' levels, and any disruption to her studies at  this  stage
       could be detrimental to her future ability to get a job or  continue
       in her studies. She was born and brought up in  the  United  Kingdom
       and there was no evidence she had ever been to  Bangladesh  and  all
       her life has been here as a British Citizen. They have a very  close
       bond [167] and understandably, especially after  the  death  of  her
       father, she would be devastated to lose another 'father' albeit  for
       different reasons.

The grant of permission


    6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish granted permission to appeal  (24
       May 2016) on the grounds that it is arguable that "the finding  that
       the appellant needs to remain ... for the well being of the youngest
       step child lacks reasoning."


Respondent's position

    7. There was inadequate evidence of the close bond the Judge  found  to
       exist as the Appellant had only lived in the same  household  as  JB
       for 11 months as at the date of hearing.


Appellant's position


    8. There was no rule 24 notice. Having heard from Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
       I indicated that I did not need to hear from Mr Hussain as there was
       plainly no merit in the application for the following reasons  which
       I gave at the hearing.

Discussion

    9. The Respondent's position,  as  conceded  by  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller,
       merely amounts to a disagreement with the findings  the  Judge  made
       and to which I have referred above. Having made those findings,  the
       Judge was entitled to find that it would be unreasonable to  require
       JB to leave the United Kingdom to retain her family  life  with  him
       and that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  it  continuing
       abroad.

   10. I am not therefore satisfied that the Judge made a material error of
       law.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
16 June 2016
