
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01958/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2018                             |On 4 May 2018                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mrs Ifat jahan tammi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case is the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal with the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mrs Tammi as
    "the Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  who  appealed  against  a
    decision of the Respondent refusing her leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Following a hearing at Taylor  House  on  18  September  2017
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shore allowed the Appellant's appeal.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. That was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin on 21 March 2018. His reasons for so
    granting were: -

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against the decision
             of First-tier Tribunal Judge Shore promulgated on 22 September
             2017, allowing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of
             State's decision to refuse leave to remain.

         2.   It is arguable that the  Judge  erred  in  law  materially  in
             failing to engage with the main issues in the appeal and  give
             sustainable reasons for the findings.

         3.   I grant permission to appeal".

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. The Appellant failed to appear. I was satisfied  that  she  was  served
    with notice  of  today's  hearing  and  in  line  with  the  overriding
    objective  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    considered it fair and just to proceed.

 6. Mr Melvin relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal and argued
    that the Judge should have  considered  this  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 7. I find that for all the reasons put forward the  Judge  has  materially
    erred. It was incumbent upon him  to  consider  this  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds and to engage with the totality  of  the  evidence  that
    fell to be considered. That he has failed to  do.  The  issues  in  the
    appeal have not been addressed and the Respondent  has  been  denied  a
    fair hearing in those circumstances.

Decision

The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Shore.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date          2 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
