
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01477/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 March 2016                          |On 13 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                                 MANSOR ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Khan, GK Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan.   He  arrived  in  the  UK  in
    December 2009 with leave to enter as a Tier 4  (General)  Student.   He
    was subsequently granted extensions of stay until 14 October 2014.   On
    13 or 14 October 2014 he applied for further leave to remain  based  on
    being dependent on his parents and  being  in  a  relationship  with  a
    European national. On 17 December  2014  the  respondent  refused  this
    application. He appealed stating shortly that the decision was  not  in
    accordance with the law or Article  8  ECHR  as  he  had  close  family
    members in the UK and had an established private life. His  appeal  was
    fixed for rehearing on 28 July 2015.

2.   On 27 July the appellant sent a letter requesting  an  adjournment.  It
    said he was unable to attend as he  had  fallen  down  stairs,  he  had
    difficulty in working and was in pain. His letter enclosed a form Med 3
    issued by  his GP dated 24 July 2015, stating that he was not  fit  for
    work for the period 24 July 2015  to  7  August  2015.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal  refused that application.

3.   On 28 July the appellant failed to attend the hearing  nor  did  anyone
    attend on his behalf.  His case was then dealt with "on the papers"  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Malcolm who in a decision sent on 2 September
    2015 dismissed his appeal.  In the course of his written  decision  the
    judge noted the application for an adjournment.

4.   The grounds of appeal contend  that  the  decision  of  the  judge  was
    procedurally unfair as the effect of  dealing  with  the  case  on  the
    papers was to deny the appellant a fair  hearing.   In  amplifying  the
    grounds Mr Khan has submitted that there  were  substantive  Article  8
    issues in play because the appellant had family here who  were  British
    citizens; the appellant had submitted medical  evidence;  the  Tribunal
    Administration should have notified him that  his  adjournment  request
    had been refused, but failed to do so; if they had, her  parents  could
    have attended  the  hearing  as  the  very  least'  the  appellant  was
    unrepresented.

Relevant Law

5.   There is ample case law on adjournments. I do not propose to  summarise
    this here, but illustrative of that case law is the  reported  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (Adjournment;  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    418 (IAC) whose head note states :


         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  on  several
         respects: these include a refusal to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting  immaterial  consideration  to  intrude,
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing, failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally. In principle, in most  cases
         the question  will be whether the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is not  whether   the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather  the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."
6.   I am not persuaded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  in
    proceeding to determine the case  in  the  absence  of  the  appellant.
    There are several reasons which lead me to this conclusion.

7.   First, the medical evidence submitted verified only that the  appellant
    was  unable to work, it did not indicate that he was unfit to attend  a
    hearing of his  appeal.   The  appellant's  reference  in  his  grounds
    seeking permission to the  GP confirming his "inability to walk,  which
    restricted me to attend the hearing" is inaccurate and incorrect.

8.   Second, there is nothing to show (and the appellant does  not  contend)
    that he took any action either on the day before the hearing or in  the
    morning of the hearing to ascertain whether his adjournment request had
    been granted.  He had no basis for assuming that it would be.

9.   Third, despite Mr Kahn stating that the appellant's parents would  have
    attended if they had known the adjournment request  had  been  refused,
    nobody attended the hearing - not his parents nor anyone else on his by
    behalf.  It was the heart of his case that  he  was  dependent  on  his
    parents.

10.  Fourth, in advance of the hearing before  me,  the  appellant  has  not
    sought to adduce any further evidence in support of  his  challenge  to
    the fairness of the adjournment.  There has been no letter from the  GP
    saying the appellant was unfit to attend the hearing on 28 July.  There
    has been no letter from his parents saying they  would  have  attended.
    It is fair to say the appellant's parents were  in  attendance  at  the
    hearing before me today, but my concern here is about  the  appellant's
    failure, in response to clear Tribunal directions to adduce any further
    evidence casting light on the situation at the date fixed for the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.

11.   Fifth  (as  noted   earlier)   despite   lodging   appeal   based   on
    dissatisfaction with the respondent's refusal of his claim based on his
    dependency on parents and ties with a European girlfriend, he  had  not
    produced any evidence in support of either those claims.

12.  I take into account that the appellant had no legal  representative  at
    the time but he has known since refusal of his application for leave to
    remain that he was facing removal from the UK as he had no other lawful
    basis for stay.  His ability to lodge an appeal  demonstrates  that  he
    was aware of the elementary fact that his very stay in the UK rested on
    the outcome of his appeal.  Yet he sat on his hands  and  when  he  did
    request an adjournment, sat on them  again,  even  though  he  said  he
    received no further information until September when he  was  sent  the
    judge's decision dismissing his appeal.

13.  In such circumstances I do not consider that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision to proceed to deal with  his case on the papers discloses  any
    procedural unfairness or denial of a  right  to  a  fair  hearing.   He
    failed to take the opportunity afforded to him to  attend  the  hearing
    and failed to  show that there was a valid reason for  there  being  no
    one in attendance at his hearing.

14.  The grounds do not seek to challenge the judge's findings  in  relation
    to Article 8.  It is pertinent to  observe  what  the  judge  found  at
    paragraphs 16-22.

         "16.     The circumstances narrated  by  the  appellant  would  not
             allow him to apply for further leave to  remain  as  an  adult
             dependent relative in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules.
             It is detailed that he is  living  with  his  parents  and  is
             supported financially by them. The appellant has not  provided
             any further information of his relationship with his  European
             girlfriend and it is noted that he  is  not  living  with  his
             girlfriend but is living with his parents.


         17.      The appellant came to the UK in December  2009.   At  that
             time  he  was  aged  27  and  it  is  accordingly   considered
             reasonable to assume that he  had  been  living  in  Pakistan.
             Whilst he has detailed that he has no other family members and
             has lost contact with friends in Pakistan, he is an adult  who
             lived  independently  in  Pakistan  until  2009  and   it   is
             considered  reasonable  to  assume  that  there  would  be  no
             significant obstacles to him being able  to  reintegrate  into
             his home country.


         18.  It is clearly the preference of the appellant to remain in the
             UK where his parents are resident and where he has established
             a relationship with his girlfriend.  Whilst the  appellant  is
             living with his parents who are supporting him financially, if
             the appellant returns to his home country he will be  able  to
             continue to have contact with his family  and  it  is  assumed
             that, if necessary, his family would be  able  to  financially
             support him out with the UK.


         19.  Whilst the appellant has given some detail of his relationship
             with his girlfriend, there is no information to  suggest  that
             this relationship could not continue outside  the  UK.   Given
             the nature of the leave which had been granted, the  appellant
             can have ad no reasonable expectation to stay long-term in the
             UK.


         20.  Whilst it was clear that it is the appellant's  preference  to
             remain in the UK, I did not consider  that  the  evidence  and
             information provided was persuasive to  support  consideration
             of the case on the basis of the appellant's family or personal
             circumstances.


         21.  As detailed, the burden of proof lies with the appellant and I
             was not satisfied on the information presented that there  was
             anything exceptional or compelling in this claim.


         22.  I  did  not  find  that  there  was  anything  exceptional  or
             compelling in this claim  or  that  refusal  would  result  in
             unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual such  that
             refusal of the application  would  not  be  proportionate  and
             accordingly did not consider that  there  were  good  arguable
             grounds for considering  the  claim  outwith  the  Rules.   In
             reaching this decision I have given consideration to the cases
             of Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 and Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA  Civ
             74."

15.  I see no realistic prospect of any different conclusion  being  reached
    by another judge faced with the nugatory evidence which  the  appellant
    chose to place before the Secretary of State in relation to his Article
    8 circumstances.

16   For the above reasons

17.  The First-tier Tribunal decision is not vitiated  by  legal  error  and
    its decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 12 July 2016
               [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

