
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01467/2015
                                                               IA/01469/2015
                                                               IA/01470/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 19 February 2016                  |on 23 February 2016                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                                SHAMSUN NAHAR
                                    [WR]
                                    [DR]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Parkinson - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Islam of London Law Associates.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge S Taylor promulgated on the 25 August 2015 in which  the  Judge
       dismissed the appeals under the Immigration Rules but allowed  it  by
       reference to Article 8 ECHR which is challenged by the  Secretary  of
       State.

Background


    2. The first respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh born on the  21  July
       1982, the second and third respondents are her children born  on  the
       13 October 2005 and 29 August 2012. On 24 October 2014  they  applied
       for leave to enter the UK as the spouse  and  children  of  a  person
       present and settled here. The first respondent and her  sponsor  were
       married in Bangladesh on 18 September 2002.

    3. Judge Taylor sets  out  the  findings  at  paragraphs  12-14  of  the
       determination.

    4. The appeal under the Immigration Rules was conceded for  although  it
       was claimed the earned income was in excess of  the  requirements  of
       the Rules, the respondents failed to submit the required documents in
       accordance with Appendix FM-SE. The respondents had failed to provide
       bank statements that corresponded with the submitted  payslips.   The
       rationale  behind  this  requirement  is  to  ascertain  whether  the
       payslips  represent  genuine  income  earned  and   paid   into   the
       recipient's bank account which was not proved.

    5. In relation to EX.1 the Judge found the first  respondent  unable  to
       qualify as a partner or parent as the second  and  third  respondents
       are not UK citizens and had not been in the UK for a period of  seven
       years immediately preceding the application. It was  noted  that  the
       second respondent had been out of the  United  Kingdom  from  January
       2012 to August 2013, that all three respondents had lived with  first
       respondent's  mother  in  Bangladesh  with   no   evidence   of   any
       difficulties that would be faced on return. No private life had  been
       established that enabled the respondents to succeed under  the  Rules
       and  nor  had  the  first  respondent  demonstrated  any  significant
       obstacles to her integration on  return  to  Bangladesh.  The  appeal
       under the Rules by reference to both  family  and  private  life  was
       dismissed [12-13].

    6. The Judge considered this is a case that warranted  consideration  of
       Article 8 outside the Rules [14].

    7. It was found family life exists between the  sponsor,  who  is  a  UK
       citizen, and the respondents who have lived  together  intermittently
       since 2008 and continuously for the last two years. It is claimed the
       respondents provided evidence to prove they earned  sufficient  funds
       but failed to provide the prescribed documents.

    8. When considering the proportionality of the decision [14]  the  Judge
       found:

           "... On the question of proportionality, I accept the submission
           that expecting the appellants to return to Bangladesh to make an
           application, both as a spouse the  children  of  a  UK  citizen,
           would result in prolonged separation of the sponsor and his wife
           and  children,  while  they  returned  to  Bangladesh  to  lodge
           applications and the application were processed.   I  find  that
           such removal would be  disproportionate  interference  with  the
           family life of the family unit and contrary  to  Chikwamba  2008
           UKHL 40 which concluded that it would be rarely proportionate to
           expect a parent to  leave  the  UK  to  apply  from  abroad.  In
           addition, S55 of the 2009 Act requires that the interest of  the
           child is a primary consideration and the  case  of  Zambrano  is
           authority that the interest of the child is to be  brought  upon
           the presence of both parents. I find that the  interest  of  the
           second and third appellants is  best  served  by  being  in  the
           presence of both parents and a long  term  separation  would  be
           contrary to the principles of S55 o the 2009 Act."

Discussion


    9. It is not disputed the family life exists in this  case.  It  is  not
       disputed that the requirements of the Rules cannot be met as a result
       of the omission of important documents relevant to  the  verification
       of the claimed income. Although the Judge  records  in  paragraph  14
       that evidence had  been  provided  to  prove  sufficient  funds  were
       available the Judge also records the  failure  to  provide  the  bank
       statements and fails to make a specific finding that  the  funds  are
       genuinely available. If this is to be inferred from paragraph  14  it
       is important to note that in ZY (Turkey) v Secretary of State for the
       Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 65 the Court  of  Appeal  said  that,
       amongst other things, the fact that the Claimant was not a burden  on
       the state was not capable of carrying any weight; not needing to have
       recourse  to  public  funds  was  a  pre-condition  imposed  by   the
       Immigration Rules but it was not sufficient for  entry,  and  it  was
       impossible to understand how it could outweigh the need for effective
       immigration control.

   10. It is arguable the Judge misapplied  the  decision  in  Chikwamba  in
       importing a legal test from that decision which the courts have since
       said does not exist.

   11. In Jeunesse v the Netherlands Application 12738/10 the  ECtHR  stated
       that in principle Contracting States have the right to require aliens
       seeking residence on their territory to make the appropriate  request
       from abroad. They are thus  under  no  obligation  to  allow  foreign
       nationals to await the outcome of immigration  proceedings  on  their
       territory.

   12. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v Hayat;  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department v Treebhowan  (Mauritius)  [2012]  EWCA
       Civ 1054 the Court of Appeal outlined the following  guidance  as  to
       the effect of Chikwamba and the subsequent decision of the  Court  of
       Appeal in TG (Central African Republic) [2008] EWCA Civ  997  and  SZ
       (Zimbabwe) [2009] EWCA Civ 590 and MA (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ  953
       in which it had been considered: (i) Where an applicant who  did  not
       have lawful entry clearance  pursued  a  claim  under  Article  8,  a
       dismissal of the claim on  the  procedural  ground  that  the  policy
       required that the applicant should have made the application from his
       home state might, but not necessarily would, constitute a  disruption
       of  family  or  private  life  sufficient  to   engage   Article   8,
       particularly where  children  were  adversely  affected;  (ii)  Where
       Article 8 was engaged, it would be  a  disproportionate  interference
       with family or private life to enforce such a policy unless there was
       a sensible reason for doing so; (iii)  Whether  it  was  sensible  to
       enforce  that  policy  would  necessarily  be  fact  sensitive,   and
       potentially relevant factors  included  the  prospective  length  and
       degree of disruption of family life and whether other members of  the
       family were settled in the UK; (iv) Where Article 8 was  engaged  and
       there was no sensible reason for enforcing the policy,  the  decision
       maker should determine the Article 8 claim on its substantive merits,
       having regard to  all  material  factors,  notwithstanding  that  the
       applicant had no lawful entry clearance; (v) Nothing in Chikwamba was
       intended to alter the way  the  courts  should  approach  substantive
       Article 8 issues as laid down in seminal cases as Razgar  and  Huang;
       (vi) If the Secretary of State had no sensible reason  for  requiring
       the application to be made from the home state, the fact that he  had
       failed to do so  should  not  thereafter  carry  any  weight  in  the
       substantive Article 8 balancing exercise (para 30).

   13. It is not said by the House of Lords said in Chikwamba that  that  it
       would always be Kafkaesque to require those who are in  this  country
       illegally or who have no other right to be here to  return  to  their
       country of origin to reapply in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the
       United Kingdom.

   14. It is also important to note that  Chikwamba  was  decided  in  2008.
       Cases such as Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
       [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), MF (Article 8 - new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]
       UKUT 00393 (IAC) and Nagre do not deal directly  with  the  issue  of
       whether it would be reasonable to expect an applicant to return  home
       simply to reapply for entry in the correct capacity although they  do
       comment specifically on the strength that is now to be given  to  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules.

   15. In R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM -  Chikwamba  -
       temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT  00189  (IAC)
       it was held that (i) Appendix FM does not  include  consideration  of
       the question whether  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  an
       individual to return to his home country to make an  entry  clearance
       application to re-join family members in the U.K. There may be  cases
       in which there are no insurmountable obstacles to family  life  being
       enjoyed outside the U.K. but where temporary separation to enable  an
       individual  to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
       disproportionate. In all cases, it will  be  for  the  individual  to
       place before the Secretary of  State  evidence  that  such  temporary
       separation will interfere disproportionately with  protected  rights.
       It will not be enough to rely solely  upon  the  case-law  concerning
       Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. (ii) Lord Brown was not laying  down
       a legal test when he suggested in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant
       to make an application for entry clearance would only  "comparatively
       rarely" be proportionate in a case involving children (per Burnett J,
       as he then was, in R (Kotecha  and  Das)  v  SSHD  [2011]  EWHC  2070
       (Admin)).

   16. The Judge also appears to have been influenced by what  is  described
       in the determination as a  'prolonged  separation'  without  defining
       this term or explain why this would be so.  In SA (Article 8  -burden
       of proof) Algeria [2008] UKAIT  00054  the  Tribunal  held  that  the
       European Court of Human Rights has not seen  a  period  of  delay  of
       limited duration (before an  applicant  can  be  considered  for  re-
       admission to the country where he had established family ties) as  in
       itself giving rise to disproportionality.

   17. The finding by the Judge in this appeal is inadequate reasoned.

   18. In relation to section 55 and the best interests of the children, the
       guidance provided by the House of Lords in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 :

           (1)    The best interests of a child are an integral part of the
           proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

           (2)    In making that assessment, the best interests of a  child
           must be a primary consideration, although not  always  the  only
           primary consideration; and the child's best interests do not  of
           themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

           (3)    Although the best interests of a child can be  outweighed
           by the cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
           consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

           (4)    While different judges might approach the question of the
           best interests of a child in different ways, it is important  to
           ask oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in order to
           avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child  might  be
           undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

           (5)    It is important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
           circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests  before
           one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed  by  the
           force of other considerations;

           (6)    To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
           examination of all relevant factors  when  the  interests  of  a
           child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and

            (7)   A child must not be blamed for matters for  which  he  or
           she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

   19. Although the starting point is that the best interests of a child are
       to be brought up by both parents this is not the determinative factor
       and Zambrano did not make it so. The Judge was required  to  identify
       what the best interests of the children  are  and  then  factor  this
       important element into a proper  proportionality  assessment.  It  is
       arguable this process has not been properly undertaken.

   20. In such an assessment, as the date of the decision is 25 August  2015
       (the date of promulgation) and hearing 30 July 2015 it was  necessary
       for the Judge to consider Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002. From 28 July 2014 section 19 of the Immigration  Act
       2014 was brought into force by the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement
       No 1, Transitory and Saving Provisions) Order  2014  (SI  2014/1820).
       This amends the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by
       introducing a new Part 5A which applies where the Tribunal  considers
       article  8(2)  ECHR  directly  i.e.  outside  of  the  Rules.   These
       provisions bring in mandatory statutory requirements relating to  the
       weight to be attached to the public interest under  Article  8  which
       override existing case law.

   21. A fundamental error in the determination is the lack of  any  mention
       of section 117 or indication that the Judge was  even  aware  of  its
       provisions. This is relevant as it is a statutory  provision  and  it
       has an impact upon pre- 28 July 2014 case law.  Mr  Islam  eventually
       accepted that there was no mention of these  provisions  but  claimed
       the omission was not material for the Judge had  considered  all  the
       relevant elements.  Although I accept that if this had been the  case
       the lack of specific reference to section 117  may  not  be  material
       error, the difficulty in this case is that it has not been  made  out
       that the Judge has considered the required elements and made specific
       findings upon the same, including the  weight  given  to  the  public
       interest [section 117B].

   22. It is also noted that the  Judge  refers  the  impact  on  separation
       whilst an  application  is  made  but  failed  to  factor  into  that
       assessment the fact the first  and  second  respondents  returned  to
       Bangladesh  between  November  2008  and  May  2010  when  the  third
       respondent was not born, and again between January  2012  and  August
       2013 where the third respondent was born.

   23. The determination is fatally flawed. I find legal error  material  to
       the decision made out. The determination shall be set aside.

   24. As there has yet to be a proper assessment  of  the  Article  8  ECHR
       element outside the Rules the case shall be remitted.

Decision

   25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I  case  is  remitted  to  Taylor
       House for a rehearing to allow a full and proper  assessment  of  the
       merits of this appeal.

   26. Case management directions, including a hearing date shall be  issued
       by the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House in due course.

  Anonymity.

   27. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22 February 2016
