
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01020/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2014                           |On 3 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL



                                   Between

                      MISS OLUFUNMILOLA COMFORT BRIGHT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bello, Solicitor, Apex Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  her  with
    a derivative residence card on the basis that she is  a  third  country
    national upon whom a British citizen  is  dependent  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor  ("the  judge")  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 1st July 2014.

2.   The appellant claimed to be the  primary  carer,  responsible  for  her
    father, a British citizen.  The judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant  and  from  her  father,  took   into   account   substantial
    documentary evidence, which included a letter from a doctor, and  heard
    submissions from the two representatives present.   He  concluded  that
    the appellant could not benefit from  regulation  15A  or  18A  of  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations") and that the evidence did  not  show  that  she  was  her
    father's primary carer.  He went on to make an  Article  8  assessment.
    In  this  context,  the  judge  found  that  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules"), contained in Appendix FM and paragraph
    276ADE, were not met.  In the Article 8 assessment, the judge's primary
    finding was that family life had not been shown between  the  appellant
    and her father  and  that  there  was  nothing  exceptional  about  her
    circumstances, or his.  The judge found, on an alternative basis,  that
    if  family  life  were  shown,  the  adverse  decision  amounted  to  a
    proportionate response.  So far as  private  life  was  concerned,  the
    judge found that any interference in this context  was  reasonable  and
    proportionate.  He dismissed the appeal.

3.   In the grounds in support of the application, it was  contended  first,
    that the judge made findings against the weight of evidence before him.
     He concentrated on evidence regarding the circumstances and  condition
    of the appellant's father at earlier times,  rather  than  focusing  on
    circumstances as at the date of the hearing.  The appellant's  father's
    health had deteriorated over the past few years, since 2012.  The judge
    did not properly consider or take into account that he was 91 years old
    and that it was better to have his  daughter  present  with  him  as  a
    primary carer, rather than relying on a stranger  or  the  state.   The
    evidence showed that other family members in the United Kingdom  seldom
    visited.  Other relatives lived abroad.  The judge's finding  that  the
    appellant's decision to move  in  with  her  father  was  a  matter  of
    convenience was described in the grounds as perverse.

4.   In a second ground, it was contended that the judge applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof in relation to regulation 15A.  Although he  directed
    himself in  terms  that  the  applicable  standard  was  a  balance  of
    probabilities, the findings he made showed that  a  different  standard
    had been applied.  The judge  should  have  given  due  weight  to  the
    appellant's father's advanced years, as a strong factor.  Moreover, the
    phrase "primary carer" under regulation 15A was not  given  its  proper
    meaning by the judge.  His findings  regarding  the  ability  of  other
    people or agencies to look after the appellant's father detracted  from
    a proper assessment of whether the appellant was his "primary" carer.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 18 July 2014.  The  judge  granting
    permission found that it was arguable that the judge failed to give due
    weight to a letter dated 3rd March 2014 from Dr  B  Bello,  who  stated
    that it would be beneficial for the  appellant's  father's  health  and
    general welfare for the appellant herself to continue to care for  him.



Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Bello relied upon his skeleton argument and  also  had  with  him  a
    copy of the relevant parts of the 2006 Regulations  and  part  of  form
    DRF1, the application for a derivative residence card.

7.   He said that the judge placed too  much  weight  on  issues  concerning
    events before the date of hearing.  The critical evidence concerned the
    health of the appellant's father.  This included a letter from his  GP.
    It was apparent that her father was to have an operation for cataracts.
     The judge should have given full weight to this evidence.   The  trend
    in the determination seemed  to  be  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's father was healthy for a man of his age.  This was  against
    the weight of the evidence.

8.   Irrespective of the  medical  evidence,  the  age  of  the  appellant's
    father should have been  given full weight in its own  right.   He  was
    now over 91 years old.

9.   The judge considered regulation 15A in terms of whether  the  appellant
    was her father's sole carer whereas the proper test was whether she was
    his primary carer. The regulation did not deal with circumstances where
    there was nobody else present at all.  It was  plainly  concerned  with
    the presence of a primary carer.  At paragraph 43 of the determination,
    the judge found that the appellant's  decision  to  move  in  with  her
    father was merely a matter of convenience.   It was, however,  entirely
    natural  that  she  would  move  with  him.   If  her  father's  health
    deteriorated  subsequently,  this  should  not  be  held  against   the
    appellant.

10.  So far as the standard of proof was concerned, paragraphs 39 and 41  in
    effect showed that the judge believed  that  the  appellant  should  be
    almost "on duty" daily.   Again, this was  not  what  was  required  by
    regulation 15A.  The judge also gave weight to the  presence  of  other
    people, available to provide care and support.  This  was  apparent  at
    paragraph 48.  If this were so, nobody could succeed  under  regulation
    15A because, if no relatives were available, state agencies would  step
    in.  This showed the judge's material error.   Moreover,  the  relevant
    trend in the  United  Kingdom  was  that  health  and  social  services
    agencies were short of funds.  This  should  have  been   given  proper
    weight also.  The doctor's letter was before the judge, making it clear
    that it would be better for the appellant to care for her father.

11.  The respondent's own guidance, apparent from the application form,  put
    the focus on whether a person depended upon his or her carer.  This was
    a question of fact not properly considered by the judge.  The  evidence
    showed that the appellant was her father's primary  carer.   The  judge
    did not properly weigh the evidence.  His  findings  revealed  that  he
    applied a higher standard than a balance of probabilities.

12.  Ms Kenny said in response that  the  grounds  revealed  a  disagreement
    with the  judge's  findings  but  no  error  of  law  was  shown.   The
    determination was very well reasoned  and  the  judge  dealt  with  all
    matters in hand.   At  paragraph  40,  the  judge  noted  the  cataract
    operation and the medical opinion that  the  appellant's  father  would
    recover and might be able to drive again. The  judge  was  entitled  to
    find, on the evidence,  that  the  appellant's  father  had  no  health
    issues, save for the need for cataracts to be  removed.   Overall,  the
    judge clearly took into account the appellant's father's  health.   The
    father's age was a major factor, although not determinative, but  again
    this was taken into account. The judge accepted that  on  occasion  the
    appellant herself might help her father with putting on socks and shoes
    but, at paragraph 41, he  was  entitled  to  find  that  there  was  no
    requirement for this support on a daily basis.  The judge  clearly  did
    consider the letter from Dr Bello.  This  revealed  the  doctor's  view
    that it would be beneficial for the daughter to look after  her  father
    but what was not known was the question actually put and the letter did
    not support the claim that  the  appellant  was  her  father's  primary
    carer.  In any event, the judge  took  the  letter  into  account.   No
    particular health matters were identified in it.  It was apparent  from
    paragraphs 42 and 43 that the appellant's father was, on the  evidence,
    healthy and there was nothing to show that his daughter  was  compelled
    to move in to act as a carer.  All in all, the determination  was  well
    reasoned and no error of law was shown in the  grounds  or  submissions
    made on the appellant's behalf.

13.  In a brief response, Mr Bello said that the Tribunal ought to  look  at
    what was reasonable or not.  The father's age was not in doubt and what
    other medical evidence would be required to show that he  might  suffer
    from memory problems? His age spoke for  itself.   The  judge  granting
    permission mentioned this as a factor at paragraph 3.  The letter  from
    the doctor was also fundamental evidence.

Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

14.  I am grateful to the representatives for their careful submissions  and
    to Mr Bello for his skeleton argument.

15.  The thrust of the challenge  is  that  the  judge  did  not  weigh  the
    evidence properly and applied the wrong standard of proof  in  relation
    to regulation 15A.   Having read the determination carefully and having
    also carefully considered the grounds, I conclude no material error  of
    law has been shown.   As  Ms  Kenny  submitted,  the  determination  is
    extremely thorough and  well  reasoned.   The  judge  directed  himself
    correctly in relation to the standard of proof, at paragraph 12 of  the
    determination.  His assessment of the evidence was largely set  out  at
    paragraphs 18 to 34.   It is clear that the judge took into account the
    letter from Dr Bello and paragraph 42 contains the  judge's  assessment
    of that evidence.

16.  The weight  to  be  given  to  evidence  is  a  matter  for  the  judge
    determining an appeal.  In this case, the determination shows that  the
    judge gave due weight to the particular items before him and he did not
    weigh any single item in isolation or  out  of  context.   Nor  did  he
    misunderstand the  issues  before  him.   His  focus  was  properly  on
    regulation 15A and, in his Article 8 assessment,  the  content  of  the
    ties established by the appellant in  the  United  Kingdom,  since  her
    arrival here.  Important in this context was her relationship with  her
    father, particularly following her decision to move into  his  home  in
    October 2012.  The judge  did  not,  I  find,  put  undue  emphasis  on
    evidence of events before the  hearing.   He  weighed  the  documentary
    evidence with the oral evidence, as he was required to.   The  findings
    of fact he made regarding the  health  and  general  wellbeing  of  the
    appellant's father, taking into account of  course  his  advanced  age,
    were open to him on the evidence.  Again, in this context,  the  letter
    from Dr Bello formed part of his assessment.

17.  Having weighed the evidence, the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
    the appellant had not shown that she was her father's primary carer and
    that  the  requirements  of  regulations  15A  and  18A  of  the   2006
    Regulations were not met.   He did not apply an incorrect  standard  of
    proof.  Paragraph 45 of the  determination  shows,  for  example,  that
    having correctly directed himself earlier in the determination, he kept
    the correct standard in mind throughout.

18.  Similarly, the judge's human rights assessment is free from error.   He
    directed himself in the light of recent authority,  took  into  account
    fully his findings of fact regarding the appellant's ties here and  the
    relationships she enjoys with  her father and others and  then  weighed
    the competing interests.  His conclusion that the adverse decision  was
    a proportionate response and that the appellant could  not  succeed  in
    relation to Article 8 was open to him on the evidence.

19.  In summary, I conclude that the judge's findings of fact were  open  to
    him and that he correctly applied  the  law  to  those  findings.   The
    grounds do not show an error of law and so the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.





Signed                                  Date: 10 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



