
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01538/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Liverpool                                     |                              |
|On 13th August 2018                           |On 25th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  ARMAN [V]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Metzer QC (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Birrell, promulgated on 16th March 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Manchester  on  5th  March  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Armenia,  and  was  born  on  2nd
    February 1978.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent,
    dated 23rd March 2016, refusing his application for ILR  as  a  spouse,
    with a British citizen by the name of [JB], which application had  been
    refused by the Secretary of State on the basis of paragraph 287  of  HC
    395 and the failure of the Appellant to satisfy paragraph  322(1C),  as
    well as the requirements of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

The Judge's Findings

 3. Judge Birrell was faced with an appeal  which  had  shifting  scenarios
    unfolding before her.  Initially the Appellant had claimed to be  in  a
    relationship with [JB].  This is how the appeal had been listed on 15th
    March 2017 before Judge Wedderspoon.  At that  hearing,  the  Appellant
    claimed no longer to be in a relationship  with  this  lady  but  in  a
    relationship with another lady by the name of [AA].   He  claimed  that
    she was not his partner at the time but he had exercised regular access
    to the children, who were also his children, and those of [AA].  At the
    appeal before Judge Birrell, the situation changed again  in  that  the
    Appellant claimed that he was now living with [AA], as well as with his
    children, and doing so as a family unit, and had been  doing  that  for
    about a month (paragraph 19).  The judge heard several witnesses,  most
    of whom she considered to be unreliable (see paragraphs 50 to 51).

 4. In the background,  there  was  also  the  matter  of  the  Appellant's
    criminal convictions for fraud in Scotland in February  2012  where  he
    had been sentenced to a term of eight months' imprisonment, for a first
    offence, which Judge Birrell  observed  could  only  have  met  with  a
    custodial sentence because "this was a matter viewed as serious by  the
    court" (paragraph 66).

 5. Nevertheless, there were the children.  They are  twins  and  they  are
    British citizens, having been born in the  UK.   The  judge  was  clear
    that,

         "The objective evidence now produced  suggests  that  he  has  been
         involved in their life since they were born as he registered  their
         birth and on a number of occasions has an address which is the same
         one given for them.  I accept that  he  has  produced  photographic
         evidence showing that he is part of their lives although the extent
         of his involvement in their early years is less clear  than  it  is
         now.  The school is clearly familiar with him and friends  and  the
         church see him and his  partner  and  the  children  as  a  family"
         (paragraph 55).

 6. However, given that sufficient regard also  had  to  be  given  to  the
    Section 117B consideration in favour of immigration control, the  judge
    ended the determination with the observation that,

         "I am mindful of the fact that the children should not be  punished
         for the actions of their parents, but I am satisfied that  in  this
         case the accumulative effect of the Appellant's  convictions  taken
         together with the repeated  dishonesty  of  the  Appellant  in  his
         dealings with the Respondent in his various applications  seriously
         undermined the integrity of the immigration  system  and  thus  are
         powerful factors that outweigh the best interests of the  children"
         (paragraph 73).

Grounds of Application

 7. In detailed and well crafted grounds of application, it was argued that
    the judge erred when assessing that it was not  overwhelmingly  in  the
    best interests of the children to remain in the UK with both parents by
    failing to take into account and to give significant weight to the fact
    that they had lived for a continuous period of at least seven years  in
    the UK.

 8. On 29th June 2018, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that  the  judge  may  not  have  considered  the  best
    interests of the children who are British citizens and have been in the
    UK for seven years.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Diwnycz, appearing as  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, on behalf of the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    conceded that there was an  error  in  the  judge's  determination,  as
    argued by Mr  Metzer  QC,  Counsel  for  the  Appellant,  in  that  the
    existence  of  "qualifying"  children  meant  that  the  Section   117B
    considerations could only be given priority if it was  "reasonable"  to
    do so.

10. Otherwise the children faced being separated from the Appellant,  given
    that [AA], their mother, was a British citizen settled in the  UK.   Mr
    Metzer argued that in this case, if there was to be a concession,  then
    it would be helpful if, on a remittal back to the Tribunal below, those
    matters, that had been found to be in favour of the  Appellant,  should
    be preserved intact, so that they are not to be re-visited again  as  a
    contentious set of issues, given how long this appeal had been  in  the
    system, with little resolution in sight.

11. Whilst I recognise the force of that argument, I have  decided  not  to
    give a direction to this effect, because ultimately,  in  circumstances
    where the facts on the ground have been constantly changing, a decision
    as to whether it is proportionate or not for the Appellant to remain in
    the UK on the basis of his family ties with his children, must fall  to
    be determined by a judge on a remittal.

12. Put another way, for this Tribunal to give a direction that  "plays  an
    active role in their lives"  or  that  "the  children  are  settled  in
    schools, have friends and their grandparents in  the  UK",  this  would
    likely have the effect of pre-empting the decision  on  proportionality
    that is to be made by the judge following a remittal.




Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, the judge has been clear  in  the  finding  that  "the
    objective evidence now produced suggests that he has been  involved  in
    their life since they were born" and that there has been  "photographic
    evidence showing that he is part of their lives" and that  "the  school
    is clearly familiar with him" (paragraph 55).

14.  Second,  the  Respondent's  own   policy,   "Immigration   Directorate
    Instruction Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b, family life (as
    a partner or parent) and private  life:  10-year  routes  August  2015"
    ("the guidance") is clear that "strong  reasons  will  be  required  in
    order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of more than  seven
    years" for a child in this country.

15. Third, the recent Upper Tribunal decision in  SF  (guidance,  post-2014
    Act) Albania [2017]  UKUT  120  confirmed  (at  paragraphs  10  to  12)
    interests of consistent decision making, when it noted that,

         "Where there is  clear  guidance  which  covers  a  case  where  an
         assessment  has  to  be  made,  and  where  the  guidance   clearly
         demonstrates what the outcome of the  assessment  would  have  been
         made by the Secretary of State, it would, we think, be  the  normal
         practice for the Tribunal to take such guidance into account and to
         apply it in assessing the same consideration in a  case  that  came
         before it".

    The failure of the judge below to proceed along these lines means  that
    there has been an error of law.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    re-make the decision as follows.  This matter is remitted back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Birrell, pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b).  I give directions that
    this matter is to be listed for three hours  at  Manchester  Piccadilly
    Hearing Centre with provision made for the hearing of  four  witnesses.
    No interpreters are required.

17. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd September 2018

