
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01066/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 3 July 2014                                |On 7 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SHEHAN ROKMAL FERNANDO
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Mr Neil Barnes,
Solicitor

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The SSHD appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Grimes, promulgated on 10 March 2014,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
   under Article 8 of the ECHR, on the following grounds:

        1) Although the judge made reference to Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  00640
           (IAC), she has failed to identify any  compelling  circumstances
           in this case to justify granting the appellant leave  to  remain
           outside the Immigration Rules.  The appellant's child  is  still
           an infant and would not have developed  any  private  life  ties
           outside its immediate nuclear family.   It  was  made  clear  in
           Gulshan that the Article 8 assessment shall only be carried  out
           when these are compelling circumstances not recognised by  those
           Rules.   In  this  case  the  Tribunal  did  not  identify  such
           compelling  circumstances  and  its   findings   are   therefore
           unsustainable.  Gulshan also makes it clear that at  this  stage
           an appeal should only be allowed  where  there  are  exceptional
           circumstances.  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  Admin   endorsed   the
           Secretary of State's guidance  on  the  meaning  of  exceptional
           circumstances, namely  ones  where  refusal  would  lead  to  an
           unjustifiably harsh outcome.  In this case the Tribunal has  not
           followed this approach and thereby has erred.


        2) Further, the appellant and his partner entered a relationship in
           the full knowledge that his immigration status  was  precarious.
           The judge has failed  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
           Secretary of State's legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  effective
           immigration control. In FK & OK  Botswana  [2013]  Civ  238  Sir
           Stanley Burton aid:  "The maintenance of immigration control  is
           not an aim that is implied for the purposes of Article 8.2.  Its
           maintenance is necessary in order to preserve or to  foster  the
           economic well being of the country, in order to  protect  health
           and morals, and for the protection of the rights and freedoms of
           others ... That the individuals in  the  present  case  are  law
           abiding (other than in respect of immigration controls) does not
           detract from the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of  a  generally
           applicable  immigration  policy   is,   albeit   indirectly,   a
           legitimate aim for the purpose of Article 8."

        3) The Tribunal has failed to apply the  income  threshold  in  its
           Article 8 assessment.  In making a decision on an application it
           is  necessary  for  the  decision  maker  to  consider  all  the
           legislation relevant to that decision and to  give  reasons  for
           the way that it applies that legislation to  the  facts  of  the
           case.  In this instance the Tribunal had no regard at all to the
           income threshold requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
           income threshold ensures that  those  who  choose  to  establish
           their family life in the UK should have the financial ability to
           support themselves and to be able  to  support  their  partner's
           integration into British society.  The financial requirement  is
           a measure within  the  filed  of  immigration  control  that  is
           directly concerned with socio-economic  policy,  an  area  where
           decisions  are  the  remit  of  the  democratically  accountable
           branches of government,  not  members  of  the  judiciary.   The
           income threshold was adopted following expert  advice  from  the
           Migration  Advisory  Committee  and  was  also  subject  to   an
           extensive consultation process, in which responses were provided
           from a range of organisations, including  a  large  number  that
           represent immigrants and the communities most directly  affected
           by immigration policy.  It is therefore inappropriate  that  the
           Tribunal  should  decide  to  disregard  these  points  in   its
           proportionality assessment.


        4) The judge has failed  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  and
           sponsor can continue their family life outside  the  UK  and  in
           particular whether there are  any  insurmountable  obstacles  to
           family life continuing outside the UK ... the judge  has  failed
           to identify any circumstances which would render the appellant's
           removal unjustifiably harsh.

        5) It  is  submitted  that  "insurmountable  obstacles"  constitute
           serious difficulties which the applicant and their partner would
           face in continuing their family life outside the UK, and  entail
           something that could not be overcome,  even  with  a  degree  of
           hardship for one or more of the individuals  concerned.   It  is
           not something that is merely unreasonable or  undesirable.   The
           Immigration Rules specify that the existence  of  insurmountable
           obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  UK  is  a  key
           factor  in  the  proportionality  assessment,   albeit   not   a
           determinative  factor.   The  Rules  require  an  assessment  of
           whether  removal  is  prevented  by  "insurmountable  obstacles"
           rather than whether it is "reasonable to expect" the  family  to
           leave together.   It  is  submitted  that  the  changes  to  the
           Immigration Rules with the Article 8  provisions  introduced  in
           July 2012 clarified an important issue on this point.  Prior  to
           that time case law listed possible relevant factors but left  it
           to the individual  decision  maker  in  an  individual  case  to
           determine how best to balance the  relevant  factors,  based  on
           that person's perception of public policy considerations.   This
           resulted in divergent outcomes as decision makers had  to  reach
           their own view on the public policy imperatives, without a clear
           statement from the Secretary of State and  Parliament  on  where
           the public interest lies.  Since the new Rules came into  force,
           decision makers no longer operate in a  policy  vacuum.   It  is
           acknowledged that the facts  of  the  individual  case  are  the
           starting point when considering proportionality,  but  they  are
           also the starting point which then has to  be  balanced  against
           the public interest as reflected in the new Rules.   The  public
           interest achieved by applying clear rules must  be  measured  by
           the effect of the rules across the board, not just  in  relation
           to an individual case.  In this case the Tribunal did not  apply
           this approach and thereby misdirected itself in law.


3) Following the grant of permission,  the  appellant  filed  the  following
   response under Rule 24:

      Denied that the FtT failed to give any reasons or adequate reasons.


        1. The Immigration Judge did identify compelling  reasons,  bearing
           in mind that insurmountable obstacles is not  the  correct  test
           and also bearing in mind that the decision has to be read  as  a
           whole: the parties were living together (see paragraph 5);  they
           have a son (see paragraph 5);  the  claimant's  wife  needs  the
           support of her family who are in the  UK  as  she  suffers  from
           depression (see paragraph 6); the parties  would  be  unable  to
           meet the financial requirements of Appendix FM (see paragraph 6;
           Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008]  1
           WLR 1420 at  paragraph  44  per  Lord  Brown;  MA  (Pakistan)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] Imm AR 196  at
           paragraph  LJ  Sullivan;  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
           Department v Hayat and Treebhowan [2013] Imm AR at paragraph  30
           per LJ  Elias;  Kotecha  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2011] EWHC 2070  (Admin)  at  paragraph  60  per  Mr
           Justice Burnett); all the claimant's partner's family are in the
           UK; she has no ties to Sri Lanka; she does not speak Tamil  (see
           paragraph 8; Yildiz v Austria (2003) 36 EHRR 32 at paragraph 43;
           Amrollahi v Denmark Application No 56811/00 ECtHR  at  paragraph
           46; Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50  at  paragraph  53);
           the claimant's wife and child are British and EU  nationals  and
           it is not reasonable to expect them to  relocate  to  a  country
           outwith the EU (see paragraphs  13,  Ogundimu  (Article  8:  New
           Rules: Nigeria) [2013] UKUT  60;   Sanade  and  others  (British
           children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] Imm AR 597 at paragraph 95;
           VW (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]
           Imm AR 436 at  paragraph  46  per  LJ  Sedley:  AB  (Jamaica)  v
           Secretary of State for the Home Department [20089[  1  WLR  1893
           per LJ Sedley; Muhammad Irfan Khan v Secretary of State for  the
           Home Department [2013] CSOH 176 at paragraphs 13, 15, 24-31  per
           Lord  Glennie).   In  light  of  the  finding  that  it  is  not
           reasonable for the claimant's family to relocate there would  be
           an  unjustifiably  harsh  outcome  as  family  life  cannot   be
           continued by way of the occasional visit, email or Skype (R  (on
           the application of Mansoor) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
           Department [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin) at paragraphs 16 and  42  per
           Mr Justice Blake; Latif  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department  [2012] Imm AR 659  at  paragraphs  58-61  per  Upper
           Tribunal Judge Taylor; LD v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2011] Imm AR 99 at paragraphs 11-12, 20-21).


        2.  This  paragraph  refers  to  the  FtT  not   "giving   adequate
           consideration" to the appellant's legitimate aim of  maintaining
           effective immigration control.  This is not an error of law  and
           the weight to be given to a particular factor  is  one  for  the
           original  decision  maker.   In  any  event  the  FtT  finds  at
           paragraph 15 that such removal would be in accordance  with  the
           law.  The FtT acknowledges the appellant's view  of  the  public
           interest  at  paragraph  18.   The  FtT  takes  account  of  the
           precarious status of the claimant at paragraph 19.  At paragraph
           20 of the  FtT  reaches  the  view  that  the  decision  is  not
           proportionate  to  the  appellant's  legitimate   aim   of   the
           maintenance of an effective system of immigration control.   The
           FtT thus gives adequate consideration to the legitimate  aim  of
           maintaining effective immigration control.  The  FtT  reaches  a
           finding which it is reasonably entitled to do.

        3. This paragraph does not demonstrate error of  law.   The  income
           threshold has already been held to be  disproportionate  (see  R
           (on the application of MM) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2014] Imm AR 245).  In any event there would  be  no
           sensible reason for expecting the claimant to  return  to  apply
           for entry clearance  having  regard  to  the  finding  that  the
           parties would not meet the entry  clearance  requirements,  that
           they were in a genuine and subsisting relationship, that  it  is
           only comparatively rarely in cases  concerning  children  should
           the claimant be expected to return, that there would be  a  high
           degree of disruption and delay, and that it is not said that the
           marriage would not give the claimant a right to reside in the UK
           (see case law referred to above).

        4. This paragraph falls into the error of relying on insurmountable
           obstacles.  This is the wrong test and  other  factors  such  as
           those outlined in paragraph 1  are  material  factors  that  can
           legitimately be taken into account by the FtT (see MF (Article 8
           - new rules) Nigeria [2013] Imm AR 256 at paragraph 37; Izuazu v
           Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Article  8  -  New
           Rules) [2013] Imm AR 453 at rubric held (4), paragraphs 40,  53,
           56, 57, 58, 64, 67'  MF  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at paragraph 49  per  Master  of
           the  Rolls).   As  noted  in  paragraph  1  there  would  be  an
           unjustifiably harsh outcome.

        5.  This  paragraph  falls  into   error.    It   is   clear   that
           insurmountable obstacles is an incorrect criterion to apply.  It
           is clear that insurmountable obstacles are not to be interpreted
           as literally obstacles which it is impossible to  surmount  (see
           MF (Court of Appeal), supra).  The approach in Izuazu  has  been
           supported by the Court of Appeal.  Thus insurmountable obstacles
           is the wrong test to apply as there are other  material  factors
           to be considered  when  considering  Article  8,  ECHR  such  as
           nationality, length of residence,  and  best  interests  of  the
           child.  This paragraph, relied on by the appellant, ignores  the
           current approach as shown in the current case law  and  such  an
           approach is not well  founded.   The  FtT  applied  the  correct
           approach and was reasonably entitled to reach  the  decision  it
           did for the reasons given.

4)  Mr  Matthews  adopted  the   grounds,   and   submitted   further   that
   "insurmountable obstacles" although not to be  interpreted  literally  is
   not a low threshold.  The case depended to some extent upon  the  medical
   condition of the appellant's partner, the medical evidence for which  was
   only a one sentence letter from her GP stating  that  she  "suffers  from
   depression and needs support from her family  and  partner."   There  was
   nothing to justify the  judge's  finding  that  insurmountable  obstacles
   existed.  The child was not required to leave the UK.

5) Mr Devlin in response pointed out  that  at  the  time  the  relationship
   began the appellant's immigration status was not precarious  and  by  the
   time he made the application leading  to  the  present  proceedings,  his
   partner was pregnant with her child.  The authorities are clear that  the
   test is not one of insurmountable obstacles to relocation but the  degree
   of difficulty that would involve, as one of the factors in the case.  The
   judge had not only the medical report but also direct evidence  from  the
   appellant and his partner and the fact that she receives  Employment  and
   Support Allowance (ESA), a benefit which implies a degree of  disability,
   although at the lower end of the  disability  scale.   The  determination
   although brief did refer to  significant  and  relevant  factors  in  the
   appellant's favour, in particular at paragraphs 7, 8 and  10.   Paragraph
   13 of the determination implied that the judge thought she was  bound  to
   go outside the Rules in a case involving a UK citizen child, an  approach
   supported by Sanade and Izuazu.  The concession made by the respondent in
   Sanade has never been withdrawn or modified in a case involving a  child.
   The judge did not fall into the error of  casting  away  the  Rules,  and
   amply justified the conclusion at  paragraph  18  that  removal  was  not
   reasonable.  Paragraph 19 showed that the public interest had been  fully
   taken into account.  The grounds of appeal at paragraph 1 made the  point
   of an infant child not having developed private life outside the  nuclear
   family, but that is not the test.  The issue  is  over  the  child  being
   deprived of the advantages deriving from UK citizenship.

6)  Mr  Matthews  in  reply  contended  that  the   appellant's   precarious
   immigration status, from the time it became so, was relevant.  He and his
   partner should have recognised when the  relationship  was  entered  into
   that he did not have long term status in the  UK  guaranteed,  and  taken
   that into account.  The test of reasonableness was now incorporated  into
   the terms of the Rules, including cases involving  UK  citizen  children.
   To be the parent of such a child did not amount to a winning  hand.   The
   circumstances of this case are by no means out of the ordinary, but  such
   as encountered in  such  cases  on  a  daily  basis.   The  crux  of  the
   determination was at paragraph 18 which was brief and inadequate for  its
   purposes and did not place the public interest in  the  correct  context.
   Employment  and  Support  Allowance  is  not  a  benefit  which  triggers
   exemption from the income thresholds in the Rules.

7) I raised the question whether section 19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014
   setting out public interest considerations in relation to  Article  8  of
   the ECHR (by way of insertions to be made into the 2002 Act) although not
   yet in force might be a reliable touchstone.  Mr Matthews said  that  his
   understanding was that the provisions were  likely  to  be  brought  into
   force by the end of this month, and that the Immigration Rules  would  be
   amended simultaneously to reflect the new provisions.  Mr Devlin accepted
   that the new provisions could be relevant even in advance of their  being
   brought into effect, and, as  I  understood  him,  Mr  Matthews  did  not
   disagree.

8) I reserved my determination.

9) There are various criteria to be  applied  when  considering  Article  8.
   Some, such as "exceptional circumstances", have  to  be  given  different
   meanings according to the context in which they appear.  The criterion of
   "insurmountable obstacles" is not to be interpreted literally.  There are
   also the criteria of "arguably good grounds for leave to  remain  outside
   the Rules", "compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
   the Rules",  and  an  outcome  which  is  "unjustifiably  harsh".   These
   expressions may not all mean exactly the same, but they are difficult  to
   distinguish.  The SSHD's grounds of appeal  maintain  that  the  test  is
   somewhere below literal "insurmountable obstacles"  and  somewhere  above
   what is "merely unreasonable or undesirable" or "reasonable  to  expect".
   They accept the test of an "unjustifiably harsh outcome".  Mr Devlin said
   that the case law is clear that in a case involving a child the  test  is
   simply what is reasonable.

10) The crucial paragraphs in the determination, 18 - 20, find  that  it  is
   not reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  By the  respondent's
   concession in Sanade, that must be right.   The  judge  finds  both  that
   there are insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's partner  relocating
   and that it would be unreasonable.   Since  she  cannot  be  expected  to
   abandon her child, then whatever the legal test, the finding that partner
   and child cannot be expected to relocate to Sri Lanka must also be  right
   (other reasons are given, but are incidental).  It seems to me  that  the
   respondent did not quite identify the crucial final question.  It is  not
   whether, on the particular  facts,  partner  and  child  should  also  be
   expected to go to Sri Lanka.  It is whether removal of the appellant,  on
   the assumption that it would split up the  family  members  in  the  long
   term, is justified by  the  legitimate  public  interest  in  maintaining
   effective immigration control.

11) The effective final finding at paragraph 20 is that the  proportionality
   balance did not require that.  Each case in the  end  turns  on  its  own
   facts and on a judgment as to  where  the  balance  lies.   I  think  the
   grounds fall short of identifying any error of legal  approach,  material
   omission or factual error by the judge.  She sufficiently identified  the
   principles she had to apply.  It has not been said that the  outcome  she
   reached was  one  not  available  to  her.    If  she  had  said  it  was
   "unjustifiably harsh", that would have met the criterion accepted by  the
   respondent. In my opinion the final judgment,  however  the  niceties  of
   legal expression surrounding it should be phrased,  is  not  affected  by
   error of law.

12) I am fortified in that view by reference  to  the  statutory  provisions
   already enacted and expected to come into effect in the near future. When
   section 117B is inserted into the 2002 Act it will be plain that  in  the
   case of a person not liable to deportation, the public interest does  not
   require removal if he has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
   with a UK citizen child, and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
   child to leave the UK.

13) The appeal of the SSHD to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

14) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal, allowing  the  appellant's
   appeal, shall stand.

                               [pic]
                                4 July 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
