
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01628/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 13 June 2013                                 |On 24 June 2013            |
|Prepared: 14 June 2013                          |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                         Ms annabel obunezi woluchem
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, instructed by Visalogic.net
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 18  February  1982.   She
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of   the
    respondent, dated 20 December 2012,  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's immigration history is lengthy and is set out  in  full
    at paragraph 2 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. In  summary,  the
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 October  1999  and,  save
    for the periods identified below, she remained  with  leave  to  remain
    until the 30 August 2011.

 3. The appellant did not have leave to remain here (i) 31 January 2001 and
    16 September 2001, [as a consequence of her application on  31  January
    2001 being made one day after the expiry of her leave]; (ii) 1 May 2002
    until 28 May 2002 [as a consequence of her application of  7  May  2002
    having been made seven days after  the  expiry  of  her  leave];  (iii)
    between 1 May 2003 and 22 May 2003 [as a consequence of her application
    of 2 May 2003 having been made two days after the expiry of her leave];
    and (iv) 1 November 2006 and 23 October 2007, a period to which I  will
    return later in the determination.

 4. On 1 April 2010 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on
    the basis of her long residence in the United  Kingdom,  claiming  that
    she had remained here lawfully for ten continuous years. The  Secretary
    of  State  refused  this  application  on  8  November  2010  and   the
    appellant's appeal against such decision was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Eldridge in a determination dated 12 January 2011.  Her appeal
    rights were eventually exhausted  on  11  August  2011,  when  she  was
    refused permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

 5. On 29 February 2012 the appellant again applied for leave to remain  on
    the basis of her long residence. This  application  was  refused  in  a
    decision of 20 December 2012 and, on the same date, a decision was made
    to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom. The appellant appealed
    this decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson heard the appeal on  27  March  2013
    and dismissed it on all grounds in a determination  promulgated  on  15
    April 2013.

 7. By way of a  decision  dated  7  May  2013  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hemingway granted  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the following terms:

         "2.  The grounds of application assert  that  the  judge  erred  in
             these ways: a) failing to  apply  the  long  residence  policy
             which was said to sit  alongside  the  Immigration  Rules  and
             which had been raised in the appellant's skeleton argument; b)
             failing to determine the appeal  with  respect  to  Article  8
             under the Immigration Rules; c) failing to make it clear  what
             weight was being accorded to the public interest on the  facts
             of this case; d)  making findings against the  weight  of  the
             evidence with respect to the appellant's family links  to  her
             home country.

         3.   It is arguable the judge erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
             terms of the policy.   It  is  arguable  the  judge  erred  in
             failing to take into account corroborative oral evidence in  a
             previous positive adverse credibility finding before  reaching
             conclusions as to the strength of family links with  the  home
             country.

         4.   All the grounds may be argued but the appellant may be in some
             difficulty in pursuing the contention  under  the  Rules  with
             respect to Article 8 bearing in mind that Counsel appeared  to
             have argued successfully, in the skeleton argument and in oral
             submissions, that the Rules had no application  (paragraph  17
             of the determination).

         5.   Permission to appeal is granted."

 8. Thus the appeal came before me.

 9. At the outset of her submissions Ms  Chapman  quite  properly  accepted
    that she would be unable to make out the 'arguable  errors'  identified
    in paragraphs 2(b) and 2(c) of the grant of permission.  For  the  sake
    of completeness, I make clear that I have in any event considered those
    grounds for myself and conclude that they do not identify an  error  of
    law such as to require the First-tier Tribunal's  determination  to  be
    set aside. It is plain that the appellant cannot meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules relating to Article  8.   Firstly  the  family
    life provisions under the Immigration Rules are not engaged because the
    appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph GEN 1.2. This is so
    because as of the date of her application she had not  lived  with  her
    partner for two years. In any event she cannot meet the requirements of
    paragraph E-LTRP.1.10 of the  Rules,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  having
    concluded that she had  not  established  that  she  intended  to  live
    permanently in the United Kingdom with her  partner.  Neither  can  she
    meet paragraph E-LTRP.2.2 of Rules, as an  individual  who  is  in  the
    United Kingdom in breach of the immigration laws. As to the question of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal treated the weight to  be  attached  to
    the public interest as a fixity, there is nothing in the  determination
    which leads me to find that it did.

10. I now turn to consider the 2 grounds that were pursued with some vigour
    by Ms Chapman.

11. It was submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to
    determine whether the Secretary of State had considered the exercise of
    her  discretion  under  a  'long  residence  policy'  contained  within
    Immigration Directorate Instructions issued on  13  December  2012.  Ms
    Chapman observed that the Counsel who had appeared  for  the  appellant
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Ms  Chapman)  had  specifically
    addressed this matter at paragraph 6 of his skeleton  argument  in  the
    following terms:

         "6.  The Grounds of Appeal (7) refer to the Immigration Directorate
             Instructions  (IDIs)  for  December  2012  as   containing   a
             discretion  (P.22/71).   The  policy  is  dated  30/12/12  and
             therefore came into existence before the immigration decision.
              For an earlier  instance  where  Immigration  Rules  on  long
             residence coexisted with a  policy  concession  see  SA  (Long
             residence concession) Bangladesh  [2009]  UKAIT  00051.   This
             discretion  for  breaks  in   lawful   residence   says   that
             caseworkers must always discuss the use of discretion  with  a
             SCW and  must  be  satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  acted
             lawfully throughout the whole ten year  period  and  has  made
             every effort  to  obey  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  policy
             further states of multiple gaps in lawful residence  (P.23/71)
             that it may be  appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  'if  an
             applicant has had multiple gaps in leave that have been caused
             by events outside their control".

12. In response Ms  Tanner  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    implicitly considered the exercise of discretion during the  course  of
    her most recent refusal letter, and that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    accepted that this was so.

13. Neither the First-tier Tribunal nor the Upper  Tribunal  were  provided
    with a copy of the policy relied upon by  the  appellant.   Ms  Chapman
    provided the Upper Tribunal with a copy of the terms of later guidance,
    issued on 20 May 2013; noting as she did so that the instructions  from
    13 December 2012 are no longer contained on the respondent's website.

14. The terms of the 20 May 2013 instructions are as follows:

         "Gap(s) in lawful residence

         You may grant the application if an applicant:

         .    has short gaps in lawful  residence  through  making  previous
             applications out of time by no more than 28 calendar days, and

         .    meets all the other requirements for lawful residence.

         You can use your judgment and use discretion in cases  where  there
         may be exceptional reasons why a single application was  made  more
         than 28 days out of time.  For example, exceptional reasons can  be
         used for cases where there is:

         .    a postal strike,

         .    hospitalisation, or

         .    an administrative error made by the Home Office."

15. Ms Chapman submits that the instructions  from  13  December  2012  are
    highly likely to have been in the  exact  same  terms  as  the  current
    instructions, relying on the above cited passage from  paragraph  6  of
    the appellant's skeleton argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  when
    doing so.

16. Even if it is assumed for the purposes of this determination that there
    was in place, as of the date of the Secretary of State's  consideration
    of the appellant's application in  the  instant  case,  an  Immigration
    Directorate Instruction in the same or materially similar terms to that
    which  currently  exists  I,  nevertheless,  do  not  accept  that  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  of  the  20  December  2012  was  made
    otherwise in accordance with the law. Nor do I accept that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination contains an  error  on  a  point  of  law
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal before it.

17. The appellant's most recent application was made against  the  backdrop
    of an identical application having been refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in November 2010 and the appeal against such  refusal  thereafter
    being dismissed.

18. In his determination First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson cited in  their
    entirety paragraphs 14 to 19 of the determination of IJ  Eldridge  from
    January 2011. In paragraph  19  of  his  determination  Judge  Eldridge
    reasoned and concluded as follows:

         "19. I was initially surprised by the stance taken by Mr Archie  in
         respect  of  the  three  periods   of   delay.    The   Immigration
         Directorate's Instructions (IDIs) of April 2009 suggest that  where
         there are as many as three short breaks  due  to  late  application
         then an application for settlement under paragraph 276D should  not
         normally be granted, whereas a single short period would often lead
         to a grant.  Nevertheless, the stance in this case was made  clear,
         and, of course the total period of lateness for the  three  shorter
         periods was only ten days when aggregated.  The  longer  period  is
         almost six months.  I find there is no question, on the facts as  I
         have  found  them,  of  the  respondent  having  failed  to   apply
         discretion outside the Rules that has captured  by  her  IDI.   The
         periods are simply too numerous and one of them at least too long."

19. It was against this background that the Secretary of State concluded as
    follows in her most recent refusal letter of 20 December 2012 [emphasis
    added]:

         "It is understood you advised that you submitted your  passport  in
         the 20/9/06 application but we could find no trace of  ever  having
         received it  and  rejected  the  application.   You  re-applied  on
         19/10/06 still advising you had submitted your passport however  we
         maintained we could find no trace of ever having received  it,  and
         you had  no  enrolment  evidence  so  your  application  was  again
         rejected and we advised you to report the passport as lost  to  the
         police and obtain another.  You advised that you  obtained  another
         in December 2006 but your next application was not submitted  until
         9/5/07 and was out of time as  advised  above  with  no  reasonable
         explanation given you had a new passport in December 2006.

         In light of the reasons given above you have failed to  demonstrate
         ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK."

20. Ms Chapman submits that the aforementioned paragraph in  the  Secretary
    of State's refusal letter is entirely neutral and cannot be read as the
    Secretary of State considering the exercise of her discretion. I do not
    accept that this is so. I my conclusion the Secretary of State  plainly
    undertook a qualitative analysis therein of the reasons  given  by  the
    appellant for the delay in making the application of May  2007.  Having
    done so she decided that the explanation was not  reasonable  and  that
    consequently the appellant could  not  demonstrate  that  she  had  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom.   The  fact
    that such qualitative analysis was  undertaken  demonstrates,  I  find,
    that the Secretary of State gave consideration to exercising discretion
    to grant outwith the Rules;  the  appellant  clearly  not  meeting  the
    requirements of the Rules given the four  'breaks'  in  her  continuous
    leave and the Rules themselves containing no provision for the exercise
    of discretion.

21. Whilst it is correct to say that the First-tier Tribunal made no direct
    comment  in  its  determination  in  relation  to  the   aforementioned
    paragraph in the Secretary of State's refusal letter, it  did  conclude
    that there were no reasons to depart from the findings  of  Immigration
    Judge Eldridge which, of course, included the finding that there was no
    question of the respondent having failed to consider  the  exercise  of
    discretion outside the Rules. This, in the context of the instant case,
    was, in  my  conclusion,  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  appellant's
    submissions.

22. In any event, even if it  could  be  established  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in failing to engage with the submission that the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law,  such
    error was not capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  in  light
    of my finding above that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  consider  the
    exercise of her discretion to grant leave outside the Rules.

23. I now turn to the second ground pursued by  the  appellant  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, i.e. that the First-tier Tribunal's conclusions made in
    relation to appellant's family ties to Nigeria were  perverse  and  not
    supported by the evidence.

24. Ms Chapman drew  the  Upper  Tribunal's  attention  to  the  record  of
    evidence set out in paragraphs 6 and 10 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination, as  well  at  that  detailed  in  paragraph  10  of  the
    appellant's witness statement, where the appellant stated as follows:

         "After my graduation in 2006 communication between my family and  I
         stopped completely, I guess they think their work with my education
         and possibly my life is over.  ...  It  has  been  almost  fourteen
         years and I have no contact with any friends in Nigeria."

25. Ms Chapman further  drew  attention  to  the  evidence  of  a  Ms  Hope
    Mabinton, and also to evidence given by the appellant's partner,  which
    is recorded in paragraph 10  of  the  determination  in  the  following
    terms: "Asked about her family he replied that her family did not  wish
    to have anything to do with her.  ..."

26. At paragraph 34 of its determination the First-tier Tribunal  concluded
    as follows:

         "I am satisfied from the evidence before me  that  the  appellant's
         account of her immigration history set out in her written statement
         is accurate.  I find that her claim that she has no ties  with  the
         family members in Nigeria is doubtful.  She claims that she was cut
         off by her family and blames her stepmother for this.  Nevertheless
         her father continued to support her throughout her  studies.   This
         suggests she has a closer relationship with  her  father  than  she
         admits ..."

27. The Tribunal further conclude as follows in paragraphs 38 and 41 of the
    determination:

         "[38]...I take the view  that  the  appellant  was  honest  in  her
         account of her immigration history but that she has overstated  the
         lack of ties with her family.  It is clear that her father financed
         her studies.  ..."

         And at paragraph 41:

         "As I have  stated  above,  I  consider  that  their  relationship,
         although genuine, is not necessarily a permanent one.  In  all  the
         circumstances of this case I find it would not be  unreasonable  to
         expect the appellant to return to Nigeria.  I do  not  accept  that
         she could not obtain work there.  I take the view  that  she  would
         have a good chance to obtain paid employment on the  basis  of  her
         qualifications and work experience she has obtained in  the  United
         Kingdom.  I have taken into account  that  the  appellant's  father
         lives in Nigeria and although the appellant claims he has abandoned
         her, he did support her studies for several years.   The  appellant
         is familiar with Nigeria and was brought up there.  It  appears  to
         me that she does have family members and contacts to whom she could
         turn if she needed help and support."

28. The core of Ms Chapman's submission is that it was perverse to conclude
    that the appellant has family  members  to  whom  she  could  turn  for
    assistance in Nigeria, given that the entirety of the  evidence  before
    the tribunal was that the appellant's communication with her family had
    ended in 2006.

29. In my conclusion, although the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal  on
    this issue is somewhat compressed, its conclusions were open to it  for
    the reasons it gave.  I do not accept, as Ms Chapman submits I  should,
    that the only conclusion to be derived from the appellant's evidence is
    that her father stopped funding her studies in 2006. At paragraph 8  of
    its  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  record  the  appellant's
    evidence in the following terms: "even when she ceased  having  contact
    with him  [this  being  a  reference  to  the  appellant's  father]  he
    continued to sponsor her".  At paragraph 33 of  the  determination  the
    following is  stated:  "She  accepts  that  her  father  sponsored  her
    financially throughout her studies".

30. It is not disputed that the appellant ceased studying in  August  2010.
    In my conclusion it  was  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  on  the
    evidence before  it,  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  father  had
    financially  sponsored  her  studies  until   that   date.    In   such
    circumstances I also find it open to the tribunal to  conclude,  as  it
    did at paragraph 34 of  the  determination,  that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's father continued to support her  studies  up  until  August
    2010 casts doubt on her evidence that she lost all ties to  her  family
    members in 2006.

31. For this reason I do not accept the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  the
    manner claimed.

32. If I am wrong in this conclusion I, nevertheless, find that such  error
    was not capable of affecting the outcome of this appeal. In doing so  I
    find it significant that the First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that  upon
    return to Nigeria the appellant would be able obtain  paid  employment,
    given her qualifications and work experience in the United Kingdom;  it
    being observed in paragraph  41  of  the  determination,  that  if  the
    appellant 'needed help and support' she would have family  members  and
    contacts in Nigeria to whom she could  turn.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    also  deal  comprehensively  with  other  matters   relevant   to   the
    consideration of the issue of proportionality; taking into account  the
    length of the appellant's stay in  the  United  Kingdom,  her  original
    purpose in coming to the United Kingdom, the fact that her studies have
    now  come  to  an  end,  her  medical  circumstances  and  its  earlier
    conclusion that the appellant had not demonstrated  that  she  and  her
    partner intend to live permanently together in the United Kingdom.

33. When looked at as  a  whole  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    contains clear,  cogent and rational reasons as to why the  appellant's
    appeal was dismissed. The First-tier Tribunal's conclusions  were  open
    to it on the available evidence.

34. For all the reasons given above I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination does not contain an error on a point of law such that  it
    ought to be set aside.

Decision

For the reasons given above, the First-tier Tribunal's determination  is  to
remain standing. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 21 June 2013
























