
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01051/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 16 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                FARHAN FARHAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Thornhill a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The applicant at this hearing is the Secretary  of  State  for  the
         Home Department. For ease of reference and continuity I will  refer
         to her as the respondent.

      2. The respondent notified the appellant of her decision to refuse  to
         issue him with an EEA Residence Card and  to  revoke  his  existing
         Residence card  on  16  December  2014.  His  appeal  against  that
         decision was allowed by First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  GM  Cox  ("the
         Judge") following a hearing on 19 March 2015.  This  is  an  appeal
         against that decision.

      3. First-Tier Tribunal Judge RA Cox granted permission  to  appeal  (9
         June 2015) on the ground that it is arguable that the  Judge  erred
         in misdirecting himself as to Regulation 10 (6) (c) and  (b)(i)  of
         the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the regulations")  as  the
         appellant had ceased employment on 30 September 2014 and there  was
         no evidence to show that he had registered as a jobseeker with  the
         relevant employment office.

The regulations

      4. The relevant regulations are as set out below:

         10. - Family member who has retained the right of residence

             (1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained  the
             right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8), a  person
             who satisfies the conditions in paragraph ... (5).

             (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-

                  ...

                  (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); ...

             (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-

                  (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if he were  an  EEA
                  national, be a worker, a self-employed person or  a  self-
                  sufficient person under regulation 6; or

                  (b)  is the family member of a  person  who  falls  within
                  paragraph (a).

         6. - Qualified person

             (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person"  means  a  person
             who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

                  (a)  a jobseeker;

                  (b)  a worker;...

             (2) Subject to regulations 7A(4) and 7B(4), a person who is no
             longer working shall not cease to be treated as a  worker  for
             the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

                  (a)  he is temporarily unable to work as the result of  an
                  illness or accident;

                  (b)  he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after
                  having been employed in the United Kingdom  for  at  least
                  one year, provided that he-

                      (i)   has registered as a jobseeker with the relevant
                      employment office; and

                      (ii)  satisfies conditions A and B;...

             (4) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), a  "jobseeker"  is  a
             person who satisfies conditions A and B.

             (5) Condition A is that the person-

                  (a)   entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  order   to   seek
                  employment; or

                  (b)  is present in the United Kingdom seeking  employment,
                  immediately after enjoying a right to reside  pursuant  to
                  paragraph (1)(b) to (e) (disregarding  any  period  during
                  which worker status was  retained  pursuant  to  paragraph
                  (2)(b) or (ba)).

             (6) Condition B is that the person can provide  evidence  that
             he is seeking employment and has a  genuine  chance  of  being
             engaged.

Discussion

      5. The relevant facts to be gleaned from the decision of the Judge are
         that the appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom on 28
         November 2008. On 14 July 2009 his application or a Certificate  of
         Approval (Marriage) was approved. He was subsequently  issued  with
         an EEA Residence Card. On 15  September  2009  he  married  an  EEA
         National. On 13 October 2012 he commenced  divorce  proceedings.  A
         decree absolute was granted on  22  February  2013.   He  was  self
         employed from 2010 until May 2013. He  worked  from  13  June  2014
         until 30 September 2014 for SAR Catering Limited. He has since been
         looking for work.

      6. The Judge said "... in my view the key date  is  the  date  of  the
         Respondent's decision. Although the Appellant had  stopped  working
         for SAR catering by then, his contract had only been  terminated  a
         few  months  earlier  and  he  was  looking  for  a  job.  Applying
         regulation 6 (2) of the regulations,  the  Appellant  ought  to  be
         treated as a worker for  the  purposes  of  regulation  10  of  the
         regulations."

      7. Regulation 10 (6) (a) includes "a worker, a self-employed person or
         a self -sufficient person under regulation 6". It does not  include
         the alternative classification for a "qualified person" of being  a
         "jobseeker" (regulation 6 (1) (a)). It  appeared  to  me  that  the
         issue for the Judge was not therefore was he "looking  for  a  job"
         but was he "registered as a jobseeker with the relevant  employment
         office". Mr Thornhill conceded this and that there was no  evidence
         before the Judge to suggest that at the date  of  the  respondent's
         decision the appellant was "registered  as  a  jobseeker  with  the
         relevant employment office" (regulation 6 (2) (b)  (i)).  He  could
         not therefore establish he was a worker within regulation 6 (2) and
         there was a material error of law.

      8. In my judgement there was therefore a material error of law in  the
         decision and I set aside the decision.

      9. It was agreed by the representatives that  the  findings  regarding
         regulation 10 (5) were preserved as they were not  the  subject  of
         challenge.

     10. Mr Thornhill stated that the appellant had documents at  home  that
         could deal with the remaining issue namely the question of  whether
         he was "registered as a  jobseeker  with  the  relevant  employment
         office". Mrs Pettersen submitted that it was for me  to  decide  if
         the appellant satisfies the regulations as  at  today's  date,  and
         said that if she had sight of those documents  the  respondent  may
         concede without  the  need  for  a  hearing.  Both  representatives
         submitted than an adjournment was unavoidable. The only  issue  was
         whether the matter should be remitted it not being in the  interest
         of justice for there to be a lengthy delay. I  determined  that  as
         fresh evidence as to be submitted and delay was not in the interest
         of justice it was preferable for  the  matter  to  be  remitted  to
         myself.

     11. I therefore determined that it was in the interest of justice to

          1) Remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  remake  the
             decision.

          2) Direct that the appellant produce such documentary evidence as
             he wishes to rely to deal with the  issue  remaining,  and  to
             file and serve such evidence by 29 July 2015.

          3) Relist the matter before myself sitting at Bradford on the 1st
             available date on or after 13 August 2015 with a time estimate
             of 2 hours and no interpreter being required.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal on the  terms  identified
    in paragraph 11 above.



Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
15 July 2015

