

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01010/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 July 2016                               |On 22 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  GA BLACK

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                           CHARLES THABISO DLAMIKA
                          (NO ANONYMITY OrDER made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Home office presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ohanugo (Legal representative)


                            DECISION  AND REASONS


   1.   The appellant in this matter is the Secretary of State and  I  shall
      refer to the parties as the "Secretary of State" and to the  appellant
      in the First-tier Tribunal as "the Claimant".
   2.    The Secretary of State  appeals against  a  decision  made  by  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  ("FTT")(Judge  Clarke)   who   in   a   decision
      promulgated  on  24th  January  2016  allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal
      outright under Regulation 8(5) Immigration(EEA Regulations) 2006 ("EEA
      Regs."), having found that the parties were in a durable relationship.


   3.   The grounds of application for permission  argued  that  the  appeal
      ought not to have been allowed outright as the Secretary of State  had
      not  exercised  her  discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)  EEA   Regs.
      Permission to appeal was granted on the issues raised in the grounds.


   4.   The matter came  before  me  as  an  error  of  law  hearing.   Both
      representatives had reached a preliminary  agreement  as  to  how  the
      matter should proceed.  It was accepted by both  representatives  that
      there was an error in law by the FTT in allowing the appeal  outright.
      The matter should be remitted to the Secretary of  State  for  her  to
      exercise her discretion under Regulation 17(4).


   Decision


   5.    I find that there was a material error of law in the decision  made
      by the FTT who allowed the appeal outright and such a decision was not
      in accordance with the law.  It was not open to the  FTT  to  exercise
      the Secretary of State's discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the  EEA
      Regs.  The findings as to the durable relationship  are  not  disputed
      and shall stand.


   6.   The decision is set aside.  I  remake  the  decision  based  on  the
      preserved findings under Regulation 8(5) that the  appellant  and  his
      partner are in a durable relationship and the appellant is an extended
      family member.  The appeal is allowed to that extent. The matter is to
      be remitted to the Sectary of State for consideration under Regulation
      17(4) EEA Regs.

            No anonymity order made


                               Signed            Date  19.7.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



                               No fee award.


                               Signed            Date  19.7.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
