
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01064/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 October 2014                           |On 19 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                             Ms shamin ara alam
                       (anonymity direction nOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hassan
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in  1988.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 10  December  2013
    to refuse to vary her leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant under the points-based system and  for  a  Biometric  Residence
    Permit.  The application  was  refused  under  paragraph  245ZX(a)  and
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellant had claimed  10  points  for  Maintenance  (Funds)  under
    Appendix C however the Secretary of  State  considered  that  documents
    submitted with the application had been forged.  As false documents had
    been submitted the application was refused under paragraph 322(1A).  No
    points were awarded under maintenance (paragraph 245ZX).

 3. The Appellant appealed.

 4. Following a hearing at Richmond on 15 July 2014 Judge of the First-tier
     Monro dismissed the appeal.  Her conclusions  are  at  paragraph  9ff.
    She noted that the sole issue was whether or not the documents relating
    to a bank account in the name of the Appellant's father were genuine.

 5. At [11] she stated: 'The Appellant submitted a  letter  from  the  bank
    certifying that Md Faqrul Alam had been maintaining a  Savings  Deposit
    Account under number 0101 1220005217  4  with  the  bank;  the  closing
    balance on  23.12.2012  was  BDT18,14,172.00  since  1.10.12.   A  bank
    statement covering the period 2.10.2012 until 19.12.2012 was provided'.

 6. She went on (at [12]): 'The Document Verification Report records that a
    visa assistant from Bangladesh contacted the Topkhana  Road  Branch  of
    First Security Islami Bank to enquire about the  account  held  in  the
    name of Md Faqrul Alam under Account Number  0101  1220005217  4.   The
    bank representative confirmed that the bank records indicate that  this
    account does not exist so the solvency certificate and  bank  statement
    are both forged'.

 7. She noted (at [13]) that the Appellant had for the hearing submitted  a
    'letter from the Manager of the branch confirming that the  account  is
    genuine, has been opened since 28.12.2009 and that  the  bank  had  not
    been contacted by the British High Commission about Md Faqrul Alam'.

 8. Going on to consider case law in  relation  to  paragraph  322(1A)  she
    concluded  (at  [15]):  'The  Appellant  has  sought  to  address   the
    allegation that  the  bank  documents  submitted  are  not  genuine  by
    providing another letter from the bank stating that they  are  genuine.
    However the new letter does not confirm that the  previous  letter  was
    genuine; does not confirm that the person who  signed  it  was  a  bank
    employee; and does not provide any  identification  documents  used  to
    open the account; or copy correspondence between the  Appellant's  bank
    and the Appellant's father, to demonstrate that this account exists and
    has done so since 2009.  There  was  no  reason  for  the  Home  Office
    official to fabricate a conversation with the bank, and in the  absence
    of far more cogent evidence to rebut the allegation  (she  found)  that
    the refusal under paragraph 322(1A) was well founded and that deception
    was used in the application'.

 9. The judge concluded by finding that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed
    under Article 8.

10. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  19
    September 2014.

11. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Hassan made two brief  points.
    First, the judge had not considered all the material before  her  which
    included deposit slips stamped by the bank and the official envelope in
    which the later letter from  the  bank  was  contained.   Secondly,  Mr
    Hassan questioned whether the judge had applied the correct  burden  of
    proof in finding dishonesty which was on the Respondent.

12. In reply Mr Duffy submitted that the judge's findings  and  conclusions
    were adequate.  As the verification report clearly indicated  that  the
    bank letter was not genuine it would have been difficult to give weight
    to other items from the same source.  As for the burden of proof it was
    clear that the  judge  had  found  that  the  verification  report  had
    discharged that burden.

13. In considering this matter as indicated the only issue  is  whether  or
    not the bank document is genuine.

14. The judge correctly noted Adedoyin (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA  Civ  773  and
    the requirement in  the  context  of  paragraph  322(1A),  where  false
    documents or  information  have  been  submitted  that  'dishonesty  or
    deception is needed'.

15. In finding (at [15]) that deception was used, the judge did  not  place
    reliance on the second letter.  She  did  not  find  that  a  plausible
    explanation for the Respondent's concerns had been proffered. She noted
    that the second letter did not confirm that  the  previous  letter  was
    genuine, did not confirm that the person who signed  the  first  letter
    was a bank employee, did not provide any identification documents  used
    to open the account, or copy correspondence between the  bank  and  the
    Appellant's father to demonstrate that the account exists and has  done
    so since 2009. Also, that there was no reason for the  Home  Office  to
    fabricate a conversation with the bank.  These were findings the  judge
    was entitled to make on the evidence before her.

16. Whilst the judge did not specifically refer  to  the  burden  of  proof
    being on the Respondent to establish dishonesty it is  clear  that  the
    judge in accepting for the clear and sustainable reasons she gave  that
    the documentary verification report was accurate was finding that  that
    report discharged the burden.

17. It is correct that the judge did not refer to  the  envelope  that  the
    second letter was apparently submitted with and various deposit  slips.
    I agree with Mr Duffy that the judge for good reason having found  that
    that bank letter could not be relied on, could not have given weight to
    the items from the same source.

18. For the reasons stated the judge's findings  and  conclusion  that  the
    bank document lodged with the application was a false document in which
    dishonesty or deception had been shown were sustainable.

19. The First-tier Tribunal's decision shows no material error of  law  and
    the decision dismissing the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  shall
    stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
