
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/01206/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Oral Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 June 2013                            |On 24 October 2013              |
|                                           |                                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                ms mary bioh
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, Counsel, instructed by Afrifa and
Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 18 May  1978.   She
    appeals against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Woolf
    promulgated on 19 April 2013 dismissing her appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse her a residence card as  confirming
    her right of residence in the United Kingdom as the spouse  of  an  EEA
    national who is a qualified person in  that  he  is  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom being himself a citizen of the Union.

 2. The basis for the decision made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  was  in
    relation to the documentation  which  was  provided  dealing  with  the
    validity of the marriage which had taken place in Ghana.   This  was  a
    customary marriage which had  taken  place  and  in  relation  to  that
    customary marriage there  was  from  the  Republic  of  Ghana  Judicial
    Service a document by the Second Deputy Judicial  Secretary  confirming
    that there was a document which had been notarised by  a  Mr  Alexander
    Kofi Baah and that he was  on  a  list  of  Notary  Publics  in  Ghana.
    Consequently the Second Deputy Judicial Secretary was able to say  that
    Mr Kofi was a Notary Public.  The document itself that he notarised was
    a document which referred to a marriage which took place or is said  to
    have taken place in Ghana where both the  husband  and  the  wife  were
    involved in a customary marriage which was agreed to by the parents  of
    the bride and bridegroom.

 3. There was however before the Secretary of State  information  from  the
    Accra Metropolitan Assembly and Ghana  legal  sites  which  dealt  with
    customary marriages.  It  is  perfectly  acceptable  to  enter  into  a
    customary marriage in Ghana and more  importantly  such  marriages  are
    recognised  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  information   before   the
    respondent was that there is a formal statutory declaration  which  has
    to state the residence of both the husband and the wife, in  this  case
    the sponsor and the appellant, and  the  statutory  declarations  which
    were provided did not do that.  This was a point that was raised by the
    Secretary of State in her letter of 19 December  2012.   That  material
    may be right or it may be wrong but it was a  point  that  having  been
    raised had to be addressed by the appellant.  There  is  a  process  of
    registration.  It is not said on the part of  the  Secretary  of  State
    that registration is necessary but once that process of registration is
    gone through it is for the judge to attach such weight as he may to the
    documentary evidence in order to satisfy himself that the documentation
    can be relied upon.  In view of the fact that the statutory declaration
    did not appear to be consistent with the information that the Secretary
    of State had obtained about the formalities of such documents, it seems
    to me it was open to the decision maker to raise the point and, when it
    had not been answered on appeal, it cannot be said that it was perverse
    or irrational on the part of the Immigration Judge to at  least  attach
    some weight to it.  But as  she  said  in  paragraph  40  she  did  not
    consider that fact to be determinative, rather it caused her to be  put
    on enquiry as to whether  she  could  attach  weight  to  the  marriage
    certificate.  There was in paragraph 15.5.2 of the guidance provided by
    the Home Office the following passage:

         "Since it is possible for Ghanaians living outside Ghana to  obtain
         the proper certificates of marriage or  divorce,  authenticated  by
         the Ghanaian High Commission, this should be requested in all cases
         where the marital status of an applicant is  important.   Statutory
         declarations made by a parent or other family elder of either party
         to an unregistered customary marriage should only be accepted where
         they complete a chain of otherwise first class documentary evidence
         of a claim to citizenship."

 4. The guidance does not form part of the Rules and  is  not  therefore  a
    requirement but it was  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    questioning the authenticity of the documentation in relation  to  this
    customary marriage and once again it provided the  appellant  with  the
    clearest indication that it would be wise if she wished to place weight
    upon the marriage certificate to have  it  authenticated  by  the  High
    Commission.  In saying that I make it perfectly plain  that  I  am  not
    imposing a requirement which is not found under  the  Rules  nor  am  I
    imposing a requirement for corroboration which is  not  required  as  a
    matter of law in such cases.  However, where there is a means by  which
    a marriage certificate in relation  to  a  customary  marriage  can  be
    authenticated, it is simply commonsense if it is  going  to  be  relied
    upon, and the Secretary of State raises objection to it, to  have  that
    marriage certificate authenticated.  That was exactly  the  point  that
    was made by the judge in paragraph 40 of her determination.  She said:

         "I accept that this is not a requirement of  the  2006  Regulations
         and  that  failure  to  present  certificates   which   have   been
         authenticated by the Ghanaian High Commission is not fatal  to  the
         appellant's case.  It is nevertheless a course which the  appellant
         and/or her representatives could not fail to be aware was  open  to
         her following the receipt of the reasons for refusal letter."

 5. I agree with those sentiments.   It  seems  to  me  that  once  one  is
    presented with a clear  call  to  authenticate  a  document,  that  the
    authentication of that document is permissible and  obtainable  in  the
    United Kingdom by approaching  the  Ghanaian  High  Commission,  it  is
    simply folly not to rely upon that process  of  authentication  if  one
    wishes in due course to have weight attached to a marriage  certificate
    in circumstances where the authenticity of the marriage is brought into
    question.

 6. There were other reasons  which  were  put  forward  by  the  judge  in
    relation  to  discrepancies  in  the  evidence.   Reliance   on   those
    discrepancies was open  to  the  judge  but  they  matter  very  little
    compared with the points that I have already  referred  to.   In  those
    circumstances I have concluded that it cannot be said to be  irrational
    or perverse for the Immigration Judge not to be  satisfied  that  there
    had been a validly celebrated marriage in Ghana when the  matter  could
    have been put beyond doubt by an authenticated  copy  of  the  marriage
    certificate from the Ghanaian High Commission.

DECISION

    The Judge made no error on a point of law and the original
    determination of the appeal shall stand.





                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
