
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
ia/01058/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 June 2017                        |      On 6 June 2017                 |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                               mrs busri begum
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Asjad
    which was promulgated  on  27  September  2016.   The  appellant  is  a
    national of Pakistan who was born on 1 January 1948.  She  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 28 April 2005 on a visit visa which was  valid  until
    28 October 2005. In September 2004 she made an application for  further
    leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds  and  that  application  was
    refused.  The refusal letter is dated 15 February 2016. Her appeal came
    before Judge Asjad, who  delivered  a  full  determination  making  the
    following substantive findings in paragraphs 14 and 15:

         "14.  In  so  far  as  [the  appellant's]  medical  conditions  are
             concerned, there is a letter from her GP dated 9  August  2017
             [Mr Iqbal, acting for the  appellant  very  properly  concedes
             that is a typographical error and the date should in  fact  be
             2016] that set out her current conditions.  It is  noted  that
             the  Appellant   suffers   from   osteoarthritis   and   mixed
             incontinence, as well as  cognitive  decline  and  short  term
             memory loss.  There is reference in an earlier  letter  (dated
             12 March 2015)  that  the  Appellant  suffers  from  Ischaemic
             Disease and suffered a heart attack in 2013.  She also suffers
             with hypertension (high blood pressure) and asthma and a  list
             of her medication has been provided.   Objective  evidence  is
             relied upon by the Respondent  to  show  that  treatment  from
             heart  disease  is  available  as  well  as  hypertension   in
             Pakistan.  The medication that the Appellant takes  for  these
             conditions is available in Pakistan as noted at  paragraph  34
             of the reasons for refusal letter.  Mr Azeem has not made  any
             enquiries at all about the  medical  treatment  or  medication
             that is available in Pakistan apart from  asking  his  cousin.
             The medical  treatment  available  may  not  be  of  the  same
             standard but is nevertheless available to the Appellant.


         15.  The Appellant is aged 68 and has lived most  of  her  life  in
             Pakistan.  Her medical conditions are such that she is able to
             access treatment for them.  I do not  find  that  her  medical
             conditions amount to  a  very  significant  obstacle.   It  is
             claimed that her illiteracy would make it difficult for her to
             access treatment,  but  the  Appellant  does  have  family  in
             Pakistan even though  the  witness  Nazir  attempted  to  give
             evidence  that  suggested  otherwise.   There  is   also   the
             possibility of Mr Azeem and his family paying for  appropriate
             credibility for their  mother  in  Pakistan.   The  fact  that
             neither Mr Azeem nor any member of his family have even  tried
             to find out what care or help is available  is  indicative  of
             their reluctance to send their mother back to Pakistan and  to
             keep her in the UK at their own convenience.  I  do  not  find
             that the circumstances are  such  that  they  amount  to  very
             significant obstacles."

2.   Having made those findings, sufficient to be dispositive of  the  claim
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, the judge proceeded to
    consider  an  Article  8  claim  outside  the  Rules  and  adopted  the
    progressive  approach  advocated  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL   27.    The
    conclusion to which the judge came was that whilst acknowledging that a
    family or private life had arisen in the United Kingdom  sufficient  to
    engage Article 8, under the  proportionality  assessment  (particularly
    with regard  to  the  statutory  considerations  regarding  immigration
    control), the balance fell in favour of refusing the appellant leave to
    remain.

3.   In advancing the appeal, Mr Iqbal makes two  substantive  points.   The
    first is to criticise the judge's findings in relation to  "significant
    obstacle", submitting that they cannot be justified  on  the  evidence;
    and the second is to criticise the findings in relation to the  Article
    8 assessment.  Mr Iqbal took me to the letter dated 9  August  2016  to
    which I have already made reference.  The letter which emanates from Dr
    Imran Hussain, a General  Practitioner  at  the  Small  Health  Medical
    Practice in Birmingham, reads as follows:

         "This lady attended my clinic.  She has a  background  of  multiple
         comorbidities.  She has osteoarthritis  of  her  joints  which  has
         affected her ability to mobilise and to stand for periods of  time.
         She also has joint pains which affect her ability to function  with
         her hands.  She requires help with her personal hygiene and  shower
         needs and finds it difficult to  be  independent  of  help  in  her
         personal activities of daily living.   She  also  occasionally  bed
         wets herself at night and requires help with this.   She  seems  to
         have mixed incontinence for which  she  is  going  to  be  assessed
         further.  She also complains of her memory being not what  it  used
         to be.  Her memory test shows  cognitive  decline  and  short  term
         memory loss.  She  is  going  to  be  assessed  further  for  these
         complaints."

4.   The thrust of Mr Iqbal's submissions is that the judge failed  to  give
    proper and adequate regard  to  the  content  of  that  letter.  In  my
    assessment that submission is ill-founded.  The judge  incorporates  by
    reference the entirety of the content of that letter and it is  neither
    necessary nor appropriate to recite each and every sentence. The  judge
    clearly had very much in mind all that was said in that  letter  having
    regard to the appellant's health and physical limitations.

5.   Mr Iqbal suggests that the judge was wrong to conclude in paragraph  15
    that the appellant will be able to have access  to  treatment  for  her
    medical conditions when in Pakistan and refers to  the  fact  that  she
    would be a loan woman without any family or other support.  Again I  do
    not find substance in this criticism.  It is quite clear that the judge
    had very much in mind that the appellant would be  returning  alone  to
    Pakistan  and  might  experience  difficulty   in   obtaining   medical
    treatment, notwithstanding that it  was  available.   The  findings  to
    which the judge came in paragraphs 14 and 15 were open to  her  on  the
    evidence, including the capacity  of  the  appellant's  family  in  the
    United Kingdom to  provide  financial  support  for  the  provision  of
    appropriate care for their mother in Pakistan.  I do not consider there
    to be any misreporting or misconstruction of the evidence in the course
    of the judge's conclusions.

6.   As to the gravamen of Mr  Iqbal's  complaint,  concerning  the  judge's
    proportionality assessment, I do not consider that this amounts  to  an
    error of law.  Proportionality by its very nature is a test  best  made
    by the primary fact-finder who hears evidence and assesses credibility.
     In the absence of an error of law,  it  is  not  for  the  supervisory
    jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal  to  look  afresh  at  a  discretion
    exercised by the First-tier Tribunal. I can find no  error  of  law  in
    this determination.  The conclusions  to  which  the  judge  came  were
    perfectly open on the evidence.  The reasoning  is  clearly  expressed.
    The law has been properly applied. Mr Iqbal,  understandably,  did  not
    address me on the  appellant's  immigration  history  which  the  judge
    summarised at paragraphs 23 to  25.  The  judge's  application  of  the
    public interest considerations in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are not susceptible to  criticism.  The
    proportionality assessment is not one which can be impugned.

7.   I can well understand that the appellant, her family and  her  advisors
    may be unhappy with what they perceive as  a  harsh  result,  but  such
    unease does establish a material error of law.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     2 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC




