
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01704/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 July 2017                          |On 21 August 2017                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             amit aloysh macwan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is Amit  Aloysh  Macwan.   The  appellant  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is the Secretary of State and we shall refer to the former  as
    "the claimant" and the latter as "the Secretary of State".

 2. In a decision relating to the claimant issued on 17 December 2015 Judge
    Pullig who was dealing with it  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  remarked
    "This appeal is fraught with difficulty".  In the  subsequent  eighteen
    months the circumstances of the claimant appear  to  have  become  even
    more difficult to understand.  He is unrepresented before us.   We  are
    grateful to Mr Wilding for giving us some indication of the history  of
    the claimant's various claims.

 3. The claimant had been in the United Kingdom for a  considerable  period
    of time when he left the United Kingdom on 26 May 2016.  We mark  those
    facts at the beginning of this judgment because the latter of them is a
    crucial one in relation to this appeal and also the claimant's previous
    history.

 4. Whilst he was in the United Kingdom, on 22 September 2014 the Secretary
    of State made a decision under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum
    Act 1999 on the basis that he had obtained  leave  by  deception.   The
    effect of that under Section 10(8) was that when the notice  was  given
    on 26 September 2014 the claimant's leave was invalidated.  He was thus
    from that moment in the United Kingdom as a person without leave.   The
    decision carried a right of appeal exercisable only  from  outside  the
    United Kingdom.  It appears  that  the  claimant  attempted  to  obtain
    judicial review of the decision under  Section  10  asserting  that  he
    should be granted an in country right of appeal.  That judicial  review
    appears to have failed.  Certainly we have seen nothing to suggest  the
    contrary.  There is reference in Judge  Pullig's  determination  to  an
    assertion that the reason why the appeal came before  Judge  Pullig  so
    late was that time had been spent in pursuing the judicial review.

 5. Following the failure of the judicial review, the claimant appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Section 10 decision.  He was not at
    that stage outside the United Kingdom.  It therefore follows  that  (as
    we can say at any rate  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight)  he  had  no
    exercisable right of appeal and had not exercised the right  of  appeal
    that he had, that appeal being limited to an appeal  from  outside  the
    country.

 6. Judge Pullig set out what he believed to be the nature of the  decision
    under appeal before him, appears not to have his attention drawn to the
    fact that a decision of that nature carried an appeal only from abroad,
    but held that the  appeal  before  him  was  not  properly  constituted
    because the claimant had failed to serve with his notice of appeal  the
    notice of decision as required by the Rules.   As  is  clear  from  the
    judge's decision, he was not prepared to determine the appeal merely on
    the evidence of the claimant about what the decision had been and  what
    the reasons for it had been, when it was (as  the  judge  noted)  clear
    that  the  claimant  had  had  the  decision  and  had,   despite   the
    requirements of the Rules, and  a  further  direction  served  on  him,
    failed to serve the decision and the reasons for it  on  the  Tribunal.
    The judge therefore concluded that there was  no  valid  appeal  before
    him.  The claimant's attempt to constitute the appeal by putting  in  a
    notice of appeal without the notice of decision  having  therefore  not
    amounted to an appeal, he noted that it  might  be  that  the  claimant
    would attempt to make a properly constituted appeal with  a  notice  of
    decision and urged any Duty Judge dealing with  such  an  out  of  time
    appeal, as it then would be, to extend time for the purpose.

 7. At that point  we  must  leave  the  proceedings  in  that  appeal,  or
    purported appeal, and note that four days after the Section 10 decision
    the claimant had sought leave to remain as the dependant  of  his  wife
    who was here as a Tier 4 Student.  That  application  was  made  on  30
    September 2014.  It will be clear that at that time the claimant had no
    leave because following the service of the Section 10 decision,  on  26
    September, four days earlier, his  leave  had  been  invalidated.   The
    Secretary of State waited until 14 March 2016 to make her  decision  on
    that application.  On that date she made a  decision  refusing  further
    leave and asserting in the notice of decision that the claimant  had  a
    right of appeal against it.  It is  that  appeal  which  is  before  us
    today.

 8. Meanwhile, the claimant had through  his  solicitors  appealed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal against Judge Pullig's decision deciding that he had not
    properly constituted his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against  the
    Section 10 decision.  In  a  decision  sent  out  on  11  October  2016
    following a hearing on 24 August 2016, the Upper Tribunal,  constituted
    with Upper Tribunal Judge Smith and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Davey,
    determined that  Judge  Pullig  had  erred  in  law.   He  should  have
    appreciated that the claimant had an  appeal  against  the  Section  10
    decision only from outside the United Kingdom  and  should,  therefore,
    have found that there was no valid appeal before him for  that  reason,
    rather than for the reason that he did.

 9. By 24 August 2016 however, as we have already noted, the  claimant  had
    left the  United  Kingdom  and  for  that  reason  the  Upper  Tribunal
    determined apparently that the appeal before Judge Pullig had,  by  the
    time of the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal,  been  abandoned  by  the
    claimant's departure from the United Kingdom.  We have to say  that  we
    have some difficulty in understanding  the  precise  reasoning  of  the
    Upper Tribunal on that occasion: because if the claimant had  no  right
    of appeal exercisable from in the United Kingdom, the  appeal  that  he
    had attempted to lodge by appealing  from  within  the  United  Kingdom
    could not be abandoned by his departure.  But in any  event  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision is important. It records  formally  the  claimant's
    departure from the United Kingdom; secondly, that taking  it  with  the
    decision of Judge Pullig, there appear to be at least three reasons why
    there was no jurisdiction to hear the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Section 10 decision, the first being that he  had  not  constituted  it
    properly, and the second being that there was a right  of  appeal  only
    from outside the United Kingdom; and the third being that if either  of
    those two reasons was wrong, he had departed the United Kingdom  whilst
    his appeal was pending.

10. That decision has been brought to our attention by Mr Wilding today  in
    order to support part of the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  in
    relation to the Tier 4 dependant decision.  That appeal was dealt  with
    on the papers by Judge Graves in July 2016.  Judge Graves  was  unaware
    that by then  the  claimant  had  left  the  United  Kingdom;  and  the
    Secretary of State's ground of appeal is that instead of  allowing  the
    appeal as he did, Judge Graves should have recognised that  the  appeal
    had been abandoned by the claimant leaving  the  United  Kingdom  after
    lodging his notice of appeal on 4 March 2016 and whilst  it  was  still
    pending.

11. There is however a further difficulty because, as we have noted, at the
    time that the claimant made his application  for  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    dependant, he had no leave.  It therefore  follows  that  the  decision
    refusing him leave was not one which had as a result  that  he  had  no
    leave to be in the United Kingdom.  The reason why he had no  leave  to
    be in  the  United  Kingdom  was  that  his  existing  leave  had  been
    invalidated four days  before  he  made  the  application.   There  was
    therefore, in  this  case,  no  "immigration  decision":  the  decision
    against which he appealed (the decision refusing him further leave) was
    not one which carried a right of appeal of any sort. If  it  had  done,
    there is no doubt that the claimant had left the United Kingdom; and it
    follows that in this case too there was no jurisdiction  to  deal  with
    his appeal, let alone to allow it.

12. So far as this appeal is concerned, we shall therefore find that  Judge
    Graves erred in law.  We  set  aside  his  decision  and  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the appeal for want of jurisdiction.   That however
    is not sufficient to deal wholly with  this  complicated  case.   After
    Judge Pullig's decision it  appears  that  solicitors  acting  for  the
    claimant attempted some time in January 2016 to make a  further  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal, this time no doubt attempting  properly  to
    constitute such  an  appeal.   It  appears  also  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  replied  saying  that  given  the  terms  of  Judge  Pullig's
    decision, the appropriate procedure would be to appeal  against  it  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  They therefore made an application, permission was
    granted and that is how the matter came before Judges Smith and  Davey.
    That appears to have been an error of administration.  Given the  terms
    of Judge Pullig's decision, it is perfectly clear that  there  had,  as
    yet, been no valid appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in Judge  Pullig's
    view and that the appropriate course  of  action  was  indeed  for  the
    claimant, if he thought it right to do so, to  appeal,  exercising  any
    right of appeal that he had, and complying with the requirements of the
    Rules in doing so.

13.  However,  it  is  clear  from  the  solicitors'   letter   that   that
    correspondence was all dealt with before the claimant's departure on 26
    May 2016.  It therefore follows that whatever notice of appeal  against
    the Section 10 decision was put in, in January or February 2016, it was
    a notice which purported to exercise a right of appeal  which  was  not
    yet exercisable because the appellant was still in the United  Kingdom.
    He had a right of appeal which he could exercise  within  the  28  days
    after he left the United Kingdom on 26 May 2016, but he does  not  ever
    appear to have exercised that  right.   It  therefore  follows,  as  we
    understand the position in total, that (i) so far  as  the  section  10
    decision is concerned, the claimant has  never  exercised  the  out  of
    country right of appeal which he had, and (ii) so far  as  the  present
    appeal is concerned the claimant never had a right of  appeal,  but  in
    any event (iii) any appeals that he did manage properly  to  constitute
    whilst in the United Kingdom, have been abandoned by his departure.

14. The only other issue to which we would refer is this:  the  grounds  of
    appeal before this Tribunal assert as follows.  The judge allowed  this
    appeal against a Tier 4 dependent refusal on  the  papers.   The  judge
    found the ETS deception had  not  been  made  out  because  he  had  no
    evidence of  it.   However,  there  was  plenty  of  evidence  of  that
    deception in the Home Office bundle which was prepared on 14 March 2016
    and was served on the IAC.  That is  one  of  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission was granted by Judge Holmes on 30 December  2016,  over  six
    months ago.  The grounds of appeal are signed by a Presenting  Officer.
    As Mr Wilding has very frankly told us there does not appear to be  any
    factual basis for the assertion made in  that  ground.   A  bundle  was
    indeed prepared, but it does not appear that it was served on the  IAC,
    and indeed our file does not reveal it.   It  is  no  criticism  of  Mr
    Wilding to say that the assertion should not have been made, and having
    been made, should have been withdrawn before today.  It is  unfortunate
    if the Secretary of State is on record as making an assertion  of  fact
    in the context of an argument of an error of law when the assertion  of
    fact cannot be substantiated.

15. For the reasons we have given however,  that  further  error  makes  no
    difference in the case of this  appeal,  which  is  dismissed  for  the
    reasons we have given.

16. No anonymity direction is made.







                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 28 July 2017








