
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01033/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 July 2014                               |On 22nd Oct 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Suresh Yeddu
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Nasim, Solicitor of Denning Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of India against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 9 December 2013 refusing him leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.

 2. Essentially there were two things wrong with the application.   Firstly
    the documents disclosed did not show sufficient money in the account to
    satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  That of itself was an  entirely
    proper reason for dismissing the appeal;  indeed  it  would  have  been
    impossible  to  have  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Rules  on   the
    documentation provided.

 3. However, there was a  further  point.   The  Secretary  of  State  made
    enquiries about the statements purporting to come from the Andhra  Bank
    and the Secretary of State concluded that  those  statements  were  not
    genuine.  The  application  was  therefore  refused  both  under  Rules
    relating to the specific requirements  of  the  application  and  under
    paragraph 322(2) of HC 395 because the Secretary of State was satisfied
    that false representations had been made in support of the application.

 4. The appellant entered a notice of appeal.  He represented himself.  The
    notice of appeal was in entirely formal  terms  and  when  he  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal at a hearing in April 2014 he asked  for
    an adjournment.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge refused to adjourn.

 5. It is hard to see how the First-tier Tribunal Judge could have made any
    other decision.  The appellant had had ample opportunity to prepare his
    case.  If, as appeared to be the position, his case was not prepared to
    his satisfaction he only had himself to blame.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied on the evidence before  him
    that the accounts did not show sufficient money and was also  satisfied
    that the bank statements were in fact forged.

 7. There were two reasons to find  the  statements  to  be  forged.   Each
    reason is a variation of the same  theme.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    officers contacted the manager of the relevant bank who explained  that
    the account number was not known to  the  bank  but  because  the  bank
    manager had only recently been in post suggested that enquiries be made
    of a person who had earlier managed the bank. This was  done  and  same
    message was given, namely that the account was not genuine.

 8. Today the appellant has been represented by Ms Nasim who  has  taken  a
    very determined stance and has argued with some justification that  the
    evidence that the documents were forged is rather  weak.   I  say  with
    some justification because she is right to say  that  the  reasons  for
    saying that the account is not known to the  bank  are  not  explained,
    there is no indication of what searches were made or  what  exactly  is
    unsatisfactory or why it was thought  that  the  earlier  bank  manager
    would be in any position at all to say anything useful having left  the
    bank.

 9. These were all things that would have  been  proper  areas  for  cross-
    examination but they do not get around  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    independent evidence at all before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    undermine the evidence that the documents were forged.

10. I am quite satisfied that the judge was entitled to find that  a  prima
    facie case had been established on the evidence before him and the oral
    evidence of the appellant, unsupported in any way,  was  not  a  proper
    reason to come to any conclusion other than the one that was reached.

11. I see no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss
    the appeal on both points.

12. Ms Nasim says that the appellant has now got a  letter  from  the  bank
    that supports his case.  Certainly some letter exists because  she  has
    shown it to me although it has not been admitted into  evidence  and  I
    have not read the contents.

13. It really is for the appellant to prepare his case before the  hearing.
    It is not acceptable to wait until the last minute and then  produce  a
    document which if genuine would be of considerable  assistance.   I  do
    not think there was a formal application to admit it.  I would not have
    admitted it if there had been.  This is the sort of document which  can
    only be of value if it is disclosed in time for the respondent to  make
    proper enquiries.  It would have been of no use this  morning,  and  no
    sensible explanation was  offered  for  the  late  production  of  that
    document.  It is something that should have  been  in  the  appellant's
    mind since the application was refused in December of last year.

14. Ms  Nasim,  if  I  may  say  so,  has  identified  weak  spots  in  the
    respondent's case and has made of them all that she  properly  can  but
    they do not get around the fact that the  evidence  was  sufficient  to
    support the conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  who
    has not erred in law in any way.

15. I do make the comment that if there is good evidence that the Secretary
    of State has been given wrong information by  the  bank  that  that  is
    something which she ought to be interested in learning more  about  but
    whether the appellant would want to disclose a document which could put
    him in a very difficult position if it does not stand up to scrutiny is
    a matter to him.  It has no bearing whatsoever  on  my  decision  today
    which is that the First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and I  dismiss
    the appeal that is before me.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 October 2014                |







