
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01212/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 October 2017                    |On 7 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                               mr jubed ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Shah, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Bangladeshi citizen  who  made  application  to  the
    respondent for leave to remain on the basis of family life and also  on
    the basis of his private life in the United Kingdom.   His  application
    was refused on 18 February 2016 under both Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 2. The appellant appealed that decision and following a hearing, and in  a
    decision promulgated on 7 July 2017, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cameron dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Kelly on 9 August 2017.   His  reasons  for  so
    doing are:

      1) "The appellant seeks permission to  appeal  in  time,  against  the
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron, promulgated  on  7th
         July 2017 to dismiss the appeal against refusal of his  application
         for leave to remain on private and family life grounds.

      2) The grounds assert that the Tribunal's Article 8  analysis  -  with
         particular reference  to  the  reasonableness  of  the  appellant's
         infant daughter leaving the United Kingdom -  was  legally  flawed.
         Most of the particulars of this ground are simply  a  quarrel  with
         the judgment of the Tribunal that it would not be  unreasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the UK.  It is however arguable that  the
         Tribunal erred by

          i) having regard to the possibility of the child remaining in the
             UK with her mother given that the test in Section  117B(6)  is
             arguably one that is based upon the hypothesis of the child in
             the UK leaving upon whether this course  of  action  is  being
             proposed or is likely to occur,

         ii) failing to identify any one  count  availing  public  interest
             reasons rendering it reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the UK (especially given  the  Tribunal's  findings  that  the
             appellant's immigration history was unremarkable),

        iii) treating the question  of  'reasonableness'  as  a  matter  of
             evidence and thus for the appellant to prove 'on a balance  of
             probabilities' rather a neutral question of judgment  that  is
             based upon the established facts [paragraph 69 and 70  of  the
             decision]."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr Shah relied upon the grounds seeking permission to appeal  which  he
    went on to amplify at some length.  In particular the fact that it  was
    found the appellant did  not  deploy  deception  for  his  TOEIC  test.
    However, Mr Shah  asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    consideration to the appellant's family and private life in the  United
    Kingdom and that there were insurmountable obstacles upon  his  return.
    His relationship with  his  British  spouse  is  not  disputed  and  is
    accepted as being genuine and subsisting.  The grounds then  go  on  to
    detail the insurmountable obstacles that were argued within the appeal.
     Further that it would be unreasonable  for  the  appellant's  daughter
    Zaynab to leave the United Kingdom to continue  her  relationship  with
    her father  because  her  mother  would  be  unable  to  join  them  in
    Bangladesh.  Her mother would be unable to go because she cannot  leave
    her elderly parents.  He argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    failed to give due consideration to the fact that the  appellant  would
    not be able to provide an adequate home for his daughter as he does not
    have any support network in Bangladesh and  that  his  daughter  enjoys
    being in the United Kingdom with her parents, grandparents,  aunts  and
    uncles.  Further that the judge erred in law and procedure for  failing
    to consider Article 8 family life with blood relatives and did not take
    into account various authorities  which  are  referred  to  within  the
    appellant's bundle.  In responding to Mr Tarlow's submissions he  added
    that this was an appeal in  relation  to  family  life  as  opposed  to
    private  life  and  at  the  time  that  the  appellant  commenced  his
    relationship with his wife he did have leave to remain  as  a  student.
    He had to acknowledge though, thus the judge found at paragraph  60  of
    his decision, that both the appellant and his wife must have been aware
    that that did not give him a right to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    indefinitely.

 6. Mr Tarlow submitted that the grounds seeking permission to appeal  were
    no more than a disagreement with the judge's findings which  were  open
    to be made on the evidence.  The judge has made findings that were open
    to be made  taking  into  account  all  relevant  issues  and  has  not
    materially erred as asserted.

 7. Contrary to Mr Shah's submissions it is not incumbent upon the judge to
    cite every case that touches upon the issues within  the  appeal.   The
    principles therefrom have though been followed and reference is made to
    key authorities.

 8. The grounds seeking permission to appeal amount to a disagreement  with
    findings that were open  to  be  made  on  the  evidence.   This  is  a
    carefully written decision where the judge has taken all  factors  into
    account before coming to conclusions that were open to be made.  It was
    open to the judge, as he did at paragraph 46 of  his  decision,  to  be
    satisfied that the appellant did have a  sufficient  level  of  English
    language and that he had undertaken courses in  the  past  in  English.
    Further that on the  balance  of  probabilities  the  judge  found  the
    appellant did undertake the test himself and had  not  used  deception.
    Thereafter the judge has carried out  a  full  and  thorough  balancing
    exercise taking into account the impact of removal upon  the  immediate
    and extended family of the appellant and his wife.  It was open to  the
    judge at paragraph  69  to  find  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles   to   the   appellant's   wife   returning   to   Bangladesh
    notwithstanding her ties to the United Kingdom.  Further that there was
    no requirement that the appellant's wife and  child  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and if his daughter remained in the  United  Kingdom  with  her
    mother then she would  continue  to  receive  care  from  her  and  the
    extended family.  The judge has taken into account  all  other  factors
    including the assistance the  appellant  has  received  in  the  United
    Kingdom from his wife's family and also the fact that he too has family
    in his country of origin.  At paragraph 77 of his  decision  the  judge
    has subsumed within his Article 8 analysis the best  interests  of  the
    appellant's child.  The judge has recorded that the appellant spent his
    formative years in Bangladesh and acknowledges that within  the  United
    Kingdom he will have established a substantial family and private life.
     However, he also finds that the appellant's  position  has  (paragraph
    85) always been precarious.

 9. I find that  the  appellant's  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
    disclosed no material error of  law.   They  are  a  disagreement  with
    findings which were open to be made on the evidence and which have been
    adequately reasoned.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 6 November 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
