
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 01571 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2013                            |On 11 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                         SYED ABDUL WAQ TAHA SAYEED
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. At about 10:30 am when it was convenient to hear this appeal neither the
    respondent nor his representatives, SZ Solicitors, had attended.  Notice
    of hearing was sent on 5 November 2013 to the  respondent's  solicitors.
    At their request a similar Notice was sent to the  respondent  in  their
    care. I am satisfied that there was good service under the Rules of  the
    Notice of Hearing and I decided to continue  with  the  hearing  in  the
    absence of the respondent.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the respondent's appeal against a  decision
    of the Secretary of State refusing to give him further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.

 3. There is only one point of relevance. It is that  the  respondent  could
    not satisfy the requirements of the Rules because that he could not show
    that he had obtained his degree within twelve months of his  last  being
    given leave.  It is right to say that he had done all the work  and  had
    satisfied the university that he was entitled to a degree but the degree
    was not awarded until 30 May  2012.  The  application  was  made  on  27
    January 2012  and  clearly  could  not  have  been  accompanied  by  the
    certificate showing he had obtained his degree because he had  not  then
    been award his degree.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal following the guidance of this Tribunal  in  the
    case of Khatel and  others  (s85A;  effect  of  continuing  application)
    [2013] UKUT 00044 (IAC) and allowed the appeal  but  we  now  know  that
    Khatel was  decided  wrongly  (see  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Raju & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ 754).   The  point  is  that  in
    Khatel it was thought  that  making  an  application  was  a  continuing
    process and as long as the  necessary  documents  were  put  before  the
    Secretary of State before she made her decision the requirements of  the
    Rule were met.  That is what had happened here but  Khatel  is  a  wrong
    statement of the law.  The Rules require the applicant  to  support  his
    application with the certificates when he  made  the  application  which
    this claimant clearly could not do.

 5. It follows therefore that although the First-tier  Tribunal  thought  it
    was doing the right thing, it was doing precisely the  wrong  thing.  It
    should have dismissed the appeal and I set  aide  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the  appeal
    under the Rules.

 6. I have to ask myself if the decision is any way contrary to the  law  or
    contrary to the human rights of the claimant and it is not.  This  is  a
    case, as many are, of a person who as far as I know has done nothing  in
    any way discreditable but who cannot satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  The only legitimate expectation to which he was entitled was  an
    expectation of a decision in accordance with the Rules  applicable  when
    an application was made  which  is  precisely  what  he  got.   Although
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights is  clearly  raised
    there is nothing in the papers to suggest that  the  claimant  has,  for
    example, any of the weighty human relationships such as a UK based  wife
    or UK national children that can make a big difference when an Article 8
    balancing exercise is carried out.

 7. On  the  evidence  before  me  I  find  that  the  interference  in  the
    respondent's private and family life consequent on  removing  is  simply
    what is to be expected in the case of a  person  who  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2009.   He  will  have  established  useful  social
    relationships but these things  do  not  count  for  very  much  in  the
    balancing exercise.  The Rules embody a  policy  and  there  is  nothing
    unlawful about them generally or on the facts of this particular case.

 8. As is so often the case in circumstances such as this it is not easy  to
    see why the Rules have been drawn so that a person who has studied for a
    higher degree at a British university cannot extend his stay because the
    Rules require him to  produced  his  degree  certificate  before  he  is
    admitted as a graduate even  though  he  has  passed  his  examinations.
    However the Rules are clear and the respondent  did  not  satisfy  them.
    There are no special circumstances which make it contrary to  his  human
    rights to remove him.

 9. It follows therefore that I set aside the decision as  indicated  and  I
    dismiss  the  respondent's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 6 December 2013                |







