

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01680/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15th July 2014                             |On 22nd July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                            PRIMROSE ONAYI MUDIYI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr Nyamaro, of Bake and Company Solicitors.
Respondent:            Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary  of  State")
    dated 04 December 2013, which had the following elements:


     a) The Appellant's application under paragraph 317 of the  Immigration
        Rules seeking indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as
        the dependent relative (daughter) of a person present  and  settled
        here was refused.


     b) It was concluded that the Appellant did not qualify under  Appendix
        FM and paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

     c) Finally, it was considered that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed
        outwith the framework of the Immigration Rules.

    The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, aged 25 years.


 2.  The  ensuing  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")  was
    dismissed.  Permission to appeal was granted on the  following  limited
    ground:

         "The Judge considered  the  Appellant's  Article  8  rights  wholly
         within the context of Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE.   Although
         the judgment in Edgehill post dates the determination, the Court of
         Appeal illuminates the law as it has always been and, consequently,
         an arguable error of law is disclosed on this ground."

    The permission Judge added:

         "In view of the findings of fact made by the Judge, it may be  that
         the outcome will be the same  notwithstanding  the  arguable  error
         but, nonetheless, permission is granted on this basis solely."

 3. Upon the hearing of the appeal, it became clear from the submissions of
    Mr Nyamaro that the high  water  mark  of  the  Appellant's  case  was,
    relying on the decision of the Court of Appeal in Edgehill v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  402,  that  the  FtT
    erred in law by failing to consider  the  Appellant's  case  under  the
    former version  of  paragraph  317  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This
    argument  was  based  on  the  undisputed  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    application was made on 03 April 2012 and, hence, predated  the  change
    in the Rules, which took effect on 09 July 2012.   Generally,  Appendix
    FM establishes a route for entering or remaining in the United  Kingdom
    for persons on the basis of their family life with  a  person  who  is,
    inter alia, settled in the United Kingdom.  Under the changes  effected
    to the rules on 09 July 2012, the Appellant, in order  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of Section EC-DR.1.1, would have  to  establish  that  she
    required long-term personal care to perform every day tasks  by  reason
    of age, illness or disability: per paragraph 2.4.  In  contrast,  under
    the regime governing applications  made  prior  to  the  aforementioned
    date, the hurdle for the Appellant to overcome  is  that  enshrined  in
    paragraph 317(f) of the Rules, whereunder she must establish "the  most
    exceptional compassionate circumstances".

 4. Based on the decision in Edgehill, the Appellant's application  to  the
    Secretary of State was governed exclusively by  paragraph  317  of  the
    Rules.  The  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  rehearsed  above  where  not
    applicable, as their entry into operation  postdated  her  application.
    On the face of the determination, the  FtT  did  not  acknowledge  this
    distinction and,  hence,  did  not  give  effect  to  the  decision  in
    Edgehill.  However, by the same token, the FtT did not proceed  on  the
    basis that the Appellant had to overcome paragraph ECDR.2.4 of Appendix
    FM.  As a result,  the  self  evidently  elevated  threshold  enshrined
    therein did not operate to the Appellant's detriment.

 5. The substance of the FtT's decision is found, firstly, in [10] thereof:

         "In relation to paragraph  317,  the  issue  for  determination  is
         whether  the  Appellant  would  live  in   the   most   exceptional
         compassionate circumstances in Zimbabwe.  I do not accept that  she
         meets the high threshold required ...."

    This was followed by a recitation  of  the  Judge's  reasons  for  this
    conclusion.  None of this was the subject of the grant of permission to
    appeal and was not challenged in any event.  The  second  component  of
    the substance of the FtT's decision is found in [14]:


             "...   The  Secretary  of   State   considered   whether   the
             Appellant's case contained any  compassionate  and  compelling
             circumstances which would justify granting  further  leave  to
             remain outside the Immigration Rules including  any  delay  in
             dealing with the Appellant's claim.  In paragraph 3.2.7 of the
             October 2013 Guidance .....  [it]   states  that  'exceptional
             does  not  mean  unusual  or  unique  ...   exceptional  means
             circumstances in which refusal would result  in  unjustifiably
             harsh consequences for the individual  or  their  family  such
             that refusal of the application would  not  be  proportionate.
             That is likely to be the case only very rarely.'"

     When asked, Mr Nyamaro confirmed  that  he  was  not  challenging  this
formulation.

 6. Disregarding completely section E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM of the Rules,
    and thus taking the Appellant's case at  its  absolute  zenith,  it  is
    clear from the evidence adduced and the findings made  that  she  could
    not have hoped to succeed under any guise in any event.

 7. My conclusions are:

    (a)  While the FtT did not expressly acknowledge that  the  changes  to
         the Rules introduced with effect from 09 July 2012 did  not  govern
         the Appellant's application, this was of no moment, since  none  of
         the revised provisions was applied to the Appellant's detriment.

    (b)  In the alternative, if any error of law of the  nature  considered
         above did occur, this was immaterial, since the Appellant could not
         conceivably have succeeded in any event.

DECISION

 8. I dismiss  the  appeal  and  affirm  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.
                                                     [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                          Date: 15 July 2014
