

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      IA/01640/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 11 October 2013                        |On 14 October 2013       |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                               Mr Abdul Wadood
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:             Mr S Khan, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:          Mr A  Avery,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.          This  is  a  challenge  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to the
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Traynor  who  allowed  the
      appeal of the appellant by way of a determination  promulgated  on  31
      May 2013. for the sake of convenience, I continue, however,  to  refer
      to the Secretary of State as the respondent and to Mr  Wadood  as  the
      appellant. There has been no anonymity order in this case and none was
      requested of the Upper Tribunal.

   2.         The appellant is a Pakistani national born on  30  April 1978.
      He was granted leave to enter the UK as a Tier 4 student  on  2  April
      2011; that leave expired on 26 July 2012. On 4 April 2012  he  applied
      for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post study Work) Migrant  however  at
      that time he had not been awarded his degree and his  application  was
      refused on 3 January 2013 under  paragraph  245FD.  In  the  meantime,
      however, he received his degree on 30 May and  forwarded  evidence  of
      same to the Secretary of State on 30 July 2012. It is his case that on
      9 May 2012 he had received confirmation that he had been successful in
      his degree studies and that evidence was submitted when he lodged  his
      appeal.

   3.       Although an oral hearing had been requested and one was in  fact
      listed, the appellant subsequently asked, though his  representatives,
      for it to be vacated and for  the  appeal  to  be  determined  on  the
      papers. A skeleton argument  from  the  appellant  was  submitted  and
      reliance  was  placed  on  Khatel   (s.85A;   effect   of   continuing
      application) Nepal [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) and Ali (s.120 -  PBS)  [2012]
      UKUT 00368 (IAC). It was argued that the application should be seen as
      continuing until the date of  the  decision  and  that  therefore  the
      relevant date of assessment of the application was  the  date  of  the
      decision. The judge accepted that  position  and  allowed  the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules. He also found  that  the  decision  under
      section 47 was not in accordance with the law as  the  decision  maker
      had not had power to make that decision. The appeal was  also  allowed
      in that respect.

   4.       No challenge is made to the decision as far  as  section  47  is
      concerned. What is challenged is the decision under  the  rules  given
      the changed position of the law following the judgment of the Court of
      Appeal in Raju and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2013] EWCA Civ 754.  Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by
      the First-tier Tribunal but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McKee  on
      renewal.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.

   5.       The matter thus came before me on  11  October  2013.   I  heard
      opening submissions from Mr Avery who relied upon Raju.  He  submitted
      that this was a straightforward case; the appellant did not  have  his
      degree when he made his application and so could not qualify under the
      rules. The judge had erred in law.
   6.             In response, Mr Khan  submitted  a  skeleton  argument and
      made two points. The first was that the respondent's  application  had
      been made out of time and that the Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to
      hear the appeal. The second was that the appeal should be adjourned or
      the determination stayed until a  panel  of  the  Tribunal  which  had
      recently heard  several  linked  appeals  on  Khatel/Raju  issues  had
      promulgated its determination. When asked for his submissions  on  why
      the appellant maintained there was no error in law, assuming I were to
      go ahead and determine the appeal, he  acknowledged  he  would  be  in
      difficulty given the Raju  decision.   He  did  then  strive  to  make
      submissions based on paragraph 62 of the last Tier  1  guidelines  but
      was unable to provide a copy of these.

   7.       In reply Mr Avery submitted that  there  had  been  a  technical
      error with the transmission  of  the  application  for  permission  to
      appeal and that  once  alerted  to  that,  the  missing  part  of  the
      application was submitted forthwith. This matter had been  dealt  with
      by Judge McKee.

   8.         At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision which
      I now give.

Findings and Conclusions

   9.        I have considered all the evidence and  submissions  carefully.
      I deal  first  with  the  issue  of  jurisdiction.  It  is  Mr  Khan's
      submission that the Secretary of State's application was made  out  of
      time, that no request for an extension was made and that as  such  the
      Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

  10.       I have considered the submissions made both orally  and  in  the
      skeleton argument but with respect to Mr Khan do not agree with  them.
      The initial application to the Upper Tribunal was made in time  having
      been received by the Tribunal on 27 June 2013.  It  was  not  until  8
      July, however, that the Tribunal  noticed  that  the  application  was
      incomplete in that  the  grounds  were  missing.  In  accordance  with
      longstanding Field House administrative practices, the respondent  was
      notified of this omission and given until close of business on the day
      following the deemed date of the letter of notification to supply  the
      missing section. The  respondent  complied  with  this  direction  and
      indeed re-served the grounds and the rest of the application the  next
      morning.

  11.       On  8  August  2013  Judge  McKee  considered  and  refused  the
      application for permission to appeal finding that the application  had
      been received late, on 9 July, with no request to  extend  time.   The
      decision was served on 12 August.
  12.       On 27 August the respondent pointed out  to  the  Tribunal  that
      Upper Tribunal Judge McKee appeared to have been ignorant of the  fact
      that the Tribunal had invited the respondent  to  submit  the  missing
      parts of the application and that those had been  adduced  within  the
      deadline given. This letter was brought  to  Judge  McKee's  attention
      and, as a result, he set aside his  decision  under  Rules  43(1)  and
      (2)(d)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  and  re-made   it.
      Permission to appeal was granted.

  13.       I can find nothing untoward in these actions. The same  practice
      for supplying missing forms or parts of applications  applies  to  all
      appellants and indeed is used far more widely for the applications  of
      appellants than those made by the respondent. There is nothing in  the
      documents on the Tribunal's file to suggest that this was  a  'holding
      application' with the grounds  deliberately  held  back,  as  Mr  Khan
      suggested. What is apparent is that the application form was faxed but
      the part of it on which the grounds were recorded was not successfully
      transmitted via fax. Once the Secretary of State  was  made  aware  of
      this, she took immediate steps to rectify the problem and Judge  McKee
      properly dealt with the matter in his decision granting permission.  I
      also note that along with the resubmitted application on  9  July  was
      evidence of the original faxed transmission of 27 June. For all  these
      reasons I do not accept the submission that the application was out of
      time and that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

  14.       I now proceed to the Secretary of State's challenge.  Under  the
      law as it now stands, as per Raju, it is plain that the appeal of  the
      appellant cannot succeed and that the judge erred in finding that  the
      late submission of  the  award  certificate  should  have  been  taken
      account of by the respondent when  the  decision  was  made.  Mr  Khan
      sensibly acknowledged that the only chance of success his client would
      have would be if the determination was stayed until  the  decision  of
      the Upper Tribunal in the other  cases  recently  heard  on  Raju  and
      Khatel arguments was promulgated and even then only if  that  decision
      was in the appellants' favour. Although Mr  Khan  submitted  that  all
      such pending cases were being adjourned and stacked up  to  await  the
      outcome of those appeals, that is not the information I have obtained.

  15.       I note that no  application  for  an  adjournment  was  made  in
      respect of his appeal  prior  to  Mr  Khan's  submissions.  I  am  not
      persuaded that the appeal cannot be  justly  disposed  of  without  an
      adjournment. There will always be issues and legal  arguments  pending
      in the system. That is the very nature of the legal  system.  It  does
      not follow that each time a principle is challenged all similar  cases
      must be stayed to  await  the  resolution  of  that  principle.  I  am
      required to consider the law as it currently stands. That means I must
      apply the principles and conclusions set out by the Court of Appeal in
      Raju. I can see no reason why I  must  await  a  decision  in  another
      appeal heard  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  If,  when  that  decision  is
      promulgated, it goes against what I now decide, it will be open to the
      appellant to challenge my decision. In any event, I bear in mind  that
      the judgment in Raju was delivered by the Court of Appeal and  not  by
      another Upper Tribunal Judge.

  16.       It is plain from Raju that the  appellant  cannot  succeed.  His
      application was made well before the award of his degree.  As  he  did
      not have confirmation of his award when he made  his  application,  he
      cannot bring himself to qualify under the Immigration Rules.  Mr  Khan
      made submissions with respect to Home Office polices and guidance  but
      did not have copies of any of these to hand.  Those  submissions  have
      not therefore been of any assistance.

Decision

  17.       The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. Its decision to  allow the
      appeal is set aside and re-made.

  18.       The appeal of the appellant to remain as a  Tier  1  Migrant  is
      dismissed.

            Signed:





      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


            11 October 2013


