
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01484/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th September, 2014                       |On 10th October 2014         |
|Signed 10th October, 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MD SOHAG Bhuiyan

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Ahmed


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  to
    whom in this determination I shall refer as "the Claimant".

2.   The respondent was born on 16th October,  1987  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    appellant's decision, taken on 10th December, 2013, to seek the removal
    of the respondent from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions  under
    Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006,
    following the refusal of the respondent's application to vary his leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

3.   In her letter of 10th December, 2013, the Claimant explained  that  the
    respondent's application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant had been considered in accordance with  the  provisions
    of paragraph 245ZX of Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC
    395,  as  amended  ("the  Rules").   The  Claimant  believed  that  the
    provisions  of  paragraph  245ZX(c)  had  not  been  met  because   the
    respondent had failed to provides specified documents  confirming  that
    he held the necessary English language proficiency to a  minimum  level
    of B2 of the Common European  Framework  of  Reference  (CEFR).   As  a
    result, the respondent was not entitled to  claim  the  30  points  for
    attributes under Appendix A of the Rules.

4.   The respondent's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Traynor
    at Hatton Cross on 16th June, 2014, and in a determination  promulgated
    on  20th  June,  2014,  the  judge  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal,
    asserting that the Claimant's decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law.

5.   After the submission of the respondent's application, which  failed  to
    provide the documents specified confirming that he held  the  necessary
    English language proficiency to the minimum level of B2  of  the  CEFR,
    the respondent's representative sent further evidence to the Claimant's
    office by special delivery post on 9th December, 2013.  The  judge  was
    satisfied that the respondent's representatives were  able  to  produce
    proof of posting confirming despatch of their letter and the  documents
    on that date.  A "track and trace" receipt from Royal Mail showed  that
    these documents had been received by the Claimant  on  the  morning  of
    11th October, 2013, the day following the date of  the  decision.   The
    respondent's representative explained that the letter to  the  Claimant
    specifically requested the appellant to defer her  decision  until  the
    evidence enclosed with the letter had been  considered  and  where  the
    Claimant had failed to implement  the  provisions  of  paragraph  245AA
    prior to reaching the decision, the First-tier Tribunal were invited to
    take note of this and rule accordingly.

6.   The respondent's original application had been submitted in July  2013,
    and the judge found that the Claimant's caseworker could not have  been
    aware of the correspondence at the date of decision on  10th  December,
    2012, because the correspondence was not received by the Claimant until
    the following day,  the  11th  December,  2012.   Nevertheless  it  was
    accepted that  a  single  document  was  apparently  missing  from  the
    application and the Claimant had not sought to contact  the  respondent
    prior to refusing the application, in order to  establish  whether  the
    absence of that document was due to an administrative oversight on  the
    part of the respondent or his representatives.

7.   The judge noted that the Claimant's decision was made in  ignorance  of
    the fact that the respondent had  provided  a  valid  English  language
    certificate confirming  his  proficiency  and  that  the  Claimant,  in
    failing to apply the provisions of  paragraph  245AA,  had  denied  the
    respondent  the  opportunity  of  considering  his  application   under
    discretionary powers vested in the Claimant.  The judge concluded  that
    she would allow the appeal to the extent that she purported  to  "quash
    the respondent's decision of 10th December, 2013".

8.   The Claimant appealed the  judge's  decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer believed that it was arguable that the judge  had  made  a
    material error of law.

9.   At the hearing before me, Mr Deller asked me  to  note  that  when  the
    respondent made his application, he was awaiting the results of English
    language testing.  He had been provided with a conditional offer  as  a
    result.  While the application was with the  Claimant,  the  respondent
    received the results of two disciplines which he  required  to  satisfy
    the  English  language  test  requirement.   These  were  sent  by  the
    respondent's representatives and were  not  received  by  the  Claimant
    until 11th December, 2013, one day after her  decision  to  refuse  the
    application.

10.  Mr Deller pointed out that paragraph 245AA  refers  to  the  fact  that
    where specified documents must be provided, only those documents  which
    have been submitted with the application will be  considered  and  that
    documents submitted after the application will be considered where some
    of the documents in a sequence have been omitted, if a document  is  in
    the wrong format, if a document is a copy and not an original, or if  a
    document does not contain all the specified information.

11.  The Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or Secretary of  State
    may contact the appellant or his representatives in writing and request
    the correct documents and they are  required  to  be  delivered  within
    seven working days of the date of request.  Sub-paragraph  (c)  of  the
    Rule specifically refers to the fact that where  a  specified  document
    has not been submitted (for example an English language certificate  is
    missing), or where the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer  of
    the Secretary of State does not anticipate that addressing the omission
    or error referred to in sub-paragraph (b) will lead to a grant  because
    the application  will  be  refused  for  other  reasons.   It  was  not
    incumbent on the  Claimant  to  look  for  a  certificate.   The  Rules
    required that it be submitted with the application and it was  not,  Mr
    Deller told me.

12.  Ms Ahmed referred me to the refusal  letter  of  10th  December,  2013,
    written by the Claimant to the respondent.  There, the  Claimant  notes
    that the respondent has claimed  30  points  for  his  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies, but the Secretary of  State  is  not  satisfied
    that his Tier 4 sponsor has ensured that he is either competent in  the
    English language at a minimum  level  of  B2  of  the  Common  European
    Framework of Reference for Languages, or that he is a person who  meets
    an alternative requirement.  It is now being suggested,  however,  that
    the respondent had failed to submit his evidence with  his  application
    and was being refused for that reason.  If that is the case,  then  the
    Home Office should have said that the  application  was  being  refused
    because he had not  provided  evidence  that  he  fulfils  the  English
    language requirement suggested Mr Ahmed.

13.  I have concluded that I must allow  the  Claimant's  appeal  since  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does contain a material error
    of law.

14.  Paragraph 245AA provides as follows:-


         "245AA. Documents not submitted with applications


         (a) Where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in Part 6A state
         that specified documents must be provided, the Entry Clearance
         Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State will only
         consider documents that have been submitted with the application,
         and will only consider documents submitted after the application
         where they are submitted in accordance with subparagraph (b).

         (b) If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which:

             (i)Some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted (for
             example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);


             (ii) A document is in the wrong format (for example, if a
             letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or

             (iii) A document is a copy and not an original document; or

             (iv) A document does not contain all of the specified
         information;

             the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the
             Secretary of State may contact the applicant or his
             representative in writing, and request the correct documents.
             The requested documents must be received at the address
             specified in the request within 7 working days of the date of
             the request.


         (c) Documents will not be requested where a specified document has
         not been submitted (for example an English language certificate is
         missing), or where the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer
         or the Secretary of State does not anticipate that addressing the
         omission or error referred to in subparagraph (b) will lead to a
         grant because the application will be refused for other reasons.

         (d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

             (i) in the wrong format; or

             (ii) which is a copy and not an original document; or

             (iii) which does not contain all of the specified information,
             but the missing information is verifiable from:

                  (1) other documents submitted with the application,

                  (2) the website of the organisation which issued the
             document, or

                  (3) the website of the appropriate regulatory body;

         the application may be granted exceptionally, providing the Entry
         Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State is
         satisfied that the specified documents are genuine and the
         applicant meets all the other requirements. The Entry Clearance
         Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State reserves the
         right to request the specified original documents in the correct
         format in all cases where (b) applies, and to refuse applications
         if these documents are not provided as set out in (b). "

15.  It is clear from paragraph 245AA, that  any  documents  submitted  with
    the application will be considered where they are  specified  documents
    and other documents will be considered only where they are submitted in
    accordance with sub-paragraph (b).

16.  At the time the respondent submitted his application to  the  Claimant,
    he did not have the necessary English language qualification.   It  was
    submitted to the Claimant and received by her the  day  after  she  had
    made her decision.

17.  There was no requirement by the Secretary of State to call for  missing
    evidence.  The evidence that was missing were specified documents  that
    were required to be submitted with the application.  The  Claimant  was
    entitled to assume that since the  respondent  had  not  submitted  the
    specified documents, he did not have  them.   Paragraph  245AA  is  not
    intended  to  remedy  a  situation   where   an   appellant,   or   his
    representatives, fail to supply specified documents.

18.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor erred where she said at  paragraph  9
    of her determination that the Claimant's decision was made in ignorance
    of the fact that the respondent had provided a valid TOEIC  certificate
    confirming his proficiency in the English language, so  as  to  satisfy
    the requirements of the Rules.  He had not.   He did not  provide  such
    evidence until the day after the Secretary of State made her  decision.
    The judge further  erred  by  failing  to  examine  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 245AA and to recognise that they do not  apply  to  documents
    specifically required to be submitted with an application.

19.   I  set  aside  the  decision  of  Immigration  Judge   Traynor.    The
    respondent's appeal against the decision of the Claimant is dismissed.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
