
[pic]
IACTH-WYL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01613/2015
                                                               IA/01618/2015
                                                               IA/01619/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 February 2016                   |On 24 March 2016                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                              MRS JOMILA AKTHER
                         mr mohammad sayedur rahman
                                    [t r]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Mustafa of Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.  Jomila Akther and  Mohammad
    Sayedur Rahman are husband and wife born respectively on 15 April  1970
    and 8 April 1973.  [TR], their daughter was born [ ] 2010.

 2. The appellants appealed against the respondent's  decisions  to  remove
    them from the United Kingdom, dated 18 December 2014.  The respondent's
    reasons for refusal are set out in a letter dated 16 December 2014.

 3. Judge Sullivan (the judge) dismissed the appeals because she found that
    the appellants were not credible regarding events in  Bangladesh,  they
    could not satisfy the Immigration  Rules  and  that  the  decision  was
    proportionate in terms  of  Article  8,  bearing  in  mind  the  public
    interest.

 4. The grounds claim the judge materially erred in failing to have  regard
    to the delay in the respondent's decision making and further, failed to
    apply or properly apply the guidance in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.  In
    particular:

    (a)  Private life ties  and  expectations  to  remain  here  must  have
         strengthened over time.

    (b)  The significant delay was such that it detracted  from  "effective
         immigration control" under Article 8(2).

    (c)  The judge failed to have  regard  to  the  fact  that  whilst  the
         application was pending, "...... the third child was born and is in
         fact at school at present".  I take it that is an error and  refers
         to [TR].  The grounds claim that was a material  development  which
         the judge should have taken into account.

 5. As regards  [TR],  there  were  issues  which  the  judge  should  have
    considered and failed in that regard.  In particular,  with  regard  to
    Article 8 outside the Rules.  See [29] SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387
    and [35] of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

 6. Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal.  He considered it  was
    arguable that the judge erred  both  with  regard  to  the  failure  to
    consider  the  delay  and  the  application  of  Section  55  and   the
    implications for [TR] on return.

 7. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Mr Mustafa relied upon the grounds.  The delay  of  four  years  eleven
    months was such that there was  an  expectation  on  the  part  of  the
    appellants that they would not be removed.  Further, the delay  reduced
    the weight to be  addressed  to  the  public  interest.   There  was  a
    conflict between EB (Kosovo) and s.117B(4) which the judge  had  failed
    to resolve.  My  attention  was  drawn  to  the  respondent's  guidance
    "Chapters 46 to 62: Detention and removals".  It was first published on
    11 December 2013 and updated  on  17  December  2015.   In  particular,
    chapter 53 which considers exceptional circumstances.

 9. Mr Mustafa additionally relied upon Forman  (ss.117A-C  considerations)
    [2015]  UKUT  00412  (IAC).   Mr  Mustafa  submitted  that  Forman  was
    authority for the proposition that  additional  considerations  can  be
    taken into account.  Delay should be weighed against s.117B(4).

10. Mr Whitwell submitted that the delay was irrelevant.  As regards  [TR],
    she could not satisfy the seven year period  as  of  the  date  of  the
    application  under  paragraph  276ADE.   As  regards  Article  8,   the
    assessment was as of the date of the hearing.  There  was  no  conflict
    between EB (Kosovo) and s.117B(4).  See  in  that  regard  AM  (s.117B)
    Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. No issue was taken regarding the judge's adverse  credibility  findings
    which stand.

12. There was no issue that the appellants were never able to  satisfy  the
    Rules.  The first and second appellants came here as  visitors.   After
    exhausting  appeal  rights  they  absconded,  subsequently  lodging  an
    application for leave to remain on human rights grounds, the subject of
    the appeals before the judge.

13. There was a delay on the part of  the  respondent  in  considering  the
    application but  the  grounds  fail  to  explain  how  it  was  in  the
    appellants' particular circumstances  that  the  respondent's  guidance
    assisted them. See [19] below. The judge took account of the delay  and
    the arguments put forward on the appellants' behalf including the birth
    of [TR] and her life here at [33] - [35] of the decision.

14. I find the delay was irrelevant. [TR]  could  not  satisfy  the  Rules.
    There was no evidence before the judge nor any claim before me that the
    appellants had been  disadvantaged  by  the  delay  in  the  respondent
    dealing with the application save for the claim before the  judge  that
    they could not obtain work  permits  and  the  submission  made  by  Mr
    Mustafa to me that the delay gave rise  to  an  expectation  that  they
    would not be removed; in my view, there was nothing to suggest such  an
    expectation.

15.  Forman  was  authority  for  the  proposition   that   the   list   of
    considerations in s.117B is not exhaustive.  I do not accept that there
    was any conflict between EB and s.117B(4).

16. The judge carried out a careful and  comprehensive  assessment  of  the
    appellants' circumstances.  Whilst she did not refer to AM or Forman in
    terms, both were of significance in terms of the  appellants'  lack  of
    status  here  and  whether  it  was   reasonable   given   the   family
    circumstances to expect [TR] to return to Bangladesh with her  parents.
    The judge took those circumstances into account at [74] - [76]  of  the
    decision.  Other factors were that  the  family  were  not  financially
    independent and the private life established here both with  regard  to
    the time subsequent to absconding, before they made the application for
    leave and then the period of delay before the respondent dealt with the
    application, were built  up  at  a  time  when  the  first  and  second
    appellants were here without leave.  The judge took into  account  that
    [TR] had no responsibility for decisions taken for her by her  parents.



17. Whilst the judge did not in terms refer to EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874, or to s.55, she made a careful analysis of all of the relevant
    issues and concluded that as the family would be returning  with  [TR],
    which  was  in  her  best  interests,  the  respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate.

18. Arguably, in terms of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the judge did  not
    need to go  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  in  order  to  reach  her
    decision, however, she gave the appellants the benefit of the doubt  in
    that regard and having found that they failed to meet the  requirements
    of the Rules and having considered the factors  relevant  under  s.117B
    she went on to consider the "gap issues" outside the  Rules  identified
    in Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604 (Admin).

19. Whilst the judge did not say so, it was clear from what she had to  say
    regarding the appellants' circumstances that she did not consider  them
    to be exceptional in terms of the guidance, such that the delay  needed
    to be factored into her decision. If she had  considered  the  guidance
    then the fact that  the  appellants'  had  absconded  would  have  been
    adversely significant.

20. I do accept that to the extent that the judge did  not  factor  in  the
    delay on the part of  the  respondent  in  terms  of  the  respondent's
    guidance, the judge erred. Nevertheless, I do not accept that the error
    was material bearing in mind the other findings made by  the  judge  in
    her decision and what I have said above in that regard.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal establishes  no  material  error  of
law and shall stand.



Signed                              Date:  10 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

