
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA010752015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st April 2016                        |On 25th May 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                              MS SALOME KANABO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Turner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 24th  June  1938.   She  is
    now 77 years old.  She appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Taylor sitting at Taylor House on 20th July 2015 in which
    he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of   the
    Respondent dated 17th December 2014.  That decision was  to  refuse  to
    grant the Appellant further leave to remain under Article 8  (right  to
    respect for private and family life).  The Appellant wished  to  remain
    in this country with her husband Mr  Samuel  Sackey  a  United  Kingdom
    citizen ("the Sponsor").  The parties married in Ghana on 16th February
    2011 and the Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 14th July 2014.
     She had been granted a family visit visa valid from 23rd May  to  23rd
    November 2014.

2.   The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on  the  basis  that
    she did not meet the Immigration Rules as her application was submitted
    whilst she was in the United Kingdom as a visitor.  She had  not  lived
    in the United Kingdom for at least twenty years.  She had travelled  to
    the United Kingdom after living in Ghana for 76 years.  The  Respondent
    was not satisfied the Appellant had no remaining  ties  to  Ghana.  The
    Appellant  had  family  and  property  in  Ghana  and  there  were   no
    exceptional circumstances on which to grant the application outside the
    Immigration Rules.

The Hearing at First Instance

3.   The Appellant told the Judge she had a daughter who  had  died  in  the
    United Kingdom in 1999 and was  buried  in  Wandsworth.  The  Appellant
    could not live in Ghana because she wished to have the  opportunity  to
    visit her daughter's grave and place  flowers  there.   She  could  not
    leave her husband to return to Ghana.  She had  been  lied  to  by  her
    husband's lawyer in or about 2014 who incorrectly advised her to  apply
    for a visit visa rather than a settlement visa.

4.   The Sponsor told the Judge that it was on his lawyer's advice that  he,
    the Sponsor applied for a family visit visa for the Appellant to travel
    with him to the United Kingdom following their marriage. His lawyer had
    advised that the Appellant should apply for a visit visa and then apply
    for permanent leave.  They were not interviewed or  questioned  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer they just completed the  application  form  and
    there was no opportunity to explain the  purpose  of  the  visit.   The
    first application for a visa was  refused.   The  parties  remained  in
    Ghana after their marriage until they could both travel to  the  United
    Kingdom in July 2014.  The Sponsor was a lecturer until he  retired  in
    1995.  He had two pensions and an annuity and a current monthly  income
    of �1,250.  He owned his two bedroomed  house  outright.   The  parties
    would not be a financial burden on the State as he  had  never  claimed
    benefit.  The Sponsor also owned his own house in Ghana which was being
    looked after by a caretaker.

5.    In  closing  submissions  the  point  was  made  by  the   Appellant's
    representative that  the  Appellant  had  been  wrongly  advised.   The
    parties had no intention to deceive the immigration  authorities.   The
    Appellant and Sponsor wanted the Appellant to settle but  were  advised
    wrongly to apply for a visit visa instead. The Appellant accepted  that
    she was unable to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules as she
    had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor and applied while  she  had
    that status.

6.   The  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  13  of  his  determination  that  the
    Appellant had failed to demonstrate that she qualified to remain in the
    United Kingdom as a spouse or partner under Appendix FM and  could  not
    benefit from paragraph EX1.  EX1 was not a freestanding Rule and  could
    only be applied if the Appellant met  the  substantive  Rule.   In  any
    event  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to her return to  Ghana.   The  parties  might
    well prefer to live in the UK where the Sponsor had  his  children  and
    grandchildren but both Appellant and Sponsor had homes in  Ghana.   The
    Appellant failed to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  with
    regard to private life.  There were no arguable grounds to grant  leave
    outside the Rules.

7.   In rejecting the Appellant's claim that the lawyer's bad advice  should
    be taken into account the Judge wrote at paragraph 14:

         "The Appellant claims that she travelled to the UK on a visit  visa
         on the advice of a lawyer who said that she could  then  apply  for
         indefinite leave in the UK.  The limitation on applying  for  leave
         as a spouse while in the UK as a visitor or  with  leave  for  less
         than six months is not a new provision and should be well-known  to
         any professional advisor.   The  Appellant  has  not  produced  any
         written advice from the lawyer to confirm her account of the advice
         that she was given.  Her evidence that it was  her  genuine  belief
         that she could apply for indefinite leave while  in  the  UK  as  a
         visitor is undermined by her failure to disclose the  true  purpose
         of her visit during the application process.   On  the  balance  of
         probabilities I am not satisfied that a professional advisor  would
         have given this advice on an unqualified basis without pointing out
         the risk that further leave may be refused".

     The Judge dismissed the appeal under both  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Appellant's grounds of onward appeal argued  that  the  application
    for a family visit had been made  upon  the  advice  of  the  Sponsor's
    lawyer Wisdom Abordo of Alpha Legal Services.  The visa application was
    refused twice "even after an appeal  to  Leicester  Home  Office".  The
    Sponsor  had  subsequently  complained  about  the  advisor.   A  third
    application for a visit visa resulted in the grant of a family visa  to
    the Appellant.  The visa was issued for six months scheduled to  expire
    on 23rd November 2014.  After  the  Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom the couple went to see the lawyer who said  he  was  making  an
    application to the Respondent.  The Sponsor produced a letter from  the
    Office of the Immigration Services Commission dated 20th  October  2015
    stating that  Mr  Abordo  had  pleaded  guilty  to  three  offences  of
    providing unqualified immigration advice contrary to Section 91 of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on 2nd October 2015.  He was  sentenced
    to 26 weeks' imprisonment.

9.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin sitting in the First-tier on  20th  January
    2016.  In refusing permission to appeal she  stated  that  the  grounds
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with the  decision  that  there
    were no compelling reasons to justify allowing the appeal on Article  8
    grounds.  The Judge had given detailed reasons why there was nothing to
    prevent this couple albeit elderly from living  in  Ghana.   They  were
    both of Ghanaian origin; both had property and  family  there  and  had
    lived there together for three years after they married.  She added  at
    paragraph 4 of her refusal "They were also  less  than  candid  in  the
    Appellant obtaining leave to  enter  as  a  visitor  when  it  was  her
    intention to remain".  There were no compelling reasons  to  allow  the
    appeal outside the Rules.

10.  The Appellant renewed her application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and the matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer
    on 15th February 2016.  Granting permission to appeal she wrote:

         "In finding an absence of exceptional or  compelling  circumstances
         it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
         account that the  individual  who  initially  advised  the  elderly
         Appellant and her husband that the  Appellant  should  enter  as  a
         visitor as opposed to a spouse was being investigated by the  OISC.
         The FTT was not satisfied that a professional  advisor  would  have
         given the advice claimed.  The FTT arguably  failed  to  take  into
         account  the  evidence  before  it  that  the  matter   was   being
         investigated by the OISC.  Since the date of decision the Appellant
         has provided an OISC letter dated 20th October  2015  stating  that
         the individual who advised the  Appellant  has  been  convicted  of
         providing unqualified immigration advice or services and  sentenced
         to 26 weeks' imprisonment.  The Appellant's representatives  should
         be prepared to argue why  such  post-decision  evidence  should  be
         taken into account when determining whether the FTT erred in law at
         an oral hearing."

11.   In  her  onward  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  grant
    permission at first instance the Appellant  submitted that  there  were
    compelling circumstances in her case given her and the  Sponsor's  ages
    and the strength of the Sponsor's ties to the United Kingdom  of  which
    he was a citizen.  The balancing act required in Article  8  cases  was
    not properly applied by the Judge and  the  onward  grounds  of  appeal
    proceeded to cite at some length from a number of decided cases.  These
    grounds of appeal were lodged on 1st September 2015 to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  They should have been lodged by  28th  August  2015  and  no
    explanation why they were late was ever given.  For those reasons Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin refused to  extend  time.   The  point  does  not
    appear to have been dealt with by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer when she
    overturned that decision and granted permission  to  appeal.   For  the
    avoidance of doubt I formally extend time to the Appellant to lodge her
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

12.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  4th
    March 2016.  She citied the case of BT [2004] UKIAT 00311  that  if  an
    appeal was based in whole or in part on allegations about  the  conduct
    of former representatives there must be evidence that those allegations
    have been put to the former representative and  the  Tribunal  must  be
    shown either the response or correspondence indicating that  there  has
    been no  response.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  determination  did  not
    disclose any evidence put before  the  Tribunal  that  would  meet  the
    requirements identified in BT. The permission only referred to a letter
    confirming an investigation.  It was thus not open to the First-tier to
    make a finding of fact against the lawyer.  Nor  was  it  open  to  the
    Tribunal to regard the Appellant's  allegation  against  the  Sponsor's
    former  lawyer  as  a  compelling  circumstance  that   would   warrant
    consideration outside the Rules.

13.  In any event at paragraph  15  the  Judge  had  considered  the  matter
    outside the Rules giving adequate reasons for finding that removal  was
    proportionate.  It was unlikely that the financial  requirements  would
    have been met in any event and the Appellant did  not  appear  to  have
    contested this submission.  The Appellant had not argued that she could
    meet the requirements of an entry clearance  application  nor  was  any
    reliance placed upon the cases of  Chen  or  Chikwamba.   Even  if  the
    lawyer was at fault there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was
    prejudiced by the advice.

The Hearing before Me

14.  For the Appellant Counsel argued that the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  had
    been badly misled.  Their representative  had  deceived  them  and  had
    received 26 weeks' imprisonment on the basis of breaking the 1999  Act.
    Were these individuals in their 20's  to  40's  and  were  professional
    people one might be somewhat less sympathetic for them  but  they  were
    approximately 75 years of age, two very old people who had fallen  into
    the hands of disreputable representatives. Dealing with the preliminary
    point raised in the grant of permission the new material now  available
    went to the core of the Judge's findings.  The Judge had said at  first
    instance that there was no evidence of dishonesty and had  treated  the
    Appellant's then representative as a qualified  advisor.   The  advisor
    should have known that he was not entitled to take the Appellant's  and
    Sponsor's money.

15.  Counsel indicated  he  was  not  in  a  position  to  say  whether  the
    Appellant would have met the Immigration  Rules  at  the  time  of  the
    application as that was not information that he had been given  in  his
    instructions.  What he had was evidence which showed that the Appellant
    and Sponsor had  been  deceived.   There  was  clear  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor's property and bank statements and  money  going  in  and  out.
    There was enough therefore to show  that  the  Appellant's  application
    would not have been hopeless (if she had applied for entry clearance as
    a spouse).  That was more properly a matter for another  Judge  but  in
    the meantime there was a huge stain on the characters of the  Appellant
    and the Sponsor.  One could say there  was  every  likelihood  that  an
    application for entry clearance would have  succeeded  as  the  Sponsor
    owned his own property in the UK and in Ghana.  Money was not an issue.



16.  There was something exceptional about this case.  Whilst on  the  basis
    of the Appellant's status as a visitor she could  never  have  met  the
    Immigration Rules the only reason why she  was  in  that  position  was
    because of the dishonesty of the  representative.   The  Appellant  and
    Sponsor did not simply make an allegation  of  dishonesty  against  the
    representative they took steps to report the matter to the OISC.   What
    they did was in the wider public interest in reporting the lawyer.  The
    Respondent would want people to do that.  The focus in this case was on
    the exceptional circumstances.  Normally evidence after the  event  was
    not  normally  allowed  in  but  this  evidence  showed   the   Judge's
    conclusions to be wrong. This was not intended as a  criticism  of  the
    Judge.  There was not the evidence before him but now  there  was  such
    evidence.  The question was what would the Upper Tribunal do with  that
    evidence?  The  appeal  should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be decided again.  If this was a judicial review  the  test
    would be whether this was  a  material  fact  which  could  lead  to  a
    different result which was the case here.

17.  In reply for the Respondent it was argued that the error  made  by  the
    Judge in saying that the Appellants were not misled was  not  material.
    The case was never put in the First-tier on that basis that but for the
    bad advice they would  have  succeeded.   The  Judge  was  entitled  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules  which  he  did.   Any  error  was
    immaterial.  It was suggested that because the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    had been given poor advice that was a compelling reason  to  allow  the
    appeal outside the Rule.  Whilst it might  engender  sympathy  for  the
    Appellant the argument was not sustainable as there was  nothing  wrong
    with what the Judge did.  If there was an  error  of  law  it  was  not
    material.

18.  In conclusion  for  the  Appellant  Counsel  argued  that  the  Ladd  v
    Marshall test was met.  The Respondent  appeared  to  accept  that  the
    Judge had got it wrong in the fact that the Judge did not believe  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor were deceived.  But for the visit visa  issue
    they would have succeeded.  The Judge had made an error  of  law.   The
    decision should be set aside and sent back.  There was  evidence  which
    pointed to a prima facie  case.   The  parties  had  sufficient  assets
    although Counsel conceded that that had not been shown in a  clear  and
    coherent manner in the statements. The Appellant's case would  be  much
    stronger if there was a schedule before the court showing that she  met
    all the requirements. Nevertheless they did meet all  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM.

Findings

19.  In or about 2014 the Sponsor sought advice from a Mr  Abordo  who  held
    himself out to be an immigration law advisor.  He advised the Appellant
    and Sponsor that the Appellant should apply for a visit  visa  to  gain
    entry to the United Kingdom.  This application was rejected by the Home
    Office but it appears that the application was repeated at least  twice
    before finally being granted.  The  Appellant  duly  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom with the Sponsor and immediately made an application for
    indefinite leave to remain whilst here.  This she was not  entitled  to
    do on the basis that her status was as a visitor.  The  correct  course
    of action would have been to have applied for leave to enter the United
    Kingdom as the spouse of the Sponsor.  Had this been refused  it  would
    have generated an out-of-country appeal.

20.  The Appellant and Sponsor were unhappy to discover that the  result  of
    acting on the advice given to them by Mr Abordo was that the  Appellant
    could no longer make an application for leave to remain whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom. They complained to the Office of  Information  Services
    Commissioner who investigated and found that in  taking  the  Sponsor's
    money Mr Abordo had committed one or more offences under the 1999  Act.
    He was successfully prosecuted for that.

21.  The Appellant's case is that she and the Sponsor are elderly  and  thus
    vulnerable to being deceived but their main complaint is that the Judge
    on the basis of the evidence before him at the time was  not  satisfied
    that the Appellant and Sponsor had been given  the  wrong  advice;  had
    they been given the correct advice they could have succeeded under  the
    Rules.  The Judge formed the view that  it  was  so  obvious  that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor could not succeed in the way that had been chosen
    for them (applying for a visit visa and then once she was here applying
    for leave to remain) that the explanation of  being  deceived  did  not
    have the ring of truth about it.

22.  The Tribunal is not in a position to know whether Mr Abordo was or  was
    not otherwise competent (as opposed to dishonest).  There seems  little
    doubt that the Appellant and Sponsor were given incorrect advice by  Mr
    Abordo (since the visit visa route did not lead to a further  grant  of
    leave under the  Rules)  but  there  is  no  indication  that  had  the
    Appellant been given  correct  advice  her  position  would  have  been
    materially different.  That is to say there is  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant could meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  including  the
    financial requirements as at 2014 when she applied for a visit visa  if
    instead she had applied for leave to enter as a spouse.

23.  Counsel frankly accepted that he did  not  have  evidence  which  would
    show that  the  Appellant  could  have  met  the  financial  and  other
    requirements of Appendix FM as at 2014.  In my view this  evidence  was
    crucial.  As I have indicated I am not in a position to say whether  Mr
    Abordo looking at the  situation  could  see  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor could not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and  therefore
    advised them to carry out a course of action which would seek to  evade
    immigration control albeit without them knowing that that was what  was
    happening. The  evasion  was  by  the  device  of  applying  for  entry
    clearance as a visitor and then making an  application  once  here  for
    leave to remain. To conclude that about Mr Abordo would be  speculation
    on the Tribunal's part. All one can say is  that  he  dishonestly  held
    himself out as a person who could charge for immigration advice when he
    could not.

24.  The burden of establishing that the Appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    Rules rests on the Appellant and that means that some  evidence  should
    have been produced to the Judge at first instance to show that but  for
    the incorrect advice given by Mr Abordo (whatever  his  motivation  for
    that  incorrect  advice  was)  the  Appellant  would   otherwise   have
    succeeded. The Judge's suspicion of some degree  of  collusion  between
    the Appellant and Sponsor on the one hand and Mr Abordo on the other in
    so arranging matters that the Appellant came into the United Kingdom as
    a visitor and overstayed was an error but the question I have decide is
    whether it was a material error.

25.  Given the paucity of evidence  before  the  Judge  that  the  Appellant
    could have otherwise succeeded if she had put in an application to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in correct form it is difficult to see how  the
    Judge's error was material in this case.  Counsel  suggested  that  the
    matter should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  evidence
    to be gathered to show the financial position of the Sponsor in clearer
    terms with a view to showing that the  Appellant  could  have  met  the
    requirements in 2014.  That is in reality an invitation to the Tribunal
    to go on a fishing expedition to look for evidence which  might  be  of
    assistance to the Appellant.  If the Appellant wishes to say  that  she
    would have been eligible for entry clearance but for the advice  of  Mr
    Abordo she should be in a position to provide evidence  of  that.   All
    instead that the Appellant has provided evidence of is  the  conviction
    and sentence to prison of Mr Abordo.   That  does  not  take  the  case
    materially further. The evidence  of  Mr  Abordo's  dishonesty  is  not
    controversial but its effect on the merits is limited.

26.  It is difficult to see what detriment the  Appellant  has  suffered  in
    this case given that she is now in the United Kingdom since it  is  not
    at all clear that she could have entered  the  United  Kingdom  legally
    with leave to enter as a  spouse.  The  question  of  a  stain  on  the
    character of either Appellant  or  Spouse  does  not  arise  since  the
    Appellant's honesty is not in issue.

27.  The Tribunal cannot speculate on  what  the  Appellant's  status  might
    have been in the absence of some evidence that the Appellant could have
    achieved a different status to what she currently has,  namely  someone
    who has overstayed a visit visa. Any consideration of  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules has still
    to be looked at through the prism of the fact that she cannot meet  the
    Immigration Rules.

28.  Even if the Judge was perhaps  a  little  harsh  on  the  Appellant  at
    paragraph  14  of  the  determination  in  its  implication  that   the
    Appellant's credibility was undermined, this does not alter  the  basic
    point that the Appellant cannot show  she  was  otherwise  entitled  to
    enter the country as a spouse  because  there  was  no  clear  evidence
    presented at first instance (or indeed on Ladd and Marshall  principles
    to  me)  that  she  could  have  satisfied  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules at the time  she  made  her  applications  for  entry
    clearance.

29.  The Judge considered  whether  there  were  exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances which would lead him to consider the appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  For the reasons he gave at paragraph  15  he  found
    that there were no such circumstances.  The appeal before  me  did  not
    engage with that aspect of the case the point of appeal being that  the
    exceptional circumstance in this case such that the  appeal  should  be
    allowed outside the Rules was that the Appellant and Sponsor were  both
    elderly and had been the victim of deceit.  I do not accept  the  force
    of that argument because I do not find that the  Appellant  could  show
    that she would otherwise have been eligible for entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse under Appendix FM (particularly the financial  requirements).  I
    do not accept the argument that because of the incorrect implication of
    collusion the Judge's findings under Article 8 were thereby infected. I
    find that the Judge's summary of his decision under Article 8  and  his
    finding of a lack of compelling circumstances were adequately  reasoned
    (see also Upper Tribunal Judge Martin's summary at paragraph 9  above).
    There were many reasons why this appeal could not succeed  outside  the
    Rules. The Appellant had failed to meet the requirements of  the  Rules
    and has not produced evidence to show that she  could  have  met  those
    requirements.  Any error of law in the Judge's determination  was  thus
    not a material one.  I therefore dismiss the appeal in this case.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal against it.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 10th day of May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable and the appeal has been dismissed there  could  be  no
fee award.


Signed this 10th day of May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

