
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/01157/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16th March 2018                        |   On 11th April 2018             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                              Mr Muhammad Bilal
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy, Counsel, instructed by SG Law
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 31st October 1985.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history  dating  back  to  first
    entering the UK on a student visa back  in  September  2005.   On  24th
    March 2015 the Appellant made a human rights application for  leave  to
    remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  claiming  to  have
    established private and family life.  That application was  refused  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 12th February 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Nash sitting at Hatton Cross on 4th August  2017.   In  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 29th August the Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed.

 3. On 9th September 2017 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 11th  January  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Shimmin granted permission to appeal.  Judge Shimmin recorded that  the
    grounds requesting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal made four
    submissions as to where the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred.  These
    were:-

      a) That the judge had failed to follow the case of  SF  and  others  v
         Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (Guidance,  post-2014
         Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC);

      b) failed to have regard to whether there would be  a  breach  of  the
         Zambrano principle if the Appellant's British child is removed;

      c) failed to show powerful or exceptional or  reasonable  reasons  for
         justifying the removal of the British child;

      d)  failed  to  show  sufficient  reasons  as  to  why  it  would   be
         proportionate for the Appellant's wife to leave  the  UK  with  the
         Appellant.

 4. No Rule 24 response has been lodged by the Secretary of State.   It  is
    on that basis that the appeal comes before me to determine  whether  or
    not there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his  instructed  Counsel,  Mr
    Murphy.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, Mr Tarlow.

Relevant Case Law

 5. The relevant case law to this appeal are to be found in the head  notes
    of SF and others and Sanade.  They recite as follows:-

    SF and others v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (Guidance,
    post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC):

         "Even in the absence of a 'not in accordance with the  law'  Ground
         of Appeal, the Tribunal ought to  take  the  Secretary  of  State's
         guidance into account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome
         in the instant case.  Only in that way can consistency be  obtained
         between those cases that do, and those  cases  that  do  not,  come
         before the Tribunal."

    Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48
    (IAC):

         "(5) Ruiz Zambrano now makes it  clear  that  where  the  child  or
             indeed the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore
             a citizen of the European Union, as a matter of EU law  it  is
             not possible to require the  family  as  a  unit  to  relocate
             outside of the European Union or for the Secretary of State to
             submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so."

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Murphy relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He addresses  each  section
    of those grounds in turn.   Firstly  he  submits  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge materially erred as his conclusions are contrary to  the
    guidance given in SF and others as this case involves a British  child.
    He takes me to paragraphs 7 and 8 of that decision.

 7. Secondly, he submits that the First-tier Tribunal has not had regard as
    to whether there would be a breach of the  Zambrano  principle  if  the
    British child is removed and thirdly,  that  the  judge  has  erred  in
    failing to show powerful or exceptional reasons justifying the  removal
    or reasonableness of removal of the British child, applying the test in
    MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  Finally, he takes me  to  the
    issue relating to insurmountable obstacles and Article  8  outside  the
    Rules and submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed to have
    sufficient regard to the circumstances of the Appellant's  spouse,  who
    was a recognised victim of domestic violence and was granted indefinite
    leave to remain and that the judge has not provided sufficient  reasons
    as to why it would be proportionate for her to live with the  Appellant
    in his country of return.

 8. Mr Murphy takes me against those basic submissions to the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge, pointing out that at  paragraph  47  the
    judge  has  failed  to  give  any  consideration  whatsoever   to   the
    considerations to be found in paragraph 117B(6)  and  at  paragraph  51
    whilst the judge has given a consideration  of  ZH  (Tanzania)  he  has
    failed to make considerations based on  the  premise  of  the  Zambrano
    principle.  He relies on the above-mentioned head note in  Sanade.   He
    submits that it was an error to contend that the child, being a British
    citizen, could leave the UK and that this clearly is in  error  to  the
    principles of Sanade and Zambrano.  He asked me to  find  firstly  that
    there are material errors of law and secondly to  remake  the  decision
    allowing the appeal.

 9. In brief response, Mr Tarlow takes me to paragraphs 52 and  53  of  the
    decision, submitting that this is a child of very young age and that as
    a result has minimal, if any ties, to a particular society and culture.
     He submits that there has been no material error  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to make the findings that he did.   However,  he  acknowledges
    that he has no submissions to make with regard to the Zambrano point.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that there are material errors of law in this  decision.
    Whilst  acknowledging  that  the  judge  has  given  consideration   at
    paragraphs 52 and 53 to the age of the child the judge  has  failed  to
    follow the basic principles of Zambrano that as  a  matter  of  law  it
    would not be possible to require the  family  as  a  unit  to  relocate
    outside the EU or for the Secretary of State to submit that it would be
    reasonable for them to do so where the child is a  British  citizen  or
    the remaining spouse is a British citizen.  Mr Tarlow has assisted  the
    Tribunal considerably in his approach in that  he  has  not  sought  to
    argue this point and whilst not going so far as to make concessions  he
    points out that he has nothing further to add on the point.   In  these
    circumstances the judge has materially erred in law and I set aside the
    decision.

The Remaking of the Decision

13. I am asked by both parties that in  the  event  that  I  find  material
    errors of law that I remake the decision.  That I now do.  This is  not
    a case where there has ever been any criminality and there is no public
    interest to be found with regard to the removal of a  parent.   I  note
    the factual circumstances of this particular family and indeed it would
    be pointless removing the Appellant to Pakistan bearing in mind that it
    appears he has never  actually  lived  there.   In  all  circumstances,
    following the principles of Zambrano and Sanade, the  correct  approach
    is to remake the decision, allowing the appeal.



Decision

The decision is remade, allowing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
