
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/01510/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 4 February 2016                        |     On 22 February 2016          |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H J E LATTER


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              SALIM AHMED KHAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms C Bexson, counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons,
solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro) allowing an appeal by the applicant
    against the Secretary of State's decision  made  on  18  December  2014
    refusing to vary his leave to remain and to remove him from the UK.  In
    this decision I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal, the applicant as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The background to this appeal can briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 21 November  1971.  He
    entered the UK on 21 April  1996  with  entry  clearance  as  a  family
    visitor and thereafter remained  without  leave.  On  25  May  2005  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence
    and under article 8 and on 10 October 2011 his application was  refused
    but the respondent exercised her discretion in the  appellant's  favour
    and he was granted discretionary leave to remain until 9 October 2014.

3.   Following this grant the appellant has returned to Bangladesh on  three
    occasions from 27 November 2011 to 22 February 2012, from 7 August 2012
    to 18 September 2012 and from 25 June 2013 to 21 September 2013. During
    his last visit he married and his wife has four children aged between 7
    and 15. On his return on 21 September 2013 the appellant was stopped by
    immigration officers, questioned and interviewed. On 1 October 2014  he
    applied for further leave to remain.

4.   This application was refused for the reasons set out  in  the  decision
    letter of 18  December  2014.  The  respondent  noted  that  since  the
    appellant had been granted  discretionary  leave  he  had  returned  to
    Bangladesh on three separate occasions and had formed a family life  by
    marrying his wife who has four children.  It  was  her  view  that  the
    appellant  had  established  family  life  with  his  wife   and   four
    stepchildren and she was not satisfied that the grounds on which he had
    previously been granted discretionary leave is still persisted. She was
    not satisfied that  he  was  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules for a grant of leave in relation to his private  life
    or that there were any exceptional circumstances justifying a grant  of
    leave to remain outside the rules.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

5.   The appellant appealed against this decision  and  gave  oral  evidence
    through an interpreter at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    He confirmed the chronology of his arrival in the UK and the subsequent
    grant of discretionary leave and accepted that he had  family  life  in
    Bangladesh with his new family. He hoped that he would be able to bring
    them to join him in the UK where he  had  a  well  established  private
    life. He had been in the UK for 18 years and believed that all his ties
    were here such as friends, relatives and employment [16]-[18].

6.   The judge set out the relevant  part  of  the  respondent's  policy  on
    discretionary leave  at  [23]  noting  that  according  to  the  policy
    guidance if there  were  any  significant  changes  in  an  applicant's
    circumstance's the application for a grant of discretionary  leave  was
    to be refused [27]. She found that the appellant's marriage was such  a
    significant change and that it was reasonable  for  the  respondent  to
    refuse a further grant of discretionary leave [28]. She found that  the
    appellant could not bring himself within the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE. He had lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years  and
    was unable to meet the requirement of showing that there would be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Bangladesh.

7.   The judge then referred to R (otao Ganesabalan) v  Secretary  of  State
    [2014] EWHC 2712 relying on that  judgment  for  the  proposition  that
    there was always a "second stage" in which the respondent must consider
    the exercise of discretion outside the rules. The judge therefore  went
    on to undertake an article 8 assessment  following  the  step  by  step
    approach set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

8.   The judge accepted that article 8 was  engaged  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's private life and that removal would be in  accordance  with
    the law and for a legitimate purpose. The final  question  was  whether
    the respondent's decision was proportionate. The judge referred to  the
    provisions of s.117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended. She noted that there was no evidence before  her  that
    the appellant was able to speak English but she was  expected  that  he
    must have achieved good understanding of  English  language  and  about
    life in the UK having lived and worked in the UK over the  past  18  or
    more years [52]. She was satisfied that the appellant had continued  to
    be financially independent as there was no evidence that he had claimed
    public funds. There was documentary evidence  about  previous  earnings
    and she accepted that the appellant was willing and able to work in the
    future [53].

9.   The judge concluded her decision as follows:


         "54. The appellant was  granted  three  years  Discretionary  Leave
        which was up to October 2014. He had a reasonable expectation  when
        he  made  his  application  that  he  would  be   granted   further
        discretionary leave having lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  18
        years. Although he visited Bangladesh on three occasions, following
        his grant of leave and even got  married  on  the  last  visit,  he
        viewed the United Kingdom as his country of residence and  returned
        to the United Kingdom to the private life he  had  established,  at
        the end of each visit.


         55.  I have taken note of the fact the appellant has a wish for his
        family to join him but I bear in mind that this  is  not  automatic
        and his newly acquired family will have to meet the requirements of
        the immigration rules before they can do so. I do not find the fact
        that the appellant has established  a  family  life  in  Bangladesh
        should prevent him from enjoying the long established private  life
        he has formed in  the  United  Kingdom  which  the  respondent  had
        acknowledged by her grant of Discretionary Leave in October 2011.


         56.  I find that after 19 years living and working  in  the  United
        Kingdom the appellant would have formed very strong  bonds  and  in
        the particular circumstances of this case, where he  would  not  be
        reliant upon public funds, it is  disproportionate  to  remove  him
        from the United Kingdom."


     Accordingly the appeal was allowed under article 8.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

10.  In the grounds it is argued that the judge erred by failing to  conduct
    the article 8 assessment through the lens of  the  rules,  an  approach
    endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Secretary  of  State  v  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ  387  at  44.  Private  life  arising  from  length  of
    residence in the UK was clearly  catered  for  in  the  rules  and  the
    appellant could not meet those requirements.  Secondly,  it  is  argued
    that despite reciting the provisions of section 117B the  judge  failed
    to acknowledge that as a starting point the tribunal  was  required  to
    attach little weight to private life  established  at  a  time  when  a
    person's immigration status was precarious or to have due regard to all
    the public interest factors.

11.  Thirdly, it is argued that the judge erred  by  giving  weight  in  the
    proportionality assessment to  the  claim  that  the  appellant  had  a
    reasonable expectation that he would be granted further leave:  he  had
    no such expectation not least as there had been a  material  change  of
    circumstances. Finally, the grounds assert that  whilst  the  appellant
    would have formed some private life in the UK this was limited  to  his
    working connections and friendships as a result of  his  residence  and
    that he would be  able  to  establish  a  comparable  private  life  in
    Bangladesh with the support of his new family unit.  The  circumstances
    advanced  by  the  appellant  in  support  of  this  application   were
    insufficient to disclose a disproportionate breach when compared to the
    relevant legitimate aim.

12.  Ms Isherwood  adopted  her  grounds.   She  made  the  point  that  the
    appellant had spent a number of years in the UK when he had  no  lawful
    right to remain and the limited leave granted was precarious. He  could
    have had  no  expectation  of  a  grant  of  further  leave.  His  only
    expectation was for a proper consideration under the relevant rules and
    policies and the judge had accepted that the respondent's decision  had
    been reasonable. The judge had failed to give proper weight to the fact
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of the rules contrary  to
    the judgment in SS (Congo).

13.  Ms Bexson submitted that the judge was entitled to reach  her  decision
    on the available evidence. It had been open to her to find that article
    8 claim was reasonably arguable and she had looked at  all  matters  in
    the round when assessing at [46] - [48] whether article 8 was  engaged.
    She had considered the provisions of section 117B.  There  was  nothing
    unusual in someone living in this country but getting  married  abroad.
    The judge had been entitled to conclude that the appellant was able  to
    speak English and was financially independent and to take those factors
    into account in his favour. She argued that the  judge  had  considered
    all relevant matters  and  reached  a  decision  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

14.  The issue for me is whether the  judge  erred  in  law  such  that  her
    decision should be set aside. I am  satisfied  that  she  has  for  the
    following reasons. The judge relied on Ganesabalan as authority for the
    proposition that she was required to carry out an article 8  assessment
    but it appears that she was not referred to SS (Congo) where the  Court
    of Appeal reviewed the  authorities  about  how  article  8  should  be
    approached in the  light  of  the  changes  to  the  immigration  rules
    introduced in 2012.

15.  At [44] of the judgment the Court said that the proper  approach  would
    always be to identify firstly the substantive content of  the  relevant
    immigration  rules  both  to  see  if  an  applicant  satisfied   those
    conditions and to  assess  the  force  of  the  public  interest  given
    expression in those rules which would  be  relevant  to  the  balancing
    exercise under article 8. If an applicant did not satisfy the rules  he
    might seek to maintain  a  claim  for  leave  outside  the  substantive
    provisions of the rules under article  8  if  there  was  a  reasonably
    arguable case which had not already been sufficiently dealt with  under
    the substantive provisions of the rules. In considering that  case  the
    individual interests of the applicant and others whose article 8 rights
    were in issue should be balanced against the public interest, including
    as expressed in the rules, in order to make  an  assessment  whether  a
    refusal was disproportionate.

16.  In summary, when assessing proportionality, proper  consideration  must
    be given to the public interest which includes the immigration rules as
    they set  out  the  respondent's  policy  on  the  requirements  to  be
    fulfilled before leave is granted. There  is  nothing  in  the  judge's
    decision to indicate that any weight was given to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of   paragraph   276ADE
    particularly in the light of her findings of fact  that  he  would  not
    face very significant difficulties on return to Bangladesh and that the
    respondent's  decision  to  refuse  further  discretionary  leave   was
    reasonable.

17.  I am also satisfied that the judge failed to  take  into  account  that
    the appellant's private life was established at a time  both  when  his
    presence in the UK was unlawful and when  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious: see AM (S.117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  where  the
    tribunal held that a person's immigration status is precarious if their
    continued presence in the UK will be dependent upon obtaining a further
    grant of leave. The judge also failed to give proper weight to the fact
    that the appellant's circumstances had drastically  changed  since  the
    grant of discretionary leave. He now has a family  life  in  Bangladesh
    with his wife and four stepchildren. No consideration appears  to  have
    been given to how that impacted on his  private  life  in  the  UK  and
    whether and to what extent he could and  would  have  private  life  in
    Bangladesh. Finally, I am satisfied that the judge erred in by  placing
    reliance on the fact that the appellant had  a  reasonable  expectation
    that he would be granted further discretionary leave. It has  not  been
    suggested or argued that appellant had a  legitimate  expectation.  The
    appellant may have had a hope of a further grant  but  his  expectation
    could only be  that  a  further  application  would  be  considered  in
    accordance with the current rules and policies.

18.  I am therefore satisfied that the judge  erred  in  law  by  leaving  a
    number of relevant matters out of account and by  taking  into  account
    the appellant's expectation of a further grant.  The  errors  are  such
    that the decision should be set aside. Both representatives agreed that
    the proper course would be for me to re-make the decision in the  light
    of the fact that there had been no significant change in  circumstances
    since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and no application has
    been made to adduce further evidence. Ms Isherwood adopted her previous
    submissions and argued in particular that little weight should be given
    to private life developed when his leave was precarious. Ms Bexson also
    relied on the fact that  the  judge  had  found  the  appellant  to  be
    credible  and  the  fact  that  he  had  been   granted   three   years
    discretionary leave following the period when he had overstayed.

Assessment of whether the appeal should be allowed or dismissed

19.  It has not been disputed that article 8 is  engaged  as  the  appellant
    has established private life  in  the  UK  and  that  the  respondent's
    decision to remove him would be an interference with  that  right.  The
    decision is in accordance with the law and  is  for  a  legitimate  aim
    within the provisions of article 8 (2). The sole issue is  whether  the
    decision is proportionate to that aim.

20.  In carrying out that assessment I must have regard  to  the  provisions
    of s.117A(3) of the 2002 Act and when  assessing  proportionality  take
    proper regard of the public interest factors set out in s.117B. In [52]
    and [53] the First-tier Tribunal judge accepted that the appellant must
    have achieved a good understanding of the English language and of  life
    in the UK and that he had been financially independent having worked in
    the past and she accepted that he was willing and able to work  in  the
    future and in consequence there would be no reliance on  public  funds.
    There is no reason to take any different view on those factors.

21.   However,  s117B  also  provides  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest and that little weight is
    to be given to a private life established when a  person's  immigration
    status was precarious. The appellant's  private  life  was  established
    both when he had no lawful right to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    period after the expiry of his leave to remain as a  visitor  following
    his arrival in April 1996 and  the  grant  of  discretionary  leave  in
    October 2011, and then in the period of discretionary leave, which  was
    also time when his leave was precarious and dependent upon the  outcome
    of a further application. Therefore, only little weight is to be  given
    to his private life established in  these  circumstances.  In  addition
    proper weight has to be given to the public interest in the maintenance
    of effective immigration control.

22.  The judge gave weight to the fact that the appellant had  a  reasonable
    expectation that when he made his application he would granted  further
    discretionary leave having lived in the  UK  for  18  years  [54].  She
    commented that although he had visited Bangladesh on three occasions he
    had returned to the private life he had established in the  UK  at  the
    end of each visit. However, it is not argued that the appellant  had  a
    legitimate  expectation,  simply  a  reasonable  expectation  but  that
    expectation was limited to having a  decision  assessed  in  accordance
    with  current  rules  and  policies.  The  judge  accepted   that   the
    respondent's decision to refuse further leave was reasonable  [28]  and
    it must follow that the appellant received a decision under the  policy
    properly open to the respondent.

23.  Further and more significantly the appellant was not able to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules. This is a factor must be given proper weight
    in assessing whether the respondent's decision was  proportionate.  The
    appellant's case was based in substance on his length of residence  and
    the rules have set out the circumstances in which such a claim will  be
    granted. The appellant failed to meet those requirements.

24.  The judge said in [55] that she did not find that  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had established  a  family  life  in  Bangladesh  should  him
    prevent from enjoying the long established private life he  had  formed
    in  the  UK  as  acknowledged  by  the  respondent  in  her  grant   of
    discretionary leave on October 2011. However, this fails to  take  into
    account the significant change  of  circumstances  in  the  appellant's
    private and family life  following  his  marriage  in  Bangladesh.  The
    strength of his family life with his  wife  and  four  stepchildren  in
    Bangladesh is a family bond which should properly be taken into account
    in the assessment of proportionality.  When the appellant's private and
    family life is looked at as a whole, his family life in Bangladesh  and
    the fact that there are no significant obstacles to  him  reintegrating
    there is a factor of greater weight than his continuing private life in
    the UK.  Taking this into account  together  with  the  fact  that  the
    appellant cannot meet the requirements of the rules  and  will  have  a
    private life in Bangladesh, I find that the  respondent's  decision  is
    proportionate.

25.  In summary, looking at the evidence as a whole I am satisfied that  the
    respondent's  decision  was  proportionate  to  a  legitimate  aim.   I
    therefore substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.

Decision

26.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and I set aside  the  decision.  I
    re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal. No anonymity
    order was made in the First-tier Tribunal and  no  further  application
    has been made. No application has been made in relation to costs.



Signed   H J E Latter


H J  E  Latter                                           Date:  15  February
    2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
