

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/01889/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 September 2013                          |On 20th September 2013       |
|Prepared 16 September 2013                    |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                              MD AMINUR RAHMAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chowdhury, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash promulgated on 31 May 2013  in  which
    he dismissed the appeal against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  to
    refuse to vary the appellant's leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  Student
    Migrant pursuant to paragraphs 245ZX(i) and 322(1A) of the  Immigration
    Rules. The judge did, however, allow the appellant's appeal against the
    decision of the respondent  to  make  removal  directions  pursuant  to
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.   That
    decision is not challenged by the respondent.

 2. The appellant's case is that he is entitled to further leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 Student Migrant on the basis that he had a  valid  CAS  and
    was in possession of the required funds for the relevant period.

 3. The respondent refused the application  on  the  basis  that  the  bank
    statement from Prime Bank supplied by the appellant as evidence of  the
    funds available to him  was  not  genuine  and  therefore  he  was  not
    entitled to the 10 points claimed under Appendix C of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  She concluded also that as the bank statement had been  checked
    with the issuing body who confirmed that the  documents  had  not  been
    issued, that the appellant had used false documents in support  of  his
    application and thus it fell to be refused under paragraph  322(1A)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. The appeal was first listed for hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 12 April 2013 but it was adjourned to a later date at the request of
    the appellant's solicitors on the basis they  were  seeking  additional
    time to verify the bank statement.

 5. Judge Shamash dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules, finding
    that:

      i) when an allegation of dishonesty is made it is for  the  respondent
         to establish that there has been some dishonesty on the part of the
         appellant [15];

     ii) the appellant had not put forward any information  which  displaces
         the document verification report relied upon by the  respondent[15]
         ; and

    iii) in any event there was no evidence  which  had  been  independently
         verified to displace the  assertion  made  by  the  respondent  the
         appellant  having  been  given  extra  time  to  authenticate   the
         letters[16];

     iv) the respondent had established to the relevant  standard  of  proof
         that the bank account relied upon does not exist [17].

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal against this decision on  the
    grounds that the judge had erred:

      i)  In  failing  to  consider  properly  the  dates  in  the  document
         verification report given that it had been  submitted  on  26  July
         2012 but that the bank had been contacted on 8 November 2012;

     ii) In taking account of an irrelevant matter by  suggesting  that  the
         proper course of action to take when the  letter,  confirming  that
         the appellant had an account, had been obtained from the  bank  was
         to send it to the ECO and thus imposing a burden of  proof  on  the
         appellant rather than on the respondent [5];

    iii) By stating that the  burden  of  proof  was  on  the  appellant  in
         paragraph 10 of his determination [6] and in blaming the  appellant
         in not putting forward evidence  to  counter  that  placed  by  the
         respondent [8];

     iv) By unreasonably and unfairly imposing a high standard of  proof  on
         the appellant, failing to give adequate findings of how information
         from  an  unknown  source  via  telephone  conversation  was   more
         authentic than a letter obtained directly from the bank and  signed
         by a responsible person.

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Frankish on 1 August 2013.

Submissions

 8. Mr Chowdhury submitted that the judge had erred in his analysis of  the
    Document Verification Report ("DVR") given  it  appears  to  have  been
    submitted on 26 July 2012 although he accepted that the first page [D1]
    does not reach any conclusion. He accepted that the challenge  to  this
    letter was in relation to weight to be attached by the  judge  although
    he submitted the case law shows that an inconsistency  should  lead  to
    less weight being attached to a document.  He  further  submitted  that
    the judge had erred as the DVR shows only that  somebody  spoke  to  an
    unnamed official whereas the letters  produced  to  the  Tribunal  were
    signed.

 9. Mr Chowdhury was not, however, able to explain to me why there were two
    letters from Prime Bank of the same date, 29 March 2013, saying similar
    things nor why one of the letters referred to issues about the  history
    of transactions when there was no indicatino that it was the history of
    transactions which was in dispute.  He was unable to explain either why
    the letter of 29 March 2013 in effect reproduced the  letter  from  the
    bank dated 10 July 2012 (other than the date given for the balance).

10. In reply, Mr Deller  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  misdirected
    himself as to law and it was clear that  the  statement  regarding  the
    standard and burden of proof at paragraph 10 of the  determination  had
    not affected his decision with respect to the allegation of dishonesty,
    the judge having properly directed himself as to the  burden  of  proof
    there.  He submitted further  that  the  judge  had  been  entitled  to
    conclude that he was persuaded by the letter DVR and that  he  accepted
    that the judge had not been correct to say that the letter should  have
    been submitted to the Entry Clearance Officer.

11. On a proper analysis of the DVR it is evident that the first page  [D1]
    is a report prepared by an official, Lynn Parr, in the United  Kingdom.
    Whilst it does record "date submitted" as 26 July 2012, the  bottom  of
    the form which reads "Print this form and place it at the front of  the
    file before submitting for collection then email the form to  NEYHILU."
    Submission in this case means submission to another part of  the  UKBA.
    Page D1 contains no conclusions as to  the  authenticity  of  the  bank
    statement.

12. The document at page D2 records the actions taken consequent  upon  the
    form at D1 being submitted to the relevant section, in this case a Visa
    Support  Assistant  in  Dhaka.   The  assistant  contacted  Prime  Bank
    Limited, in relation to the appellant, and as is recorded, spoke to  an
    official who said the account did not exist   Page  D3  is  a  standard
    notice and D4 is an email containing the report  being  sent  from  the
    International Liaison Unit to an official within UKBA.  That  email  is
    dated 8 November 2012.

13. It is not properly arguable in the circumstances  that  there  are  any
    inconsistencies in the dates in this document.  The dates are different
    simply  because  of  the  actions  taken   at   different   stages   of
    investigation.  It is not proper to draw any inferences from the phrase
    "date submitted" other than  the  fact  that  it  was  submitted  to  a
    separate unit within the Home Office.

14. It is not in dispute that the determination paragraph 10  records  "the
    burden of proof is on the  appellant  the  standard  of  proof  is  the
    balance of probabilities."  Whilst that is the general position, it  is
    trite law that in the case of an allegation of dishonesty it is for the
    respondent to establish this.  After directing himself properly  as  to
    the case law [12]-[14], the judge directed himself [15]  properly  that
    it was for the respondent to prove dishonesty. I consider that  he  did
    apply the correct burden and standard, and that  what  he  recorded  at
    paragraph 10 is merely a slip not affecting the close and fuller  self-
    direction below.

15. As Mr Chowdhury accepted, the weight to be attached to DVR was a matter
    for the judge.  That diminishes significantly  the  submission  in  the
    grounds of appeal that the judge should have  rejected  it  given  that
    there was no  named  official  whereas  the  letters  produced  by  the
    appellant were signed by the Vice President of the bank. That is simply
    an argument about weight which was a matter for the judge.

16. While the DVR does not record the name of the official, it does give  a
    telephone number that was contacted but that is  not  determinative  of
    the weight to be attached.

17. While the judge did erred in suggesting that the letters from the  bank
    should have been supplied to the Entry Clearance Officer  (rather  than
    the respondent), and that is an irrelevant  consideration,  neither  of
    the letters produced deal directly with the allegation that the account
    does not exist; they simply  state  that  it  exists.   Neither  letter
    offers any explanation for how a bank  official  could  have  told  the
    respondent's representative that the account did not exist nor do  they
    expressly deny that such a conversation took place; they simply do  not
    engage with the issue.

18. The letter of 29 March 2013 which refers to transactions states:

    "I have noted that the  date  of  transaction  of  accounts  is  almost
    identical.  Consequently we have checked our record for these  accounts
    and found that these are genuine transactions made by our client."

19. This appears to be responding to a request from the appellant which was
    not before the judge. No proper explanation for that was provided. That
    letter  is  clearly  written  as  a  response  to   irregularities   in
    transactions which was not the issue her and there  is  no  attempt  to
    respond to the specific allegation or provide an  explanation  for  the
    evidence set out in the DVR.   In  the  circumstances,  the  Judge  was
    entitled to attach less weight to it.

20. In reality, the challenge to the judge's consideration of  the  letters
    from Prime Bank is one of weight and in the absence  of  letters  which
    must have been written to the bank to obtain them, or  evidence  as  to
    what was said in a conversation with the bank,  the judge was  entitled
    to attach less weight to them.  It is not arguable that  the  reference
    to letters not being passed to the ECO affected  the  outcome  of  this
    analysis and accordingly,  whilst  the  decision  may  have  been  more
    elegantly phrased, it sets out clearly why the judge  accepted,  as  he
    was entitled to do, the DVR and why he attached less weight, as he  was
    entitled to do, to the letters from Prime Bank which do not engage with
    the DVR.

21. The determination shows that the Judge weighed the evidence before him,
    finding that the respondent had, on the balance of probabilities  shown
    that the  appellant  did  not  have  an  account  with  Prime  Bank,  a
    conclusion open to him, and thus that the respondent had shown that the
    requirements of paragraph 322 (1A) had been met. There is no submission
    from the appellant that, having found that the bank account in  respect
    of which statements had been adduced did not exist, the judge erred  in
    concluding that the appellant had used deception. It follows from  this
    that the appeal fell to be dismissed,

22. Accordingly, the determination did not involve the making of  an  error
    of law by the First-tier Tribunal capable of affecting the outcome  and
    I uphold it.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making
    of an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal.  I
    uphold the determination of the First-tier Tribunal

Signed:                                 Date:  18 September 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

