
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01931/2014
     IA/01932/2014
     IA/01933/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd September 2014                          |On 26th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                   (1) Mr Tissa Ravindra Kumar Siriwardena
               (2) Mrs sujeeva vasanti fernando dehiwaththage
                        (3) miss nehansa siriwardena
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms L Greening (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wright promulgated on 3rd June 2014, following at  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 16th May 2014.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of the Appellants on human rights grounds (though dismissing
    them on  immigration  grounds).   The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.   They  are  a  family  of  a
    father, a mother, and a daughter.  The first Appellant, the father, was
    born on 17th September 1969.  The second  Appellant,  the  mother,  was
    born on 20th November 1975.  The third  Appellant,  the  daughter,  was
    born on 27th April 2006.

 3. The determination of Judge Wright describes  the  wife,  as  the  "main
    Appellant" because it is the wife who was last granted leave as Tier  1
    (Post-Study Worker) on 17th December 2010  until  17th  December  2012,
    with her husband and daughter being her dependants.   The  applications
    for leave to remain were on the basis  of  the  second  Appellant,  the
    wife's, establishment of private and family life in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge applied the applicable Immigration Rules and  held  that  the
    Appellants could not succeed under Appendix FM R-LTRP.   They  did  not
    meet the requirements for leave to remain as partners and they did  not
    meet the "relationship requirements of E-LTRP.1.2"  because  they  were
    not British citizens or present and settled  in  the  UK  with  refugee
    leave or humanitarian protection.  Under the mandatory  nature  of  the
    Immigration Rules their applications fell to be dismissed.   The  judge
    gave reasons (see paragraphs 23 to 27).

 5. However, in considering the situation under Article 8 ECHR "outside the
    Rules" (see paragraphs 29 to 43) the judge found that, on the basis  of
    the established case law that was emerging from the Upper Tribunal  and
    the Court of Appeal, that the appeals stood to be allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the  judge  purported  to  direct
    himself in accordance with Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  and  Gulshan  [2013]
    UKUT 640, but misapplied the import  of  those  judgments,  because  he
    failed to show what compelling circumstances there were  entitling  him
    to consider the situation under freestanding Article 8 jurisprudence.

 7. On 6th August 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    it did appear that the judge had  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  adults
    primarily because the third Appellant, the child, Nehansa, had been  in
    the UK for approximately eight years, and  so  with  her  appeal  being
    allowed, the parents' appeal was also granted in line with that appeal.
     However, the family could be returned to Sri Lanka as  a  family  unit
    and the judge may have erred in finding that there were  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances in this regard.



The Hearing

 8. At the hearing before me on 22nd September 2014,  the  Appellants  were
    represented by Ms Greening, a solicitor, who handed up a  bundle  dated
    16th September 2014, which included a detailed skeleton argument (pages
    1 to 8), together with a bundle of authorities that  she  purported  to
    rely upon.

 9. Mr Kandola, appearing as Counsel on behalf of the Respondent  Secretary
    of State, submitted that the judge was wrong to have allowed the appeal
    because paragraphs 24 and 27 showed clearly why  the  Appellants  could
    not meet the Immigration Rules.  If consideration was to  be  given  to
    the child, Nehansa, then it ought to have been recognised that she  had
    not been in the UK for eight years because she had returned back to Sri
    Lanka  in  February  2009  because  her  father's  leave  had  expired,
    returning back to the UK only on 16th October 2009, some  eight  months
    later.

10. The precise timeline is easy to discern from the judge's own  reference
    to the "immigration history" where he sets  out  the  "brief  timeline"
    (see paragraph 2).  It is made clear here in  sub-paragraph  (xi)  that
    Nehansa and her father entered the UK as the wife's dependants on  16th
    October 2009.  The entire family consisted of  temporary  migrants  and
    they had no entitlement to remain.  The judge was wrong to have allowed
    the appeal.

11. For her part, Ms Greening simply relied upon the determination of Judge
    Wright.  She initially argued that each family  member  had  their  own
    private and family life in the UK.  Furthermore,  the  father  had  now
    applied for settlement.  I pointed out that  settlement  had  not  been
    granted to him.  She suggested that Nehansa could not  return  back  to
    Sri Lanka because she no longer  had  the  requisite  language  skills,
    having gone to nursery school in this country.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.  First, the judge sets out  the  "latest  guidance  of  the
    Upper Tribunal on Article 8", referring to the key cases (see paragraph
    31) before subsequently analysing the principles in these  cases.   For
    example, the judge make its clear that following Gulshan, the  position
    now is that recourse to Article  8  is  only  justified  if  there  are
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences such as to be disproportionate  under
    Article 8" (see paragraph 33).

13. Second, the judge then considers  the  facts  in  the  context  of  the
    established law.  He makes it clear that,

         "Whilst both  Nehansa's  father  and  mother  entered  the  UK  for
         temporary purposes (firstly together in 2004 when her father was  a
         student and then secondly  in  2009  when  her  mother  became  the
         student respectively) with the  legitimate  expectation  that  they
         would leave at the  end  of  their  respective  studies,  the  fact
         remains that Nehansa (born here on 27th April 2006 and now aged  8)
         has resided here now (as at the date of hearing,  not  application)
         for more than eight years (it is still more than seven  years  even
         if one discounts the eight  months  spent  in  Sri  Lanka  in  2009
         pending the issue of visas for her mother [student] and her  ......
         [as dependant])".

14. The judge so stated at paragraph 35.

15. Third, the judge then immediately proceeded to consider that "the  best
    interest  of  Nehansa  .....  and  children  generally  are  a  primary
    consideration  .....  but  not  the   paramount   consideration   ...."
    (paragraph 36).  This, is also, an accurate recitation of the law.

16. Fourth, the judge considered SC (Article 8 -  in  accordance  with  the
    law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056, where  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  held
    that, in the absence of  strong  countervailing  factors  residence  of
    eight years in the UK with a child is likely to make removal at the end
    of that period not proportionate to the legitimate aims in  this  case"
    (see paragraph 39).

17. It was in this context that the judge finally concluded that,

         "Nehansa is clearly well settled into life in the UK,  and  clearly
         well settled into education here (see  up-to-date  reports  of  her
         teacher and year 3 class teacher dated 15th May 2014).  Her  future
         development is clearly at stake here.  Her friends are here.  While
         she has visited Sri Lanka, life  would  be  very  different  there.
         Whilst there was a delay in the necessary  visas  being  issued  in
         2009 (leading to an eight month stay in Sri Lanka), this was not of
         Nehansa's doing" (see paragraph 40).

    This was clearly an entirely proper consideration for the judge to give
    regard to.  It shows why the judge was driven to  the  conclusion  that
    there were indeed compelling and  exceptional  circumstances.   Indeed,
    the judge refers to "exceptional cases" at the end of the determination
    (paragraph 43).  All in all, accordingly, the  determination  does  not
    elicit an error of law.

Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th September 2014
