
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01058/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 May 2013                                |On 4 June 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                            mr md. anisur rahman

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hossain, instructed by Hossain Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh,  born  on  20  October  1989.
    His appeal against the respondent's refusal  on  10  December  2012  to
    grant him an extension of leave as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond.

2.   The respondent refused the appellant's application because  Section  50
    of the 2009 Act, applicable since 5 October 2009, prohibits  a  student
    from changing institution of study without making a fresh  application,
    whereas the appellant having been granted Tier 4 leave  on  15  October
    2009 to study at  St.  Peter's  College  of  London,  had  relied  upon
    certificates from West London School of Management and Technology which
    did not hold highly trusted status.

3.   The judge held as follows:

         "2.  Mr Hossain relied  upon  a  UKBA  email  confirming  that  the
             appellant actually submitted his application on 29.09.09.   He
             relied in addition upon UKBA Tier 4 Policy  Guidance  advising
             that  students  who  applied  before  05.10.09  should  obtain
             permission if they wished  to  continue  with  a  new  Tier  4
             Sponsor.  He interpreted this to mean  that  Section  50  only
             applied to students who applied for leave after  05.10.09.   I
             am not certain of the line of this argument.  In any case  the
             present application needed to be made in relation  to  studies
             that had taken place with a highly trusted Sponsor  given  the
             change of institution, as is set out in paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv)
             by reference to paragraph 322(3).  Mr Hossain also relied upon
             the evidential flexibility policy line of argument,  but  this
             does not help the appellant as he could not have replaced  his
             certificates with ones from a highly trusted sponsor.  The CDS
             line of argument also does not help the appellant as he cannot
             be seen to have made an investment  in  his  private  life  of
             studies by obtaining  qualifications  from  a  highly  trusted
             Sponsor, as could enable him to build upon such qualifications
             to progress his studies and any possible career."


4.   Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant  on  the  basis  that
    the judge failed to deal with the respondent's decision to  remove  the
    appellant pursuant  to  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  Whatever view the judge took  of  the  variation
    aspect, he was, on the face of it, obliged to allow the appeal  against
    removal to a limited extent.  His failure  to  deal  with  that  aspect
    amounts to an arguable error of law.  Permission was  also  granted  on
    the other grounds.

5.   Mr Hossain relied on the  other  grounds  to  argue  that  the  judge's
    decision in respect of the refusal of the appellant's application under
    Section  50  was  fundamentally  flawed  on  two  bases;  firstly,  the
    appellant's application for entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student  Migrant  was  made  on  29  September  2009.   Therefore   the
    restriction under Section 50, which  requires  the  appellant  to  seek
    permission from the Secretary of State  to  switch  colleges,  did  not
    apply to him and therefore he could switch to any  college  whether  or
    not it was a highly trusted sponsor.  Secondly, the  judge's  assertion
    that he was not certain that Mr Hossain's argument meant that the judge
    did not understand the arguments in  this  case.   Mr  Hossain  further
    argued that the judge failed to deal with his argument on the CDS point
    in respect of the appellant's private life.

6.   Mr Ouseley  submitted  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the  date  the
    appellant made his application.  He said that  West  London  School  of
    Management and Technology was no longer on  the  Register  of  Sponsors
    even if the judge got the date wrong.  In any event the appellant  went
    to a college which did not hold highly trusted status.  He is here on a
    temporary basis and can return to Bangladesh to study there.

7.   Mr  Hossain  replied  by  saying  that  when  the  appellant  made  his
    application West London School of Management and Technology was on  the
    Register of Sponsors and was rated "A" although he acknowledged that it
    did not hold a Highly Trusted status.  He  argued  that  this  did  not
    matter because of the fact that the appellant had made his  application
    before 5 October 2009 and therefore he  could  switch  to  any  college
    whether or not it held a highly trusted status.

Findings

8.   In respect of the removal decision under Section 47,  I  find  that  in
    line with Adamally the respondent's decision was wrong in law.  To that
    extent the appellant's appeal is allowed and remitted to the  Secretary
    of State to reconsider the decision to remove the appellant.

9.   With regard to the argument in relation to Section 50 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, I find that the respondent  erred
    in law in stating that the appellant was last granted leave based on  a
    successful application made on 15 October 2009 for entry clearance as a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant to study with St. Peter's  College  of
    London.  The appellant  submitted  an  e-mail  from  the  British  High
    Commission in Dhaka which confirmed that he submitted  his  application
    form at the Visa Application Centre on 29 September 2009.  I find  that
    the respondent's error tainted its decision.

10.  Under paragraph 322(3) an applicant's application  should  normally  be
    refused for failure to comply with any conditions attached to the grant
    of leave to enter or remain.

11.  Paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv) -

         (1)  requires the appellant to study at the  institution  that  the
             Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  Checking   Service
             records as the migrant's sponsor, or  where  the  migrant  was
             awarded points for  a  visa  letter  [unless  the  migrant  is
             studying at an institution which is a partner  institution  of
             the migrant's sponsor], study at the institution which  issues
             that visa letter,


         (2)  until such time as a decision is received from the  UK  Border
             Agency on an application which is sponsored by a  Confirmation
             of Acceptance for Studies assigned by a Highly Trusted Sponsor
             and which is made while the applicant has  extant  leave,  and
             any appeal against that decision has been determined, to study
             at  the  Highly  Trusted   Sponsor   institution   which   the
             Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  Checking   Service
             records as having assigned a Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
             Studies to the Tier 4 Migrant; and ..."


12.  I note that paragraph  245ZW  was  inserted  from  31  March  2009  and
    subparagraph (c)(iv) was inserted from 1 October 2009.

13.  In light of this information and the fact that the appellant  made  his
    application before 5 October 2009, I find that section 50 of  the  2009
    Act does not apply to the appellant.  Consequently, the  appellant  has
    not breach the condition attached to his leave.  The  judge's  decision
    was flawed and that error was as  a  result  of  the  respondent's  own
    error.  In the circumstances I allow  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the
    extent that  it  is  remitted  to  the  respondent  to  reconsider  the
    appellant's application.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
