
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA016332015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2016                       |On 17 June 2016                      |


                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                  HAFIS [J]
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. He is  married  to  Ms  [JJ],  a
    British Citizen. They have cohabited  since  February  2012,  and  were
    married on 19 June 2012. An application was then made for the appellant
    to be granted leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules  which  was
    refused.



 2. On 20 September 2014 the appellant applied, pursuant to  regulations  9
    and 17 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016
    ("the EEA Regulations") for a residence card  as  confirmation  of  his
    right of residence as the family member of a British Citizen with  whom
    he had lived while she was residing and working in another member state
    to the United Kingdom, and who had returned to the United Kingdom.  The
    application was made on the basis that the appellant and his  wife  had
    moved to Dublin, Ireland, where they lived together and where  she  had
    been employed between 22 April 2014 and 31 August 2014; they  had  then
    returned to the United Kingdom.



 3. On 5 December 2015 the respondent refused the application on the  basis
    that she had been unable to determine, on the  basis  of  the  evidence
    provided, that the appellant met the requirements of Reg. 9 of the  EEA
    Regulations. In particular, she was not satisfied that the  couple  had
    lived together in Ireland, or that the centre of the spouse's life  had
    transferred to Ireland.



 4. The appeal against that decision was heard on 21 July  2015  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 10 September 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge  V
    M D Fox dismissed  the  appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against that decision was granted  on  2  February  2016.  The
    appeal then came before Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on 29 March 2016.



 5. For the reasons set out in a decision  promulgated  on  1  April  2016,
    Judge Storey  found  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law, and  that  it  required  to  be
    remade. He also gave directions as to how the matter was to proceed.  A
    copy of that decision, and the directions, is annexed to this decision.
      By virtue of a transfer order, the appeal  then  came  before  us  to
    remake.







    The hearing on 7 June 2016




 6. In response to the directions made, the respondent produced a  skeleton
    argument. She also indicated that she disputed that the  appellant  and
    his spouse were in Ireland between April and the end of August 2014 and
    that the appellant's spouse had been employed there for 4  months.  The
    reasons for that, and the deficiencies she identified  in  the  written
    evidence were set  out  in  a  separate  document.  We  were,  however,
    concerned that this document had not been served on the appellant,  and
    that consequently he had not been able to adduce (as he indicated)  two
    documents which he had not known would be required.



 7. The appellant did, nonetheless, assure us that he was happy to  proceed
    with the appeal and he asked us to take into account a small number  of
    additional documents. We heard oral evidence from the appellant and his
    wife who were both cross-examined.







    The Law




 8. Reg 9 of the EEA Regulations provides as follows:

         '9.      Family members of British citizens

         (1)      If the conditions in paragraph (2)  are  satisfied,  these
         Regulations apply to a person who is the family member of a British
         citizen as if the British citizen ("P") were an EEA national.

         (2)      The conditions are that-

             (a) P is residing in an EEA State as a worker or self-employed
             person or was so  residing  before  returning  to  the  United
             Kingdom;

             (b) if the family member of P is P's spouse or civil  partner,
             the parties are living  together  in  the  EEA  State  or  had
             entered into the marriage or civil partnership and were living
             together in the EEA State before the British citizen  returned
             to the United Kingdom; and

             (c) the centre of P's life has transferred to  the  EEA  State
             where P resided as a worker or self-employed person.

         (3)      Factors relevant to whether the centre  of  P's  life  has
         transferred to another EEA State include-

             (a) the period of residence in the EEA State as  a  worker  or
             self-employed person;

             (b) the location of P's principal residence;

             (c) the degree of integration of P in the EEA State.

         (4)      Where these Regulations apply to the family member of P, P
         is to be treated as holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State
         for the purpose of the application of regulation 13 to that  family
         member.'

 9. Reg. 9 was not enacted to give effect to a part of Directive 2004/38/EC
    ("the Directive") but to give effect  to  the  decisions  of  the  CJEU
    interpreting article 21 TFEU.  As such, it is, on  general  principles,
    to be construed in conformity with EU law - see Marleasing  [1990]  ECR
    4135. We did not hear argument on this point, nor that  there  was  any
    difficulty in interpreting Reg. 9 in the light of O & B [2014] EUECJ C-
    456/12.  For the purposes  of  this  appeal,  and  in  the  absence  of
    argument to the contrary, we have proceeded on the basis that reg.9 can
    be construed as being in conformity with the law as interpreted in O  &
    B.



10. It is clear from O & B at [36], [44] that any right the  appellant  has
    is a derivative right; it is also of note [45]  that  the  purpose  and
    justification of the derived right is that were it not  allowed,  there
    would be an interference with the EU national's  freedom  of  movement.
    At [46] and [47], the CJEU held:




         "46.     The Court has accordingly held that where a Union  citizen
         has resided with a family member who is a third-country national in
         a Member State other than  the  Member  State  of  which  he  is  a
         national for a period exceeding two and a half years  and  one  and
         half years respectively, and was employed there, that third-country
         national must, when the Union citizen returns to the  Member  State
         of which he is a national, be  entitled,  under  Union  law,  to  a
         derived  right  of  residence  in  the  latter  State  (see  Singh,
         paragraph 25,  and  Eind,  paragraph  45).  If  that  third-country
         national did not have such a right, a worker who is a Union citizen
         could be discouraged from leaving the Member State of which he is a
         national in order to pursue gainful employment  in  another  Member
         State simply because of the prospect for that worker of  not  being
         able to continue, on returning to his Member State of origin, a way
         of family life which may have come into being in  the  host  Member
         State as a result of marriage or family  reunification  (see  Eind,
         paragraphs 35 and 36, and Iida, paragraph 70).

         47.      Therefore, an obstacle to  leaving  the  Member  State  of
         which the worker is a national, as mentioned in Singh and Eind,  is
         created by the refusal to confer, when that worker returns  to  his
         Member State of origin, a derived right of residence on the  family
         members of that worker who are third-country nationals, where  that
         worker resided with his family members in the  host  Member  State
         pursuant to, and in conformity with, Union law."

11. At [51], the CJEU held:




         "51.     An obstacle such as that referred to in paragraph 47 above
         will arise only where the residence of the  Union  citizen  in  the
         host Member State has been sufficiently genuine  so  as  to  enable
         that citizen to create or strengthen family  life  in  that  Member
         State. Article 21(1) TFEU does not  therefore  require  that  every
         residence in the host Member State by a Union  citizen  accompanied
         by a family member who  is  a  third-country  national  necessarily
         confers a derived right of residence on that family member  in  the
         Member State of which that citizen is a national upon the citizen's
         return to that Member State."




12. Regard must also be had to [53]:




         "53.     On the other hand, an obstacle such as that referred to in
         paragraph 47 above may be created where the Union  citizen  intends
         to exercise his rights under Article 7(1)  of  Directive  2004/38.
         Residence in the host Member State pursuant to  and  in  conformity
         with the conditions set out in Article 7(1) of that  directive  is,
         in principle, evidence of settling there and therefore of the Union
         citizen's genuine residence in the host Member State and goes  hand
         in hand with creating and strengthening family life in that  Member
         State."




13. We note also the reference at [57] to "settled"; this cannot be equated
    to the meaning of  settled  in  domestic  law,  but  rather  is  to  be
    construed as the individual having established herself in a host member
    state.



14. It is, we consider, evident from [56] and [57], and the observation  at
    [54] that genuine residence is in addition to conformity  with  article
    7(1) and (2) of the Directive, that the prior exercise of Treaty rights
    by the EU national is not determinative  of  whether  a  derived  right
    accrues to the non-EU spouse of that  EU  national;  there  must  be  a
    creation or strengthening of family life [61] during genuine residence.
    All of these issues require a nuanced, contextual evaluation  which  is
    inevitably highly fact-sensitive.



15. It is not in dispute that [JJ] has temporal lobe  seizure  epilepsy,  a
    serious, long-term medical condition which causes her and  her  husband
    significant distress. She has, as a result of her condition, been under
    the care of her GP and also King's College Hospital, in particular  the
    care of Dr Cocco, a consultant neurologist. She has been  prescribed  a
    number of drugs for her condition, some  of  which  have  serious  side
    effects including significant teratogenic effects such that  were  [JJ]
    to conceive, there is a likelihood that any child born would be at risk
    of birth defects.




16. As is evident from the letter from Dr  Cocco  dated  1  March  2012,  a
    temporal lobectomy was  discussed  as  a  treatment,  but  no  definite
    decision was reached.  It appears from the oral evidence  that  surgery
    did occur in late 2014, that there were some  complications,  and  that
    she was finally discharged in 2016.   The  medical  evidence  is  quite
    brief, and mainly in the form of letters from Dr Cocco to the GP.   The
    medical evidence does not refer to [JJ] travelling to  Ireland  at  any
    point.



17. There are, however, difficulties with the second letter from  Dr  Cocco
    which is apparently dated 30 April 2014.  That date makes little  sense
    give that below the date is typed:




         Clinic:  02/10/2014 Typed: 29/12/2014




18. Further confusion arises from the observation in the letter  that  [JJ]
    is to have a period of video telemetry on 28 October 2014 but we do not
    draw adverse inferences from the dates.



19. In evidence, Mr [J] said that he and his wife  had  tried  to  register
    with the health  providers  in  Ireland,  but  had  not  qualified  for
    anything but a GP visit as they did not earn enough. He  accepted  that
    in the UK she had received specialist care, and had been under the care
    of Dr Cocco for over 10 years. Asked if his wife had  known  she  would
    have to return for treatment in October, he said she had been contacted
    and told she had been moved up the waiting list.  They had not returned
    to Ireland after the operation, as her treatment was ongoing, and  only
    in 2016 had she been discharged.



20. It is,  we  consider,  surprising  and  a  significant  factor  in  our
    analysis, that [JJ] would go  to  Ireland  with,  it  is  claimed,  the
    intention to establish  herself  and  her  husband  there,  yet  before
    ensuring continuity in care, and when, it appears, before  she  started
    work, she knew she would have to  return  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    extensive treatment and a serious operation.



21. We accept the unchallenged oral evidence that the  appellant  travelled
    overland (and presumably partly also by sea) from London to Dublin  via
    Northern Ireland, and thus did not need a passport. We accept also that
    he went ahead of his wife, and that explains why the tenancy  agreement
    commences in February 2014. There is no challenge  to  the  explanation
    that the rent was paid cash in hand.



22. The evidence of both Mr [J] and [JJ] is that she had returned to London
    on 29 and 30 April 2014 for a consultation; that is partially confirmed
    by the discharge note which records that PET and MRI scans were carried
    out in April 2014.



23. As to the purpose of going to Ireland, Mr [J] said in evidence that  he
    and his wife had decided to go to Ireland for family  reasons,  because
    the cost of living was lower; and, because it was thought  that  living
    in Ireland might be less stressful and thus her condition may  improve.
    He said that before she left the United Kingdom, she had been told that
    her treatment plan had been brought  forward,  He  said  his  wife  had
    returned to the UK on 29/30 April for a medical appointment.



24. [JJ]'s evidence is broadly  consistent  with  this,  but  she  made  no
    mention of a possible improvement in her condition. She said  that  she
    had only worked three weeks in a month due to her condition,  and  that
    she needed to take time off to recuperate when she had a seizure.



25. Turning to the details of [JJ]'s employment, we consider that there are
    significant discrepancies which are not satisfactorily explained.  When
    asked directly, neither Mr [J] nor [JJ] could explain why the P45 shows
    employment between 17 May 2014 and 14 September 2015, contrary to  what
    was said in the application form. Asked about her P45 indicating a work
    start date of 17 May 2014, [JJ] said she had started in April  but  had
    had to wait for a PPS Number (equivalent to an NI Number).  She was not
    sure why the end date was given as  14  September  2014  but  said  she
    returned to the UK on 31 August 2014. Her  jobseekers  allowance  claim
    was made on or around 2 September 2014.



26. The identity of [JJ]'s employer is  unclear.  It  is  stated  to  be  a
    limited company in the application form, but the tax documents and  the
    P45 refer to an individual, [A], whose name also appears  on  the  wage
    slips and as the payer of wages into [JJ]'s bank statement.



27. Mr [J] said his wife had obtained a job in a logistics firm on  account
    of communication skills, and that it would not have been easy  for  her
    to get a job in the care sector. He said that the long  term  plan  had
    been  to  relocate  to  Ireland,  reduce  his  wife's  medication  and,
    hopefully, start a family.  He  said  his  wife's  seizures  were  less
    frequent when it was cold.



28. Further, there are discrepancies over the place of employment.  Mr  [J]
    said his wife had worked  3  weeks  each  month,  and  that  while  the
    business for which she worked was based in Galway, it had a  branch  in
    Dublin city centre.



29. [JJ] said that the head office of the employer was in Galway, but  that
    she did not travel there. She said that she met the  people  with  whom
    she had to interact in various  offices  which  had  been  hired  on  a
    temporary basis for that purpose. She was contacted by phone  or  email
    to be told where to go.



30. Cross-examined about her employment, she  said  that  she  was  a  team
    leader and had told  her  team  about  sales  technique,  and  customer
    relations. She said it was not possible to get employment in  the  care
    sector due to her condition. Also, as she was not allowed to drive, her
    opportunities in that sector were limited.



31. We found the evidence of the employment to be lacking in detail. It was
    not at all clear what [JJ]'s job involved, nor why she would have  been
    recruited as a team  leader  in  a  logistics  company  when  her  work
    experience is in the care sector. There was no evidence  that  she  had
    team leadership skills. We were not satisfied by the explanation as  to
    how she worked in Dublin. [JJ]'s description of going  to  meetings  in
    different rented offices was lacking in detail. It was not at all clear
    how her attendance at ad-hoc meetings in different offices  constituted
    a full time job, nor was the explanation of working three weeks out  of
    four - that she took time off to recuperate from having  had  a  fit  -
    coherent or sufficient.



32. [JJ] could not explain her duties coherently, in direct contrast to her
    detailed, articulate evidence of the difficulties she has in  obtaining
    employment owing to her medical condition.



33. We consider that these factors, taken  together  with  the  unexplained
    discrepancies in the documents, cast significant doubt on the substance
    and nature of the employment, and whether to obtain work was the reason
    for moving to Ireland.  We consider also that in the context of  [JJ]'s
    medical condition, the fact that it was from the beginning of her  stay
    in Ireland intended that she would be returning to the  United  Kingdom
    for treatment, and had made no plans for continuity  of  treatment  (or
    obtaining medication) in Ireland raises further doubts  as  to  whether
    the test is met. While we note the appellant's evidence that  the  move
    to Ireland was to be a fresh start, we are not satisfied that in  these
    circumstances, that was so.



34. We consider that drawing all of these factors together,  the  appellant
    has not satisfied us that he and his wife genuinely settled in Ireland;
    it cannot properly be said that they established themselves or  settled
    there or that, in all the circumstances, family life was strengthened.



35. Accordingly, for these reasons we dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and it is set aside.



 2. We remake the appeal by dismissing it on all grounds.


Signed:                                 Date: 17 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01633/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 March 2016                     |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                  hafis [j]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bello, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.    The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, is married to a Ms [JJ] who is  a
    British citizen.  They married on 19 June 2012, having cohabited  since
    February 2012.  The appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  on  20
    September 2014, some sixteen months after having been refused leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules.  The basis of his application was
    that he was a "Surinder Singh" case by virtue  of  the  fact  that  his
    British citizen partner and he had resided in Dublin, Ireland and  that
    his spouse was employed there between 22 April 2014 and 31 August 2014.
     On 5 December  2014  the  respondent  refused  the  application.   Her
    refusal decision stated that on the evidence submitted by the appellant
    she had  been  unable  to  determine  whether  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of Regulation 9  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006, in  particular  that  the  couple  had  resided
    together in Ireland  and  whether  the  centre  of  the  spouse's  life
    transferred to Ireland, prior to returning to the UK.

2.    The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Fox  who
    in a decision dated 10 September 2015 dismissed the appellant's appeal.

3.    The appellant's grounds of appeal as amplified by a skeleton  argument
    produced by Mr Bello are in essence twofold.  First, that the judge had
    failed to consider relevant evidence, witness statements  and  personal
    evidence in particular.  Second, the respondent had not considered  the
    issue of whether the appellant and spouse had established themselves in
    Ireland by reference to the correct legal tests.

4.    At [15] to [18] the Judge stated:

         "15.     The appellant has failed to satisfy the burden  upon  him.
             He has failed to address the respondent's concerns  and  there
             is no  reliable  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the  sponsor
             genuinely intended to exercise her treaty  rights  in  another
             member state.

         16.      The appellant misdirected himself when he believed that  3
             months is sufficient to engage EEA  treaty  rights.   European
             law is based upon  the  purposive  approach  rather  than  the
             literal approach adopted in English law.  The threshold  of  3
             months may be indicative of intention but it is reasonable  to
             conclude that the appellant sought to exploit Regulation 9  of
             the EEA Regulations to circumvent UK immigration control.

         17.      The evidence demonstrates that the appellant  and  sponsor
             travelled to Eire to live temporarily and the centre of  their
             life remained firmly within the UK where they maintained their
             home and access to medical services.

         18.      I accept that the appellant and sponsor are in  a  genuine
             relationship on the basis  of  consistent  evidence  of  their
             commitment to each  other  and  the  bond  along  with  shared
             experiences  that  they  enjoy.   The  appellant  and  sponsor
             provided credible evidence of their circumstances which  leads
             to the reasonable conclusion that they can be relied  upon  to
             provide an  honest  account  of  their  circumstances.   Their
             candour  is  a  credit  to  their  credibility.   However  the
             application under the EEA Regulations  remains  misguided  and
             the appeal cannot succeed."

4.    I consider the grounds are made  out.   In  relation  to  whether  the
    judge applied the correct legal tests there  are  two  aspects  of  her
    decision which betray serious error.

5.    The two areas  are  clear  from  [16].   First  of  all,  the  judge's
    conclusion that "it is reasonable to conclude that the appellant sought
    to exploit Regulation 9.... to circumvent UK  immigration  control"  is
    not reasoned and stands in direct conflict  with  her  satisfaction  at
    [18] that "the appellant and  sponsor  provided  credible  evidence  of
    their circumstances which leads to the reasonable conclusion that  they
    can  be  relied  upon  to  provide   an   honest   account   of   their
    circumstances".  Part of  the  couple's  evidence  was  that  they  had
    genuinely sought to  establish  themselves  in  Ireland.   It  must  be
    recalled that in seeking to rely on the assessment that  the  appellant
    sought to "exploit" Regulation 9 the judge was clearly  attributing  an
    intention on the part of the appellant to abuse Regulation 9.  At  [58]
    of O v Minister voor, Case C-456/12 (hereinafter O and  B),  the  Grand
    Chamber of the Court of Justice said:

         "58.     It should be added that the scope of Union law  cannot  be
             extended to cover abuses (see, to that effect,  Case  C-110/99
             Emsland-St�rke [2000] ECR 1-11569, paragraph 51, and  Case  C-
             303/08 Bozkurt [2010] ECR 1-13445, paragraph  47).   Proof  of
             such an abuse requires,  first,  a  combination  of  objective
             circumstances in  which,  despite  formal  observance  of  the
             conditions laid down by the European Union rules, the  purpose
             of those  rules  has  not  been  achieved,  and,  secondly,  a
             subjective element consisting in the intention  to  obtain  an
             advantage  from  the  European  Union  rules  by  artificially
             creating the conditions laid down for obtaining  it  (Case  C-
             364/10 Hungary v Slovakia [2012] ECR, paragraph 58).

6.    From this passage it will be apparent that even if  the  judge  had  a
    proper basis for considering the appellant had sought to  "exploit"  EU
    law via Regulation 9, she would still have had to conduct an assessment
    of both objective and subjective circumstances  and  to  have  done  so
    recognising that the onus of proof was on the respondent.  I note  that
    the respondent raised no allegation  in  her  reasons  for  refusal  of
    abuse.

7.    A second difficulty  in  [16]  is  that  the  judge  opined  that  the
    appellant misdirected  himself  when  he  believed  that  3  months  is
    sufficient to engage EEA treaty rights.  Given that the evidence of the
    appellant was that he had resided with his wife in Ireland in 2014  for
    over 3 months and was employed between 22  April  and  31  August  2014
    (some 4 months), there was no misdirection on the part of the appellant
    in asking that Regulation 9 should apply to him.  The  requirements  of
    Regulation 9 do not contain any specified time period and in any event,
    as the CJEU said in O and B, at [59]:

         "59.     As regards the question whether the cumulative  effect  of
             various short periods of residence in the  host  Member  State
             may create a derived right of residence for a family member of
             a Union  citizen  who  is  a  third-country  national  on  the
             citizen's return  to  the  Member  State  of  which  he  is  a
             national, it should be borne in mind that  only  a  period  of
             residence satisfying the conditions set out  in  Article  7(1)
             and (2) and Article 16(1) and (2) of  Directive  2004/38  will
             give rise to such a right of residence.  In that regard, short
             periods of residence such as weekends or holidays spent  in  a
             Member State other than that of which the citizen in  question
             is a national, even when considered together, fall within  the
             scope of Article 6 of Directive 2004/38  and  do  not  satisfy
             those conditions."

8.    By virtue of Article  7(i)(d)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  a  right  of
    residence can arise for a family member once an appellant  has  resided
    in a Member State for 3 months.  The appellant's  case  was  (at  least
    impliedly) that he had a right of residence in  Ireland  by  virtue  of
    this provision and that he had also shown he had genuinely  established
    himself in Ireland.  At [61] of O and B the Court of Justice said:

         "61.     In the light of the foregoing considerations,  the  answer
             to the first, second and third questions is that Article 21(1)
             TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that where a Union citizen
             has created or strengthened a family life with a third-country
             national  during  genuine  residence,  pursuant  to   and   in
             conformity with the conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2)
             and Article 16(1) and (2) of Directive 2004/38,  in  a  Member
             State  other  than  that  of  which  he  is  a  national,  the
             provisions of that directive apply by analogy where that Union
             citizen returns, with the family member in  question,  to  his
             Member  State  of  origin.   Therefore,  the  conditions   for
             granting a derived  right  of  residence  to  a  third-country
             national who is a family member of that Union citizen, in  the
             latter's Member State of origin, should not, in principle,  be
             more strict than those provided for by that directive for  the
             grant of a derived  right  of  residence  to  a  third-country
             national who is a family member of a  Union  citizen  who  has
             exercised  his  right  of  freedom  of  movement  by  becoming
             established in a Member State other than the Member  State  of
             which he is a national."

9.    Mr Melvin submitted that even if the judge got the law wrong this  had
    no material effect because it was clearly his finding on  the  evidence
    that the appellant had only travelled to Eire to live "temporarily" and
    "the centre of their life remained  firmly  with  the  UK"  [17].   The
    trouble with that submission (and it  goes  to  the  appellant's  first
    ground) is that it is not at all clear that in reaching that conclusion
    the judge recognised that evidence of employment  in  Ireland,  coupled
    with the couple's own evidence, was at least capable  of  demonstrating
    that their residence in Ireland was both effective and genuine.

10.   For the above reasons I conclude that not only was there  legal  error
    on the part of the judge but material legal  error.   Accordingly,  her
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal is set aside.

11.   The decision on the appeal will now be re-made by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in the context of a further hearing.  It is  presently  envisaged  that
    this will be before a panel.  In  any  event  the  parties  are  hereby
    directed as follows:

Directions

    (1)     The  appellant  is  to  produce  a  further  witness  statement
         confirming (i) what addresses he and his wife have lived at in  the
         UK since they begun cohabiting up to the present and the rental  or
         ownership basis of their accommodation; (ii) whether they have paid
         Council tax in that period and, if so,  for  what  periods  and  in
         respect of which properties; (iii) details of any bank accounts  or
         savings accounts in the UK; (iv) details of any employment  in  the
         UK during that period.

    (2)    If the respondent intends to dispute that the appellant and  his
         spouse were in Ireland between April and end  of  August  2014  and
         that the spouse was employed there for 4  months,  she  must  state
         this expressly, as the appellant has  produced  evidence  regarding
         this which the Tribunal presently sees no reason not to accept.

    (3)    Both parties are to submit  skeleton  arguments  addressing  the
         following issue:

         Is it necessary in order for an appellant to succeed under relevant
         EU law that he shows that he  meets  the  requirement  set  out  in
         Regulation 9(2)(c) - "the centre of P's life has transferred to the
         EEA State, where P resided as a  worker  or  self-employed  person"
         (see also Regulation 9(3))?  Or is it sufficient, pursuant to O and
         B, that he shows (i) he has established himself in the other Member
         State (O and B [50]); and (ii)  his  residence  there  is  "genuine
         residence" (O and B, [53]-[57]).

         Direction No.3 is given in part  because  the  Upper  Tribunal  re-
         making the decision in this  case  may  wish  to  consider  whether
         Regulations 9(2)-(3) are compatible with CJEU case law as  set  out
         in the Grand Chamber judgment in O and B, and whether  there  is  a
         need to make  a  preliminary  reference  to  the  CJEU  to  clarify
         matters.

    (4)    Both parties must comply with directions (1)-(3) by 3 May 2016.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law.

The appeal is adjourned to be heard in the Upper  Tribunal  at  a  date  and
time to be fixed but not before 10 May 2016.


Signed                                             Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
