

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/01208/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 March 2018                          |On 13 April 2018                  |
|Ex tempore judgment                       |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                               MR VIJAY BHATTI
                        (NO ANONYMITY ORDER IS MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:             No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:        Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1992.  He arrived in the UK
    on 12 October 2010 with entry clearance as a Tier  4  Migrant.   On  21
    July 2014 he made an application for further leave to  remain  in  that
    capacity, but the application  was  refused  in  a  decision  dated  23
    February 2016.

 2. The respondent's  decision  refusing  the  application  can  be  simply
    explained.  The appellant  needed  a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies ("CAS") but he did not have  one.   The  respondent's  decision
    refers to no  CAS  reference  number  having  been  provided  which  is
    synonymous  with  no  CAS  having  been  obtained.   Accordingly,   the
    appellant was unable to meet a fundamental aspect of the Rules and  his
    application was refused.  The  maintenance  requirement  of  the  Rules
    under Appendix C was not assessed corresponding with the fact that  the
    appellant was unable to meet the main requirement of the Rules.

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision and his appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  at  a  hearing  on  3
    October  2017.   Judge  Devittie  dismissed  the   appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that the appellant had failed to  submit
    a CAS.  He did not however, go on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR,  a
    matter to which I shall  return  momentarily.   For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt, it seems to me to be clear that the appellant did  then  have  a
    right of appeal which he would not have now because the changed appeals
    regime was not in force at the time of the appellant's  application  in
    2014.   Nothing  turns  therefore,  on  any  issue   of   validity   or
    jurisdiction.

 4. Judge Devittie set out verbatim the respondent's decision.  He also set
    out the appellant's grounds of appeal which are to the effect that  the
    respondent could/should have asked him to  provide  further  documents,
    and asserting that the decision is not  in  accordance  with  the  law.
    Argument in relation to the common law duty of fairness was raised.  At
    [4] of his decision Judge Devittie said as follows:

         "In considering this appeal I bear in  mind  that  it  is  for  the
         appellant to show on a balance of probabilities that  he  satisfies
         the requirements of the immigration rules.   It  is  common  ground
         that the appellant failed to submit a CAS, as  required  under  the
         immigration rules, with his application.  He has not  advanced  any
         basis upon which this  Tribunal  may  be  minded,  for  reasons  of
         fairness, to grant him further time within which to obtain  a  CAS.
         In my opinion this appeal is wholly devoid of  merit  and  must  be
         dismissed."

 5. In the appellant's grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  I
    summarise, it is asserted that Judge Devittie did  not  look  into  the
    reasons as to why no CAS was provided, those  reasons  being  that  the
    respondent had closed all the colleges.  It said  in  the  grounds  for
    permission that he made several attempts to obtain a CAS but then their
    licences were  revoked  by  the  respondent.   It  was  unfair  of  the
    respondent not to give him more time to find a Tier 4  sponsor,  it  is
    argued.  It is further asserted that it was beyond his control that all
    the Tier 4 sponsor colleges were  closed  by  the  respondent  and  the
    respondent should have contacted him to request a CAS prior to refusing
    the application.

 6. It is next argued that Judge Devittie failed to  consider  his  private
    life in the UK as he has "strong friendship with my  friends  who  have
    become like family members  to  me.   Also  I  did  provide  sufficient
    evidence to confirm my relationship with my friends."   He  points  out
    that he has been in the UK for over seven years but argues  that  Judge
    Devittie failed to take that into account.  Reference is  made  in  the
    grounds to what is described as a "fundamental abuse of  power  by  the
    Home Office".  The appellant further asserts that his friends in the UK
    support him mentally, emotionally and financially.  He  has  family  in
    India but they are not able to support him like his friends in  the  UK
    do.  He states that he understands his civic duties and  he  has  never
    been in trouble with the authorities.

 7. The appellant did not appear for  the  hearing  before  me  today,  and
    indeed did not appear before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  am  satisfied
    that he was given notice of the hearing to the address which is in fact
    the same address that he had at the time  of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore, I decided to proceed  in  his  absence
    pursuant  to  Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Procedure Rules 2008.

 8. In submissions on behalf of the respondent before me Ms Ahmad  referred
    to the relevant paragraph of the Immigration Rules that applied at  the
    time of the decision before the First-tier Tribunal.  It was  submitted
    that even today  there  is  no  CAS  provided  by  the  appellant.  The
    proposition on behalf of the respondent was  that  even  now,  when  he
    could have provided  a  CAS,  perhaps  because  s.3C  leave  under  the
    Immigration Act 1971 would have  allowed  him  to  obtain  a  CAS  from
    another college, he had not done so. In any event, on the basis of  the
    authorities to which I was referred, there was no unfairness.

 9. In relation to Article 8, the appellant was unable to  show  compelling
    reasons as to why any consideration of  Article  8  outside  the  Rules
    should prevail in terms of the appeal being allowed under Article 8.

10. I am not satisfied that there is any error of law in  the  decision  of
    Judge Devittie, or at least any that is material.  The simple  fact  of
    the matter is that the appellant was required by reason  of  paragraphs
    245ZX(c), and 115A of Appendix A, to provide a valid CAS  in  order  to
    succeed in his application for further leave to  remain.   That  was  a
    fundamental requirement of his application which  he  failed  to  meet.
    The contention that there was unfairness in the  respondent's  decision
    is devoid of any merit.

11. Ms Ahmad helpfully referred me to three decisions  under  the  name  of
    Patel.   The  first  is  a  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,   Patel
    (revocation of sponsor licence -  fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT  00211
    (IAC).  That  was  a  case  which  dealt  with  circumstances  where  a
    sponsor's licence was revoked.  The guidance given in that case  is  to
    the effect that where  a  sponsor  licence  has  been  revoked  by  the
    Secretary of State during an application for variation of leave and the
    appellant is both unaware of the revocation and not party to any reason
    why the licence has been revoked, the Secretary of State should  afford
    an appellant a  reasonable  opportunity  to  vary  the  application  by
    identifying a new sponsor before the  application  is  determined.   It
    then goes on to refer to  the  period  of  60  days.   That,  I  think,
    subsequently found its way into policy on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State to afford an  applicant  who  had  initially  on  an  application
    provided a valid CAS  reference  number,  but  thereafter  the  sponsor
    licence was revoked, a period of  60  days  in  which  to  find  a  new
    sponsor.  That is however, far removed from the circumstances  of  this
    appellant.  He provided no valid CAS reference number at all in support
    of his application and  his  application  therefore  was  bound  to  be
    refused.

12. Ms Ahmad also referred me to a decision of the Court of Appeal in Patel
    & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    229.  I was referred in particular to [28] which I quote as follows:

         "But there is an exception to the general  rule,  when  public  law
         fairness requires a period of grace for an individual to identify a
         new sponsor; but the authorities make clear that that  is  confined
         to cases in which the problem that has arisen was of the  Secretary
         of State's own making, e.g. if the Secretary  of  State  revokes  a
         sponsor's licence or a student's CAS."

    Further, at [31] the court said:

         "Therefore, where there is no valid CAS, the Secretary of State  is
         entitled to refuse an application for leave dependent upon a  valid
         CAS, without making  any  further  enquiries,  unless  the  refusal
         stemmed from her own actions or omissions."

    I cannot see any validity to the argument that the respondent's actions
    in revoking licences  of  colleges  which  presumably  do  not  achieve
    appropriate standards to be on the approved list of  sponsor  colleges,
    in any way compromises the fairness of  the  respondent's  decision  to
    refuse the application for leave to remain by reason of  the  appellant
    not having a valid CAS.  It cannot be  said  that  the  respondent  was
    responsible for the fact that the appellant does not have a CAS.  It is
    the appellant's responsibility to find  a  sponsor  that  does  have  a
    sponsor licence and that would be able to provide  a  suitable  vehicle
    for a college course with a valid CAS.  No issue of  unfairness  arises
    at all.

13. So far as Article 8 is concerned this is the issue in relation to which
    I used the words "material" when I said  that  there  was  no  material
    error of law in the decision of Judge Devittie.  The reason I say  that
    is this: Judge Devittie did not consider Article 8 in his decision.  In
    my judgement he ought to have done so because Article 8  is  raised  in
    the appellant's grounds of appeal.  However, what  the  appellant  says
    about Article 8 is devoid of any substance.  It is simply  asserted  in
    the grounds before the First-tier Tribunal that the Secretary of  State
    had not given any consideration to his Article 8 rights.  How Article 8
    could have impacted  on  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is  not
    explained in the grounds.  It is not evident either, that any  evidence
    was put before Judge Devittie which supported any contention  that  the
    decision to refuse him leave to remain  compromised  his  private  life
    rights under Article 8 in any respect whatsoever.

14. It is to be remembered that the appellant came to the UK as  a  student
    in 2010.  He must have realised that he was here on a  temporary  basis
    only.  It has often been said that the mere fact of wishing to pursue a
    period of study does not of itself, without  more,  engage  Article  8.
    Whilst it may be that the appellant has established friendships in  the
    UK, even if Judge Devittie had gone on to consider Article 8  in  terms
    of the appellant's private life whether within or outside the Rules  it
    is inconceivable that he could have allowed the appeal on  that  basis.
    That is aside from the fact, as  I  have  already  suggested,  that  no
    evidence in relation to the appellant's private life in the UK  was  in
    fact before Judge Devittie.  In those circumstances, even if  it  could
    be said that there was an error of  law  in  his  failure  to  consider
    Article 8, any error of law in that respect is not material.

15. I conclude my reasons by referring to the last of  the  cases  that  Ms
    Ahmad referred me to; a decision of the Supreme Court, Patel  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, in which the
    court said at [57]:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be  unrelated  to  any  protected  human  right  ...  The
         opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in  this
         country, however desirable in general terms, is  not  in  itself  a
         right protected under article 8."

16. That quotation is illustrative of the limits to which Article 8 can  be
    deployed in support of an appeal on private life grounds for  a  person
    who  wishes  to  pursue  studies,  but  in  fact  it  goes  beyond  the
    appellant's circumstances because there is nothing in  the  appellant's
    evidence provided either to the Upper Tribunal  or  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in terms of what loss of prospects there was in terms  of  his
    studies, or indeed in terms of any promise that he  had  or  has  as  a
    student.

17. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss  the
    appeal therefore stands.

18. After this hearing, a letter dated 29 March from the appellant's  (now)
    solicitors, states that "We now have instructions from the appellant to
    withdraw the appeal with a view to submitting a fresh  application.  We
    therefore request the tribunal to withdraw the said appeal."

19. By rule 19 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  a
    party may withdraw its case before the  Upper  Tribunal.  There  is  no
    provision, as such, for a party to withdraw its  appeal.  In  addition,
    The Tribunal must give its consent to the withdrawal.

20. I do not consent to the appellant's request to withdraw his  case  (and
    thus his appeal). Whilst it is the case that a decision  is  not  final
    until promulgated, in this case I gave an oral judgment at the hearing,
    dismissing the appeal. I do not consider that in  the  circumstances  I
    have the power to, in effect, reverse the decision that I have  already
    made. In addition, the appellant failed to attend the hearing and  gave
    no explanation for having done so. A timely application to  withdraw  a
    party's case is one thing, it is quite another for such an  application
    to be made not only post-hearing, but significantly post-hearing.

21. Consent to withdrawal of a party's case is a  discretionary  matter.  I
    decline to exercise my  discretion  to  allow  the  withdrawal  of  the
    appellant's case.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such as to require its decision  to  be  set  aside.
Therefore, its decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Upper                Tribunal                Judge                 Kopieczek
                         11/04/18
