
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01625/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2015                         |On 9th February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                               MUZAFFER SIMSEK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No one
For the Respondent:    Miss Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey, born on  1st  January  1971.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 16th August  2013
    refusing him indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  human
    rights grounds.  His appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Malins on 10th September 2014 and dismissed in a determination
    promulgated on 24th September 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal V A Osborne on 14th November 2014.   Two  of  the  grounds  of
    application were rejected.  The third ground was that the judge applied
    an inappropriate test when assessing the appellant's family  life  with
    his brothers in the United Kingdom.   This  could  not  be  covered  by
    Appendix FM and relying on the case of Ghising (Family life - adults  -
    Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012] UKUT 160  (IAC)  it  was  argued  that  the
    correct test was to consider further elements of  dependency  involving
    more than normal emotional ties  as  opposed  to  imposing  a  test  of
    exceptional dependency as stated at paragraph 11 of the  determination.
    This was stated to be the only arguable error of law and it is on  this
    ground that permission to appeal has been granted.

 3. The error of law hearing was listed to  take  place  on  11th  December
    2014.  At that hearing an issue arose as to whether  the  appellant  in
    this claim has an in country right of appeal.  The following directions
    were given orally at the hearing.

         "The Tribunal must establish whether the certificate  contained  in
         the notice of decision in paragraph 26 of the reasons  for  refusal
         letter has been withdrawn.  Counsel's brief  was  endorsed  to  the
         effect that the Presenting Officer conceded that the Appellant  had
         an in country right of appeal however there is nothing on the  Home
         Office's file or the Presenting Officer's minute to this effect.

         The Tribunal will hear argument and consider any evidence  on  this
         issue which the parties wish to submit.  Any such  evidence  should
         be filed and served no later than fourteen days before the hearing.
          It may be that the issue could be resolved  between  the  parties.
         If it transpires a concession  was  made  regarding  the  right  of
         appeal, the representatives should be  prepared  to  argue  whether
         such a concession could be made and its effect."

 4. No evidence relating to the concession was submitted by the  Appellant.
    On 16th December 2014 the Respondent forwarded a letter to the Tribunal
    referring to the adjourned hearing on 11th December 2014.  The  hearing
    on that date was before Mrs Justice Carr and Judge Froom.   The  letter
    refers to the Tribunal raising with the parties that  there  is  no  in
    country right of appeal before it because  the  Appellant's  claim  has
    been certified under Section 94(2) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  The letter states that it appears that neither  Judge
    Malins' Record of Proceedings nor the Home Office  file  indicate  that
    there was any concession made to withdraw the certification  or  accept
    that the Appellant had an in country right of appeal.  The  Appellant's
    representative has accepted that following a subject access request the
    documentation does not show that the certificate has been withdrawn but
    the representative  provided  a  handwritten  note  from  the  previous
    Counsel, Mr Solomon, which records - "PO concedes the  app  has  an  in
    country right of appeal".  Irrespective of  that  note  the  Presenting
    Officer was not in a position to grant a right of appeal.   The  letter
    states that the Presenting Officer at  the  First-tier  hearing  stated
    that she did not make any concession in this appeal.

 5. The notice of immigration decision dated 6th December  2013  which  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal states

         "You are entitled to appeal this decision under  Section  82(1)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  after  removal.
         You cannot appeal while you are in the  United  Kingdom  because  a
         certificate has been issued under Section 94 of the  2002  Act  (as
         amended).  A Notice of Appeal is enclosed which explains what to do
         and an Immigration and Asylum Chamber leaflet which explains how to
         get help."

The Hearing

 6. There was no appearance on behalf of the Appellant or by the  Appellant
    at this hearing.

 7. The Presenting Officer  submitted  that  the  Respondent  has  made  no
    concession relating to the certification of this claim.  She  submitted
    that in any case there is no statutory basis for the certificate to  be
    withdrawn.  She submitted that when the case was heard before the First-
    tier Tribunal and dismissed there was no material error  of  law.   She
    submitted  that  the  Immigration  Act  2014  was  in  place  and   the
    determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  makes  it  clear  that  the
    Appellant has never had any leave to be in  the  United  Kingdom.   She
    submitted that his siblings were granted leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom when the Appellant was in the United Kingdom but  it  is  clear
    from the determination and from the  file  that  the  Appellant,  since
    coming to the United Kingdom in 1999, has  been  working  for  his  own
    family.  His siblings are on benefits and  he  has  family  members  in
    Turkey.

 8. I was referred to the case of BW Afghanistan [2014]  UKUT  00568  (IAC)
    and I was referred to the said letter of 16th December  2014  from  the
    Respondent to the Tribunal.

 9. My clerk informed me that she had tried to contact  the  appellant  and
    his  representative   and   when   she   telephoned   the   Appellant's
    representative's number she was told that the  number  was  temporarily
    unavailable.  There is also a telephone number on file for Mr  Solomon,
    the previous Counsel in this case and the clerk telephoned him and  was
    told that Mr Solomon was on leave.  The clerk who  answered  the  phone
    could find no notes about this case or about this hearing.

10. I therefore decided to deal with this  error  of  law  hearing  on  the
    papers available and the submissions of Miss Isherwood.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is  no  evidence  that  the
    Respondent made a concession relating  to  the  certification  of  this
    transaction.  She submitted therefore that there is no in country right
    of appeal and the appeal should be dismissed.

12. She then submitted that a concession such as this cannot be made by the
    Home Office so in this case even if a concession had been made  at  the
    First-tier hearing, in law the Respondent is not able to  withdraw  the
    certificate.  It therefore follows that the Appellant has no in country
    right of appeal.  This issue  could  have  been  resolved  between  the
    parties and I was asked to find that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction and should not have determined the case.

Determination

13. I have considered the notice of immigration decision of the  Respondent
    dated 4th December 2013.  It is clear from this that this Appellant has
    no in country right of appeal.   This  is  because  a  certificate  was
    issued under Section 94 of the 2002 Act, as amended.

14. Even if there had been a concession by the Presenting  Officer  at  the
    First-tier hearing the Presenting Officer had no authority to make this
    concession.  There is no statutory  basis  for  the  certificate  being
    withdrawn.  The judge at the First-tier hearing should not  have  heard
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

15. The appellant has no in country right of appeal in this  claim.   Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Malins should not have  heard  the  case  on
    10th September 2014.

16. The Respondent's decision of 16th August 2013  refusing  to  grant  the
    Appellant indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  human
    rights grounds must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

                           Date 06/02/2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the circumstances of this claim there will be no fee award.

Signed


                                                                        Date
06/02/2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray


