
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01427/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 November 2016                            |On 8 December 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                           Obinna Chiddzie Ndukwu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge S J Clarke)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 25 February 2016 refuse him further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student and to remove him from the UK.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  7  December  1980.   He
    came to the UK in 2013 as a Tier 4 student to study at  Oxford  College
    of London.  He studied there from 25 February 2013 to 24 February  2014
    when he was issued with an internal certificate of course completion by
    the college but he never received  his  final  certification  from  the
    awarding body.  On 2 June 2014 he applied for further leave  to  remain
    as a student and submitted a CAS and other documents in support of this
    application including an English language test certificate.

3.   When the Tier 4 Sponsor  Register  was  checked  the  college  was  not
    listed as a sponsor and on 3 November 2015 the appellant  was  informed
    that there had been a decision to revoke his college's  licence,  which
    meant that the CAS he had submitted was no longer  valid  and  that  at
    present the  application  would  fall  to  be  refused.   However,  the
    appellant was notified that, before the final decision and in line with
    the  respondent's  rules  and  guidance,  the  consideration   of   his
    application would be suspended for a period of 60 calendar days, during
    which period it was open to him to withdraw his application and  submit
    a fresh application in a different category or to leave the UK  or,  if
    he wished to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 Student, he  could  obtain  a
    new CAS for a course of study at a fully licensed  Tier  4  educational
    sponsor and then submit an application  to  vary  the  grounds  of  his
    original application.

4.   It is common ground that the appellant failed to obtain a  CAS  by  the
    date of  the  respondent's  decision  on  25  February  2016  when  his
    application was refused because he was unable to meet the  requirements
    of para 245ZX(c) and (d) of the Rules.  He was not in possession  of  a
    valid CAS.  Further, the application was refused under  the  provisions
    of para 322(9) because on 4 February 2016 the respondent had  requested
    the return of the appellant's passport, which had been sent to  him  on
    17 December 2015 so he could sit an English language test on 30 January
    2016.  He had been told that the passport would need to be returned  by
    17 February 2016.  He had had sufficient time to return it but  he  had
    failed to do so.

5.   The appellant appealed against this decision  arguing  in  his  grounds
    that discretion under the Rules should have been exercised  differently
    as he could not be held responsible for the revocation of his sponsor's
    licence, he had made efforts to obtain a new  and  valid  CAS  but  the
    respondent had delayed releasing his passport.  On 1 December  2015  he
    had requested the return of his passport so he could sit an IELTS  test
    booked for 19 December 2015 at 9.30 a.m. but the passport was delivered
    later that day and he was unable to take  the  test.   The  rescheduled
    date was booked for 30 January 2016 and he had taken the test  and  had
    passed.  The grounds further argue that the decision  was  incompatible
    with his rights under the ECHR and if he was removed without completing
    his studies, this would affect his prospects of obtaining employment in
    his home country.

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal

6.   The appeal  was  determined  on  the  papers  at  the  request  of  the
    appellant.  The judge noted the evidence the appellant had submitted in
    support of his appeal.  He had made an application for leave to  remain
    and it was only over a year later that he was served  with  the  60-day
    notice.  He needed to sit an English language test and had notified the
    respondent that he would  need  his  passport  to  do  so.   The  judge
    considered the  correspondence  between  the  appellant  and  the  Home
    Office.  On 4 February 2016 the  appellant  was  asked  to  return  the
    passport and it was noted that he  had  booked  an  IELTS  test  on  30
    January 2016.  The appellant replied on 12 February 2016 to the  effect
    that that he was looking to return his passport with other documents on
    a forward date for due consideration of  his  application.   The  judge
    commented that the reply was vague and there was no mention of  whether
    he had passed the test, on what date he would return the documents  and
    why there was a delay in sending them.

7.   The judge said that when he looked at the bundle of evidence  he  could
    not find the English language test or evidence of  a  successful  pass.
    The appellant had been unable to sit the test in December 2015 but  had
    asked about the test booked on 30 January 2016.   The  judge  concluded
    that the respondent had done all that could be done.  The appellant had
    not produced evidence  of  a  successful  pass  in  the  IELTS  and  in
    consequence the appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules.
     He concluded that the respondent was correct to refuse the application
    both under paras 245 and 322(9).  He found that the appellant had  been
    given good time to return the necessary documents.

8.   The judge commented that the appellant sought to blame  the  respondent
    for her delay in releasing the passport  but  the  respondent  did  not
    reach her decision until after the second test date in January 2016 and
    had given the appellant ample time to provide the passport and  missing
    documents.  She had followed her policy of granting 60 days  to  enable
    him to find another college and a further extension of time to sit  his
    English language test.  The judge considered the issue of human rights,
    finding that there was no evidence of any family life in the UK  or  of
    any exceptional circumstances or compelling  reasons  for  a  grant  of
    leave to remain.  Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

9.   In his grounds of appeal the  appellant  argues  that  the  IELTS  test
    result was included in the appeal papers amongst  other  documents  and
    that there should have been a proper forensic procedure in  respect  of
    the evidence, a document had not been considered which could  have  led
    to have a fair conclusion.

10.  At the hearing before me the appellant explained that  he  had  put  in
    his application for further leave and then had had to wait for  over  a
    year until he had received the 60-day letter.  He had obtained  a  test
    date for 19 December 2015 but could not take it as his passport had not
    been returned until later that day.  He obtained a further test date on
    30 January 2016.  He accepted that he had been  given  a  deadline  for
    returning his passport on 11 February 2016 but at that time he did  not
    know whether he had passed the test.  He thought he  had  probably  got
    the test result on 13 or 14 February and  he  had  later  received  the
    decision letter of 25 February 2016.

11.  He accepted that he had not  sent  a  CAS  letter  in  support  of  the
    application and still did not have such a  letter.   He  had  sent  the
    passport back to the  respondent  after  25  February  2016.   He  also
    accepted that he had not sent a copy of the  test  certificate  to  the
    respondent but it had been included with the  appeal  papers.   He  had
    come to the UK to study and get a degree and was not to be  blamed  for
    his sponsor losing its licence.  His studies had been frustrated by the
    college losing its licence and by the delay by the respondent.

12.  Mr Staunton submitted  that,  even  taking  account  of  the  delay  in
    returning the passport to the appellant, the respondent had only  taken
    the decision some three and a half  months  after  the  60-day  letter.
    When the decision was made, the respondent had not received  the  IELTS
    certificate nor had the passport been returned.  He accepted  that  the
    judge had obviously missed the IELTS certificate when he looked at  the
    papers but that was immaterial to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   The
    appellant could not succeed because he had  not  submitted  a  CAS  and
    other necessary evidence in support of his application.

Assessment of the Issues

13.  The issue I must consider is whether the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    law such that the decision should be set aside.  It  is  common  ground
    that the appellant came to the UK as a Tier 4 student to study  at  the
    Oxford College of London.  He applied for further leave  to  remain  in
    June 2014 but it was not until 3  November  2015  that  the  respondent
    wrote informing him that his college licence had been revoked  and  the
    CAS he had submitted was no longer  valid.   The  letter  followed  the
    respondent's normal policy of  giving  a  student  in  the  appellant's
    position 60 calendar days to withdraw his  application,  make  a  fresh
    application or obtain a new CAS for  a  course  of  study  at  a  fully
    licensed college.  The letter makes it  clear  that  if  the  appellant
    decides to take this course, he needs to find a new  sponsor  who  will
    issue him with a new CAS.

14.  In the present case the appellant also had to retake  his  IELTS  test.
    He booked a test for 19 December 2014 but was unable to take it  as  he
    did not receive his passport back from the respondent until later  that
    same day.  He then arranged to take a further test on 30 January  2016.
    He passed that test but he says that he did not receive the certificate
    until mid February 2016.  In his email to the respondent of 12 February
    2016, the appellant said he was looking to return his passport with the
    other documents  on  a  forward  date  for  due  consideration  of  his
    application.  The judge described the reply as vague.  The  appellant's
    explanation is that at that stage he had not obtained  the  results  of
    the test.  However, on his own account, he did obtain the results a few
    days later but he did not then send a copy of the test  result  to  the
    respondent,  neither  did  he  return  his  passport   prior   to   the
    respondent's decision of 25 February 2016.

15.  I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to find that the  respondent
    correctly refused the application.   For  the  relevant  points  to  be
    awarded, a CAS had to  be  obtained  and  submitted  in  support.   The
    appellant accepts that he did not have a CAS and still  does  not  have
    one.  The respondent also refused the application under the  provisions
    of para 322(9).  The  appellant  had  failed  to  return  his  passport
    following the request on 4 February 2016 even  after  he  had  received
    confirmation that he had passed his IELTS test.  It  was  open  to  the
    judge to find that, in all the circumstances  the  appellant  had  been
    given ample time to return that document.

16.  Permission to appeal was granted because the judge had said  that  when
    he looked at the bundle of evidence he could not find the IELTS test or
    the evidence of a successful pass. On that basis, given that there  was
    an IELTS pass certificate dated 12  February  2016  with  an  array  of
    consistently good results, it  was  arguable  that  an  error  of  fact
    amounting to an error of law had arisen.  However, I am  not  satisfied
    that  the  judge's  failure  to  locate  or  consider  the  copy   test
    certificate has any material bearing on the outcome of the appeal.

17.  Even if the judge had been aware of it, the fact  remains  that  as  at
    the date of decision the appellant was unable to meet the  requirements
    of the Rules, having failed to submit an amended application  with  the
    required documents.  Having had no response  to  the  request  for  the
    return of the passport on 4 February 2016 and  not  having  received  a
    copy of the IELTS test certificate, the  respondent,  who  had  allowed
    substantially longer than 60 days before considering  the  application,
    was entitled to proceed to decide it.

18.  The appellant has raised human rights grounds but I am  satisfied  that
    the judge dealt properly  with  that  aspect  of  the  appeal  and  was
    entitled to find that there was no evidence of family life, no evidence
    of any interference to private life  within  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules and  no  exceptional  circumstances  or  compelling  reasons  for
    looking at the application outside the Rules.

19.  I am therefore not satisfied that the judge erred in  law  in  any  way
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.  It is of  course  open
    to  the  appellant  to  make   a   further   application   or   further
    representations to the respondent but they will be  entirely  a  matter
    for her to consider.

Decision

20.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside and its decision stands.


Signed            H J E Latter               Date:  04 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

