
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01732/2015
     IA/01751/2015
     IA/01755/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th February 2016                         |On 8th March 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                       Pardeep Kumar (first Appellant)
                        Roma Rani (second Appellant)
                           [HK] (third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss S Kansal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Borsada  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 7th May 2015.

 2. The Appellants are Indian citizens, born 30th April  1985,  25th  April
    1982, and [ - ] respectively.  The  first  and  second  Appellants  are
    married and the third Appellant is their daughter.

 3. The first Appellant was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and the second Appellant granted leave
    as his dependant.

 4. Their leave to remain expired on 28th June 2014, and on 23rd June  2014
    the  Appellants  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain,  the   first
    Appellant's application was for leave to remain as a  Tier  4  Student,
    with the second and third Appellants as his dependants.

 5. The applications  were  refused  on  30th  December  2014.   The  first
    Appellant's  application  was  refused  with  reference  to   paragraph
    245ZX(c) and (d).  He  was  not  awarded  any  points  in  relation  to
    Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)  because  he  had  not
    submitted a valid CAS with his application.  For the same  reason,  the
    Appellant was not awarded any points in relation to  maintenance.   The
    applications of the second and third Appellants were refused in line.

 6. The Appellants appealed to the FtT.  In summary it was  contended  that
    the  Respondent  had  not   acted   reasonably   in   considering   the
    applications.  The first Appellant explained that he had not been  able
    to submit a CAS with his application because although he had taken  his
    English language test in June 2014, and he expected the  results  prior
    to his leave  to  remain  expiring,  his  results  were  not  received.
    Therefore the first Appellant had  submitted  with  his  application  a
    conditional offer letter dated 9th July  2014  issued  by  the  college
    where he intended to study,  the  Centre  for  Teaching  in  Management
    (CTM).

 7. The first Appellant explained that  he  received  the  results  of  his
    English language test  on  4th  September  2014,  and  he  had  passed.
    However  he  explained  that  "the  Sponsor  CAS  allocation  has  been
    finished" so his Sponsor was not able to issue him  with  a  CAS.   The
    first Appellant thereafter contacted other Sponsors, but was unable  to
    be  issued  with  a  CAS,  as  all  Sponsor  colleges   requested   the
    Respondent's written permission, and attested copies of the Appellant's
    documents, including his passport.

 8. The first Appellant wrote to the Respondent on two occasions requesting
    that these documents be returned to him to enable him to obtain a  CAS,
    and he also contacted the Respondent  by  telephone.   He  received  no
    response either to the letters or telephone call.

 9. Therefore it was contended that the Respondent had not acted fairly  in
    refusing the first Appellant's application without explaining  why  his
    documents were not returned to him.  The first  Appellant  relied  upon
    Thakur (PBS decision - common law  fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT
    00151  (IAC).   The  first  Appellant  therefore  submitted  that   the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

10. The appeals were heard by the FtT on 23rd April 2015.  The FtT did  not
    doubt the first Appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  the  delay  he
    experienced in obtaining his  English  language  certificate,  and  the
    difficulties that he encountered thereafter in obtaining a new CAS.  It
    was also accepted that the first Appellant had contacted the Respondent
    on several occasions requesting copy documents to assist in his  search
    for a  new  Sponsor,  and  there  was  a  lack  of  response  from  the
    Respondent.

11. However the FtT decided  that  because  the  first  Appellant  had  not
    submitted a valid CAS with his application, then his application  could
    not succeed, and his appeal had to be dismissed.

12. In relation to  the  question  of  fairness  the  FtT  noted  that  the
    Respondent was under no obligation  to  request  a  CAS  that  was  not
    submitted, but in this case even if such a request had  been  made,  no
    CAS would have been available.  The FtT found that

         "Whether the Respondent should have responded  to  the  Appellant's
         request for his copy documents is an entirely different matter  but
         even if it had and the Appellant had been able  to  secure  a  CAS,
         this CAS would not have assisted the Appellant in  respect  of  his
         original application."

13. The FtT found that the Respondent had a  policy  whereby  60  days  was
    given to an individual where a Sponsor licence had  been  revoked,  but
    that did not apply in  this  case,  as  the  first  Appellant  had  not
    provided a valid CAS with his application.  Therefore the FtT  did  not
    accept that the Respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    law.

14. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds are summarised below.

15. The issue before the FtT was whether the Respondent had acted fairly in
    refusing  the  application,  without  giving  the  first  Appellant  an
    opportunity to vary his application, despite requests  being  made  for
    documents held by the  Respondent  to  be  produced.   These  documents
    included the first Appellant's passport  without  which  he  could  not
    obtain a new CAS.

16. The first Appellant relied upon Kaur [2013] UKUT 00344 (IAC), and Patel
    India [2011] UKUT 00211, in addition to Thakur which  had  been  relied
    upon in the grounds submitted to the FtT.

17. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Kelly of  the  FtT,
    but the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and permission to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill in the following terms;



         "It is arguable that Judge Borsada may have erred in law in failing
         to engage at all or adequately with the Appellants'  argument  that
         the Respondent had acted unfairly by:
         (a)  failing to respond  to  the  first  Appellant's  requests  for
             copies of his documents so as to enable him to  obtain  a  CAS
             and thus submit an application to  vary  his  application  for
             leave dated 23rd June 2014; and
         (b)  proceeding instead to refuse his application of 23rd June 2014
             on the basis that he had not provided a CAS letter.
         It would seem that the Respondent's suggestion that  the  Appellant
         can make another application from abroad is not an answer, as  this
         would appear to ignore the issue of unfairness,  if  there  has  in
         fact been  unfairness  such  as  to  render  the  decision  not  in
         accordance  with  the  law.   This  ground  was  available  to  the
         Appellant at the date of the decision and  it  was  raised  in  the
         original Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.
         One would have thought that the first  Appellant  would  have  kept
         copies of his  documents.   He  should  be  ready  to  address  the
         Tribunal on this issue."

18. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    dated 14th September 2015 pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  In summary it was contended that the  FtT
    had not  erred  in  law,  and  the  grounds  submitted  amounted  to  a
    disagreement, rather than disclosing an error of law.  It was contended
    that the  FtT  provided  adequate  and  sustainable  findings  and  had
    properly considered the issue of fairness.

19. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Appellants' Submissions

20. Miss Kansal had not appeared before the FtT and had  not  prepared  the
    grounds contained within the  application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    Miss Kansal confirmed that there was no skeleton argument submitted  on
    behalf of the Appellants.

21. In addition to  relying  upon  the  grant  of  permission  Miss  Kansal
    submitted that the Respondent's decisions to  refuse  the  applications
    for leave to remain were not in accordance with the law, because  there
    was no reference in those decisions to the residual discretion to grant
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

22. The FtT had erred in law by  failing  to  consider  whether  discretion
    should have been exercised.  Miss Kansal relied upon case law, Shaikh v
    SSHD [2014] EWHC 2586 (Admin), and in particular paragraph 21  of  that
    decision.   Reliance  was  also  placed  upon  Ukus  (discretion:  when
    reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC).  Unfortunately Miss Kansal did not
    have copies  of  the  case  law  to  supply  to  the  Tribunal  or  the
    Respondent.

23. Miss Kansal confirmed that the first Appellant did not contend that  he
    should have the benefit of the Respondent's 60 day policy  which  would
    apply if a college which had issued a CAS subsequently had its  Sponsor
    licence revoked.  The case made on behalf of the  Appellants  was  that
    the Respondent had  acted  unfairly  in  not  acknowledging  the  first
    Appellant's requests for documents which  would  have  enabled  him  to
    apply for a new CAS and vary  his  application,  and  the  Respondent's
    decisions were not in accordance with the law,  because  there  was  no
    reference to the Respondent considering the exercise of  discretion  to
    grant leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.





The Respondent's Submissions

24. Mr Richards relied upon the rule 24 response and pointed out that  Miss
    Kansal was raising the issue of discretion for the first time, and this
    was not before the FtT.  I was asked to  find  that  the  FtT  decision
    disclosed no material error of law and should stand.

25. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

26. I deal firstly with the submission that the Respondent's decisions were
    not  in  accordance  with  the  law  because  discretion  outside   the
    Immigration Rules had not been exercised.  It is  unfortunate  that  no
    skeleton argument was submitted and that copies of  cases  relied  upon
    were not provided.  I do not find that  there  is  any  merit  in  this
    ground for the following reasons.

27. I find that the issue of failure to consider discretion was not  raised
    as a Ground of Appeal to the FtT, and in my view it was certainly not a
    'Robinson obvious' point.  Neither was the issue of  discretion  raised
    within the application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
    and permission to appeal was not granted on this point.

28. In my view the Appellants had no right of appeal to  the  FtT  on  this
    issue.  There was a right of appeal to the FtT (now  abolished  by  the
    Immigration Act  2014)  under  section  84(1)(f)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which I  set  out  below  for  ease  of
    reference;

         (f)  that the person taking  the  decision  should  have  exercised
             differently a discretion conferred by Immigration Rules;

    The Respondent did not have a discretion under the Immigration Rules in
    relation to the applications made by the Appellants.  The point made by
    Miss Kansal  is  that  the  Respondent  did  not  consider  a  residual
    discretion outside the Immigration Rules.  There is no  appeal  to  the
    FtT on that basis.  The case  law  referred  to  does  not  assist  the
    Appellants, as Shaikh is a High Court judicial review  case,  and  Ukus
    relates to a discretion within the Immigration Rules.

29. In my view it is clear that the FtT did not err in law on this point.

30. I then turn to the question  of  fairness,  which  is  why  Judge  Gill
    granted permission to appeal.  The cases referred to by the  Appellants
    are not exactly on point.  Thakur confirms that there is a  common  law
    duty upon the Secretary of State to act fairly in the  decision  making
    process when an applicant  had  not  had  an  adequate  opportunity  of
    enrolling at another college following the withdrawal  of  the  Sponsor
    licence or of making further representations before  the  decision  was
    made.  I set out below the second paragraph to the head note;

         2.   The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote: what
             fairness demands is dependent on the context of  the  decision
             and the particular circumstances of the applicant.

31. Patel dealt with revocation of a Sponsor licence and I  set  out  below
    for ease of reference the first paragraph to the head note;

         (1)  Immigration Judges  have  jurisdiction  to  determine  whether
             decisions on variation of leave applications are in accordance
             with the law, where issues of fairness arise.

    In Patel it was held to be unfair to refuse an application for leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 Student, when a Sponsor's licence had  been  revoked
    without giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity to identify a new
    Sponsor before his application was decided.  The Upper Tribunal decided
    that it would be unfair to refuse an  application  without  opportunity
    being given to vary it under section 3C(5), Immigration Act 1971.

32. Kaur confirms that the Respondent produced a policy to give  effect  to
    the principles of common law fairness  identified  in  Patel,  and  the
    policy provides that in cases of potential discretionary refusal  under
    paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules, caseworkers should  follow  the
    'Patel' process.  That is not directly relevant to these appeals.

33. Case law does  make  it  clear  that  the  FtT  should  decide  whether
    decisions on variation of leave are in accordance with  the  law  where
    issues of fairness arise, and what fairness demands is dependent on the
    context of the decision, and the circumstances of the applicant.

34. In my view the FtT did not properly engage  with  the  fairness  issues
    raised by the first Appellant.

35. It was accepted that the first Appellant had written to the  Respondent
    on two occasions, and copies of his letters dated 14th  September  2014
    and 20th October 2014  were  produced,  requesting  that  documents  be
    returned to him to enable him to apply for a new  CAS,  and  there  had
    been no response to those requests.

36. The FtT referred in paragraph  9  to  the  Respondent  being  under  no
    obligation to request  a  CAS,  but  that  was  not  the  issue  to  be
    considered.  The FtT noted that the CAS did not exist, but  again  that
    is not the issue the FtT  was  being  asked  to  consider,  as  it  was
    accepted that there was no CAS, and an explanation had been given as to
    why that was the case.

37. It was accepted that the first Appellant had been given  a  conditional
    letter from a college, but could not be issued with a  CAS  because  he
    was still waiting for the result of his English  language  test.   When
    that result was received, the college was not able to offer him a  CAS.
    If the  Respondent  had  answered  the  first  Appellant's  request  by
    providing documents, he would have  had  an  opportunity  to  vary  his
    application.   The  Respondent  gave  no  reason  whatsoever  for   not
    answering the first Appellant's requests.  The FtT erred in law by  not
    considering this issue, and not considering whether the Respondent  had
    complied with the common law duty to act fairly.

38. I therefore conclude that the decision of the FtT must be set aside.

39. Because the Respondent's decision was made prior to  the  amendment  to
    appeal rights introduced by the Immigration Act 2014, there is still  a
    power to find that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with
    the law.

40. Based upon the findings made by the FtT, which have not been challenged
    by the Respondent, I conclude that the Respondent did not act fairly in
    failing to acknowledge or respond to the requests  made  by  the  first
    Appellant for the return to him of documents, including  his  passport,
    that would enable him to make another application for a CAS,  and  vary
    his application for leave to remain.

41. I therefore conclude that the appropriate course of action is  to  find
    that the Respondent's decisions in relation to all the Appellants,  are
    not in accordance with the law, as the Respondent has failed to  comply
    with the common law duty to act fairly,  and  therefore  the  decisions
    remain outstanding before the Respondent  for  fresh  decisions  to  be
    made.

42. When considering these applications again, the Respondent will need  to
    consider the requests made by the first Appellant  for  the  return  of
    documents or certified copies, and either  provide  the  documents,  or
    provide a reason why it is not appropriate for those  documents  to  be
    returned to enable the first Appellant to make an application for a new
    CAS.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeals are allowed to the extent that  the  Respondent's
decisions are not in accordance with the law and  the  applications  by  the
Appellants remain outstanding before the Respondent for fresh  decisions  to
be made.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.




Signed                              Date 25th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

FEE AWARD

The appeals have been allowed to the extent that the decisions  need  to  be
considered again by the Respondent.  In the circumstances I do not  find  it
is appropriate to make any fee award.






Signed                              Date 25th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
