
[pic]


UPPER TRIBUNAL

IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER    Appeal No. IA/01825/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Birmingham                |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On: 4 September 2014                 |On: 8 September 2014                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                   Between

                              Rhona Belle Raras
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid instructed by Blavo & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  the  Philippines  and  was  born  on  23
    September 1984.

 2. This is her appeal against the determination promulgated on 13 May 2014
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal which refused the appeal under
    the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  ECHR  brought   against   the
    respondent's decision of 10 December 2013 to refuse leave.

 3. The most expedient  way  to  address  the  grounds  here  is  to  refer
    initially to two  recently  issued  reported  decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. The first case is VHR (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367
    (IAC). The head note of the case states:

         "Appeals should not be mounted on the basis of a litany of forensic
         criticisms of particular  findings  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
         whilst ignoring the basic legal test which  the  appellant  has  to
         meet."

 5. The second case is Nixon (permission to appeal:  grounds)  [2014]  UKUT
    00368 (IAC). The head note states:

         "Whilst making due allowance where an applicant for  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal is unrepresented and in respect of the
         requirement to consider obvious points arising  under  the  Refugee
         Convention or ECHR (R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         ex parte Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162), the First-tier  Tribunal  and
         the Upper Tribunal can be expected to deal brusquely  and  robustly
         with any application for permission that does not  specify  clearly
         and coherently, with appropriate particulars, the error(s)  of  law
         said to contaminate the decision under challenge.  Besides  placing
         unnecessary   demands   upon   the   judiciary,   poorly   compiled
         applications  risk  undermining  the  important  value   of   legal
         certainty and causing unfairness to the other party."

 6. Nixon goes on to state at [6] that:

         "Given recent experience,  it  may  be  timely  to  formulate  some
         general rules of practice. It is axiomatic that  every  application
         for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  should  identify,
         clearly and with all necessary particulars, the error/s of law  for
         which the moving party contends.  This must be  effected  in  terms
         which are recognisable and  comprehensible.   A  properly  compiled
         application for permission to appeal will convey  at  once  to  the
         Judge concerned the error/s of law said to have been committed.  It
         should not be necessary for the permission Judge to hunt  and  mine
         in order to understand the basis and  thrust  of  the  application.
         While in some cases it will be possible for the permission Judge to
         engage in a degree of interpretation and/or making  inferences  for
         this purpose, this should never be assumed  by  the  applicant  and
         cannot operate as  a  substitute  for  a  properly  and  thoroughly
         compiled  application.   These  are  elementary  requirements   and
         standards."

    and at [10] to [12]:

         "10.     The application for permission to appeal  in  the  present
         case did not  satisfy  the  requirements  and  standards  rehearsed
         above.  It made no attempt to specify the error/s of  law  said  to
         have been committed by the FtT.  It employed the vague language  of
         "erred", without more.  This was inadequate and  unacceptable.   In
         principle,  an  error  of  law  may  take  a   number   of   forms.
         Inexhaustively, these include a failure to have regard to  material
         evidence; taking into account and being  influenced  by  immaterial
         evidence; inadequate reasons; unfair procedure; misunderstanding or
         misconstruction of  the  law;  disregarding  a  relevant  statutory
         provision; failing to give  effect  to  a  binding  decision  of  a
         superior court; and irrationality.  It should not be difficult  for
         those who compile applications for permission to appeal to do so in
         terms  which  specify  clearly  and  coherently,  with  appropriate
         particulars, the error/s of law said to  contaminate  the  decision
         under challenge.  Terms such as "erred" or "erred in law"  or  "was
         wrong in law" or  "misdirected  itself  in  law"  are  unacceptable
         unless accompanied by a clear specification of the error/s  of  law
         alleged and suitable brief particulars.   If  the  application  for
         permission fails to satisfy this standard and the  Judge  concerned
         is unable to identify with confidence the error/s of law  asserted,
         the appropriate course will be a refusal.

         11.      One  of  the  negative  consequences  of  poorly  compiled
         applications  for  permission  to  appeal  is   the   inappropriate
         expenditure of judicial time in attempting to understand the  basis
         and thrust of the application.  This occurred in the present  case,
         both in advance of the  substantive  hearing  and  at  the  hearing
         itself.  Given the pressures on Tribunals to process large  volumes
         of cases efficiently  and  expeditiously,  in  circumstances  where
         there has been  a  notable  recent  increase  in  applications  for
         permission to appeal to UTIAC, this is unacceptable.   Furthermore,
         it is inimical to the overriding objective enshrined in  rule  2(1)
         of the 2008 Rules.  This  provides,  inter  alia,  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal must be enabled to process cases in a manner which  avoids
         delay.  Poorly compiled applications for permission to  appeal  can
         have other undesirable consequences.  These include undermining the
         important value of legal certainty  and  unfairness  to  the  other
         party.   Henceforth,   applicants   can    expect    unsatisfactory
         applications for permission to appeal to be  dealt  with  brusquely
         and robustly.

     12. The nebulous terms of the application for permission to  appeal  in
         the present case are reflected in  the  grant  of  permission.  The
         former had a contagious effect on the latter.   The  Judge  granted
         permission, firstly, on the ground that the FtT had arguably  erred
         in law in its assessment of the  credibility  of  three  particular
         witnesses: see the second ground of appeal reproduced in [2] above.
          It may be observed that it will  very  rarely  be  appropriate  to
         grant permission to appeal on this  kind  of  ground.   Credibility
         assessments by first instance fact finding Tribunals will  normally
         be challengeable only on the basis of irrationality (or, as  it  is
         sometimes inelegantly termed, perversity): Edwards - v  -  Bairstow
         [1956] AC 14. Judges should be very slow  to  grant  permission  on
         such a  ground.  The  second  striking  feature  of  the  grant  of
         permission is the statement:

             "It is arguable that the Judge  gave  inadequate  reasons  for
             finding that the Appellant lived with his wife in a subsisting
             relationship."

         There was no contention in the application for permission that  the
         FtT's determination was inadequately reasoned.  Thus  there  was  a
         mismatch between application and grant. It seems  likely  that  the
         permission Judge was struggling to comprehend the  application  and
         was driven  to  this  formulation  in  consequence.    Finally,  as
         regards the  first ground of appeal, also quoted in [2]  above,  it
         is abundantly clear from  the  determination  that  the  Judge  had
         considered the emails from the local authority  but,  on  perfectly
         rational and clearly explained grounds, declined to accord them any
         weight."

 7. Those comments appeared to me to be applicable to the grounds and grant
    of permission  here.  The  Immigration  Judge  took  into  account  the
    relevant  evidence  and  was  manifestly  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for leave under Article 8 ECHR. She has  been
    in the UK only since 2009 in a limited capacity. She came  here  as  an
    adult having spent most of her life apart from  her  birth  mother  and
    half-sister.  She  has  a  number  of  immediate   relatives   in   the
    Philippines, including the sister with whom she grew up. The First-tier
    Tribunal was correct to point out at [16] that the appellant worked  in
    the Philippines as a nurse before coming to the UK so it was reasonable
    to expect her to be able to find work  there  again.    The  judge  was
    equally correct to identify at [17] that the appellant's mother brought
    up her half-sister for most of her life  without  any  input  from  the
    appellant and could have expected to have to continue to care  for  the
    child alone when the appellant's studies ended.

 8. The grounds do not come close to identifying that the approach taken by
    the First-tier Tribunal was perverse or relied on immaterial matters or
    failed to take into account material ones.  It  is  clear  reading  the
    determination as a whole that the First-tier  Tribunal   accepted  that
    the appellant had a private life in the UK and a family life  of  sorts
    with her mother and sister. The determination identifies the latter  in
    terms at [18]. The judge sets out in clear and reasoned terms  why  the
    appellant's  family  relationships  will   not   be   interfered   with
    disproportionately by  the  decision.  Her  private  life  was  clearly
    limited and could not entitle her to leave under Article 8;  see  Patel
    and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 at  paragraph  57.  The  decision  was
    manifestly  not  made  on  the  basis  of  the  comment  at  [19].  The
    consideration at [15] to [20] covers the factors material to  a  second
    stage Article 8 assessment and finds against the appellant. The grounds
    are merely a disagreement dressed up as an error of law challenge.

 9. I must admit to being somewhat perplexed by the grant of permission  to
    appeal. I cannot parse the first paragraph in a  way  that  shows  what
    arguable error of law arose in relation to the case of Gulshan (Article
    8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640. The case  law  has
    moved on in that regard in any event, following MM and  Others  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin). The second paragraph ignores the question  of
    materiality and the finding of  a  family  life  at  [18].  The  second
    paragraph reflects the vagueness and lack of any specific error of  law
    challenge of the grounds of appeal.

10. The grounds of appeal do not show an error on a point  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    DECISION

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error on  a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:     [pic]      Date: 4 September 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
