
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01935/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2015                           |On 3 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                             somchai thonsanthia
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Bassiri-Dezfouli of Counsel by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker of the Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Thailand born on 15 February 1971.  There
    is a dearth of information in the  Tribunal  file  when  the  Appellant
    first came to the United Kingdom and on what basis.  On 5 October  2009
    he was granted discretionary leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    marriage by way of reference to his rights to a private and family life
    protected by Article 8 of the European Convention.  On 3 September 2012
    he applied for further leave to remain on the basis  of  his  marriage.
    On 13  December  2013  the  Respondent  refused  that  application  and
    proposed to make directions for his removal to Thailand.  By  a  letter
    of the same date (the reasons letter) the Respondent gave  reasons  for
    the decision which was based on her view that the Appellant had  failed
    to provide sufficient documentary evidence to support  the  claim  that
    his relationship with his wife was  genuine  and  subsisting.   He  was
    therefore refused by way  of  reference  to  paragraph  E-LTRP.1.7.  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  His application was also refused
    by way of reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    because he did not satisfy the length of residence  requirements.   The
    Respondent  considered  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    warrant consideration of his claim under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention outside the Immigration Rules.

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 2. The Appellant appealed under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds  are  brief
    and formulaic.

 3. By a determination promulgated on 12 August 2014 Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Coleman found the Appellant had not  shown  his  marriage
    was subsisting and dismissed the appeal.

 4. By a decision of 1  October  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Lambert refused the Appellant permission  to  appeal.   The  permission
    application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal and on  12  January  2015
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that the grounds identified arguable  errors  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    assessment of the evidence which  led  her  to  make  adverse  findings
    against the Appellant and his wife.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 5. At the start of the hearing Mr Walker for  the  Respondent  produced  a
    copy of the determination of Immigration Judge Dawson in appeal  number
    TH/00500/2006 promulgated on 24  April  2006  by  which  he  found  the
    Appellant  and  his  wife  were  then  in  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship. On that basis Mr Walker submitted the Respondent had  not
    been aware of the facts in 2006 when the decision now under appeal  was
    made.  He therefore remitted the case to  the  Respondent.   Mr  Walker
    advised that consequent upon  that  determination  the  Respondent  had
    granted the Appellant further leave to remain.  Mr Walker  referred  me
    in particular to paragraphs 19 and 25 of Judge  Dawson's  determination
    and that the Respondent had not sought to  challenge  the  findings  in
    those paragraphs.

 6. Both parties acknowledged that Judge  Dawson's  determination  had  not
    been put before Judge Coleman and consequently through no fault of  her
    own her determination had made no reference to it.  This was  an  error
    of law resulting in an unfair consideration of his appeal by the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The parties agreed that this was a  material  error  of
    law and that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for hearing afresh with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

 7. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    matter I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error
    of law such that it should be set aside in its entirety.  The appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh before any Judge
    other than Judge Coleman.


Signed/Official Crest                                                   Date
02. iii. 2015




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


