
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01755/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2014                             |On 05 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                QAISER BILLA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTON NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This an appeal by the Secretary of State but  for  convenience  I  have
    retained  the  designations  used  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Secretary of State is thus referred to, in this determination,  as  the
    Respondent.

2.   The appellant Mr Qaiser Billa is a 28  year  old  citizen  of  Pakistan
    born on 4 January 1986.  In May 2013 he applied  to  the  Secretary  of
    State for a residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
    on the basis that he is the  husband  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights  in  the  UK.   His  wife  is  stated  to  be  Aleksandra
    Pawlowska, a Polish national.  They were married  at  Reading  Register
    Office on 7 May 2013.

3.   On 29 November 2013 the  application  was  refused.   The  reasons  for
    refusal letter of that date maintained that the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience which is excluded by Regulation 2 of the 2006  Regulations.
    A marriage of convenience has been defined as  "a  marriage  contracted
    for the sole or decisive purpose  of  gaining  admission  to  the  host
    state": Papjorgji [2012] UKUT 00038 at [30].  The reasons  for  refusal
    letter set out lengthy and detailed reasons for believing this to be  a
    marriage of convenience based on the inconsistency of the replies given
    by the appellant and his wife  at  their  respective  interviews.   The
    respondent identified thirteen significant discrepancies as set out  in
    detail in the reasons for refusal letter.

4.   The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Onoufriou  whose  determination  was
    promulgated on 13 May 2014.  The judge heard oral  evidence  from  both
    the appellant and Ms Pawlowska.  At [21] and [22] the judge  identified
    further discrepancies in the  oral  evidence  and  he  concluded  "that
    taking into account the speed of the marriage and  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's application was just over a month before his  student  visa
    was about  to  expire,  that  on  the  facts  this  is  a  marriage  of
    convenience".

5.   Despite that finding the judge allowed  the  appeal  as  not  being  in
    accordance with the law.  He  did  so  by  reference  to  the  case  of
    Papjorgji.  At [20] he referred to  paragraph  19  of  Papjorgji  which
    stated that "there must be reason to suspect a marriage of  convenience
    before the application can be suspended pending further investigation".
     He held that it was for the respondent to  show  reasonable  cause  to
    suspect the marriage as one  of  convenience  before  pursuing  further
    investigation.

6.   The respondent sought permission to appeal.  Permission was granted  on
    20 June 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever on the  basis  that  it
    was  arguable  that  the  judge  had  misapplied  the  application   of
    Papjorgji.

7.    On  the  issue  of  error  of  law  I  heard   submissions   by   both
    representatives.  Mr Kandola, for the  Secretary  of  State,  submitted
    that the judge had found this to be a marriage of convenience and  that
    there had been no cross appeal on that finding by the  appellant.   The
    case of Papjorgji had been misapplied by the judge.  In any  event,  in
    that case, it  was  found  that  the  marriage  had  not  been  one  of
    convenience because the parties had been together  for  fourteen  years
    and had had two children.  In the present case, the appellant  and  his
    sponsor had been interviewed after the application  was  submitted  and
    before a decision was made to refuse the application and  that  it  was
    correct and reasonable for the Secretary of State to have followed that
    procedure.

8.   For the appellant, Mr Maqsood submitted that the judge  made  no  error
    of law and that he was correct to allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    Papjorgji.  Prior to the interview, the Secretary of State  could  have
    had no grounds for suspicion as to whether or not this was  a  marriage
    of convenience.

9.   I must first consider whether there has been an error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  I am  satisfied  that  there
    was such  an  error  of  law.   I  have  carefully  reviewed  the  full
    determination in Papjorgji.  In his conclusions at [39], Blake J,  then
    President of the Tribunal, said this:

         "In summary, our understanding is that, where the issue  is  raised
         in an appeal, the question for the judge will therefore be 'in  the
         light of the totality of the information before me,  including  the
         assessment of the claimant's answers and any information  provided,
         am I satisfied that it is more probable than not this is a marriage
         of convenience?'."

10.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  appears  to  have  read  [18]-[20]  of
    Papjorgji as meaning that the Secretary  of  State  is  precluded  from
    investigating a potential marriage  of  convenience  unless  there  are
    clear suspicions that the matter should be investigated.   That  cannot
    possibly be right.  Where the Secretary of State receives, as  she  did
    in  this  case,  an  application  based  on  marriage  it   cannot   be
    unreasonable, particularly where the marriage predated the  application
    by only a few days (as was the case here) to request the parties to  be
    interviewed prior to a decision being made.  That is what the Secretary
    of State did in this case and it was entirely  based  on  the  parties'
    replies to  questions  at  the  interviews  that  the  application  was
    refused.

11.  The judge therefore made a material error of law in his  interpretation
    of the effect of Papjorgji and  his  decision  must  therefore  be  set
    aside.

12.  There is, however, no reason for me, in remaking the decision,  not  to
    accept the clear  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (after
    hearing oral evidence) that this was, as claimed by the  respondent,  a
    marriage of convenience.  Those findings are retained  and  accordingly
    the appeal of the appellant Mr Billa, must be dismissed.

Decision

     The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law
and is set aside (save as to the findings of fact at paragraphs  21  and  22
of the determination).  The fee award is similarly set aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal of the  appellant  Mr  Qaiser
    Billa.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
5 September 2014
