
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01407/2016
                                                               IA/01406/2016
                                                               IA/01408/2016
                                                               IA/01409/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th April 2018                            |On 14th May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                         Abdul [K] (first Appellant)
                         Zubaida (second Appellant)
                           [MK] (third Appellant)
                           [KK] (fourth Appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G O'Callaghan, Counsel instructed by M and K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Abosie, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Abdul [K], his wife and two children  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad to  dismiss  their  appeals
    against refusal of their applications for further leave to remain, that
    decision being dated 22nd February 2016.

 2.  The  way  the  matter  came  before  Judge  Asjad  was  unusual.   The
    applications had been made as long ago as 22nd December 2014.   Mr  [K]
    made his application on the basis that he was a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur,
    and his wife and two children made their applications on the basis that
    they were his dependants.

 3. The applications were originally refused on 29th January  2015  on  the
    basis that the First Appellant, Mr [K], had not met the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules for leave to remain as an entrepreneur in that he
    had failed to demonstrate that  he  had  a  viable  business  plan.  It
    followed from this that his wife and  children  could  not  succeed  in
    their applications  for  leave  to  remain  as  his  dependents.   They
    appealed that decision and the matter came before Judge Khawar on  15th
    July 2015.

 4. In a decision promulgated on 13th August 2015, Judge Khawar found  that
    the First Appellant, Mr [K], did in fact have a  viable  business  plan
    and thus fulfilled the requirements for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur. It may thus have been expected that  Secretary  of  State
    would have granted his application for leave to  remain  in  line  with
    that decision.

 5. However, the problem arises in  this  appeal  arises  from  what  Judge
    Khawar said in his concluding remarks at paragraph 16 of  his  decision



         "Accordingly the Appellant is entitled to succeed  in  this  appeal
         ... However, I note that the Respondent has  not  fully  considered
         the Appellant's  application  and  intends  to  carry  out  a  full
         verification  check  upon  all   documents   submitted   and   will
         undoubtedly consider any credibility issues which may  or  may  not
         arise".

 6. The above reference appears to have been to a standard  paragraph  that
    appears in every written refusal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  an
    application of this type. This reads as follows -

         "Please note, on  this  occasion  we  have  not  carried  out  full
         verification  checks  on  the  documents  you  submitted   or   the
         statements that you have made on your  application  form,  as  your
         application falls for refusal on other grounds as  outlined  above.
         However, the Home Office reserves the right in  future  to  request
         independent third-party verification of any  pieces  of  supporting
         documentation that you have provided with this application ...".

 7. Unfortunately, as a result of the observations quoted  at  paragraph  5
    (above), the decision-maker in the instant appeal concluded that  Judge
    Khawar had only allowed the appeal to the limited extent  of  remitting
    the matter for a full reconsideration by the Secretary  of  State  upon
    all matters,  including  the  viability  of  Mr  [K]'s  business  plan.
    Indeed, that is the way the matter is put in the 'immigration  history'
    section of  the  introductory  notes  to  the  Respondent's  bundle  of
    documents. So it was that  the  decisionmaker  in  the  instant  appeal
    proceeded to  refuse  the  applications  upon  substantially  the  same
    grounds as her predecessor, namely, that the Appellants had  failed  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules by showing that  Mr  [K]
    had a viable business plan.

 8. Unsurprisingly, the Appellants appealed again.  The  matter  this  time
    came before Judge Asjad.   The  Appellant's  took  the  point  at  this
    hearing that it was  not  open  to  the  Respondent  to  re-refuse  the
    application given that Judge Khawar  had  already  allowed  the  appeal
    against its refusal under the Immigration Rules.   This  is  how  Judge
    Asjad dealt with that argument

         "5.  It would certainly appear from Judge  Khawar's  decision  that
             the appeal was allowed outright under the  Immigration  Rules.
             Paragraph 18 of the decision explicitly states that the appeal
             is allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  is  no
             reference to the matter being remitted back to the Respondent.
              However in paragraph 16 of the decision the judge noted  that
             the  Secretary  of  State  intended  to  carry   out   further
             verification checks which led to the decision  being  made  on
             22nd February 2016.  As this is a decision that has been  made
             by the Respondent and is the matter under appeal before  me  I
             do not find that I am in a position to do anything  more  than
             look at this decision and see whether or not  it  is  correct.
             Whether or nor there are any  issues  regarding  the  original
             decision are matters that the Appellant ought to  have  raised
             by way of judicial review or appeal on  a  different  occasion
             and it is not something that I am  able  to  rectify  in  this
             decision.  I am only able to assess the evidence before me and
             that is what I intend to do".

 9. She then proceeded to look at the substantive merits of the application
    and thereafter reached adverse conclusions in relation  to  whether  or
    not Mr [K] had a viable business plan such as to qualify for  leave  to
    remain as  a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur.  She  consequently  dismissed  the
    appeals.

10.  I  am  satisfied  that  Judge  Asjad's  analysis  at  paragraph  5  is
    fundamentally flawed in law.

11. The position with regard to the second decision which was under  appeal
    before Judge Asjad is succinctly summarised in the  head  note  to  the
    decision of Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  and  Shamen
    Chomanga [2011] UKUT 00312 (IAC)

         "The parties are bound  by  un-appealed  findings  of  fact  in  an
         Immigration Judge's decision.  It is  therefore  not  open  to  the
         Respondent following a successful and  unchallenged  appeal  by  an
         Appellant to make a further adverse  decision  on  the  same  issue
         relying on the same evidence as before unless there is evidence  of
         fraud or one of the exceptions identified in paragraph  35  of  the
         judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State v  TB  [2008]
         EWCA 997 applies".

12. It was not argued before either Judge Asjad  or  me  that  any  of  the
    limited exceptions to  the  principle  that  un-appealed  findings  are
    binding on the parties were applicable in  the  present  appeal.  Judge
    Asjad was of course right to say that the decision under appeal was the
    second decision.  She was however wrong to say  that  it  was  for  the
    Appellants to seek judicial  review  of  that  decision  if  they  were
    dissatisfied with it.  On the contrary, it was  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to challenge Judge Khawar's decision if  she  was  not  satisfied
    with it.  It was not therefore open to the Secretary of State simply to
    circumvent the appeal process by making a fresh  decision  which  again
    refused the applications on the same grounds, although I should  hasten
    to add that I am not suggesting that was done intentionally.

13. The correct analysis in my judgment, and therefore the one  that  Judge
    Asjad should have adopted, was as follows.  The present application had
    been made prior to the amendments by section 15 of the Immigration  Act
    2014 to the rights of appeal under  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 had come into effect. It therefore  followed  that  all
    the original Grounds of Appeal remained  available  to  the  Appellant.
    Where Judge Asjad went wrong in my view was in assuming that she had to
    deal with the second appeal on the same ground as that upon  which  the
    first appeal had been brought, namely, that the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules.  However,  it  was  quite  clear
    from the submission that was being made to  her  that  the  Appellants'
    representative was arguing that the appeal should  be  allowed  on  the
    ground that the second decision was 'not in accordance with  the  law'.
    The effect of allowing the appeal on this ground  would  have  been  to
    ensure that the original decision of Judge Khawar (to allow the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules) stood.

14. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  Judge  Asjad  to  dismiss  the
    appeals under the Immigration Rules and substitute a decision to  allow
    the appeals against the purported refusal on 22nd February 2016 on  the
    ground that that refusal was not in accordance with the  law.  For  the
    avoidance of doubt, and absent evidence that they are tainted by fraud,
    the Secretary of State must now grant the  applications  for  leave  to
    remain.

Notice of Decision

 1. The appeals are allowed.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeals  under
    the Immigration Rules is set aside and substituted  by  a  decision  to
    allow the appeals on the ground that the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse the  applications  for  leave  to  remain  was  not  in
    accordance with the law

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 9th May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
