
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01334/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10th February 2015                |On 29th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                   KAYANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lourdes instructed by Morgan Mark solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a  decision  by  FtT  Judge  Sangha  of  10th
    October 2014 (hearing 11th August 2014) dismissing an appeal against  a
    decision by the Secretary of State dated 11th December 2013 refusing to
    vary leave to remain and giving directions for removal under Section 47
    of the Immigration and Asylum  Nationality  Act  2016.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by a judge of the FtT. We refer to the terms of  the
    grant later in this determination.

 2. The history is set out uncontroversially in  the  FtT  decision.    The
    appellant was born on 1st April 1989.  He is a citizen of Pakistan.  On
    20th September 2010 he was granted leave to enter the UK as  a  Tier  4
    (general) student until 6th June 2012.  On  22nd  August  2012  he  was
    granted further leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (general) student
    until 19th November 2013.   On 18th November 2013, the appellant made a
    combined application for leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (general) student under the points based system  and  for  a  biometric
    residence permit.  The Secretary of State refused his applications  for
    reasons set out in the letter of 11th  December  2013.   The  appellant
    needed to score  30  points  in  respect  of  attributes  for  a  valid
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).  In the  decision  letter
    the Secretary of State stated that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had provided the specified documents listed on the  CAS  used
    to obtain the offer of a place on a course from the sponsor as required
    by paragraph 120 (FD) (a) of Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules  (the
    Rules).   The  missing  document  was  "the  Intermediate   Certificate
    examination supplementary 2008 awarded by the Board of Intermediate and
    Secondary Education Rawalpindi and dated 25.5.10".  The appellant could
    not therefore meet the requirements  to  be  awarded  30  points  under
    Appendix A of the Rules.

 3. In short grounds of appeal of his own composition which we reproduce in
    part below, the appellant said:

         "(i) that the Secretary of State  had  acted  contrary  to  law  in
             refusing the appellant's application;

         (ii) the appellant maintains that contrary to section B in order to
             awarded points of CAS the appellant must supply the  specified
             document listed on the CAS that the appellant used  to  obtain
             the offer of a place on a course from the sponsor, in this way
             appellant was failed to provide the  intermediate  certificate
             examination, Rawalpindi dated 25th May 2010 by  the  Secretary
             of State. He submitted  all  relevant  documentation  to  UKBA
             demonstrating  that  he  is  entitled  to  a  Tier  4  student
             extension.  In view of the above, the appellant maintains that
             the decision to refuse his application should not  be  allowed
             to stand.  The appellant reserves his right to provide further
             grounds of appeal upon receipt of hopeful bundle."

 4. The issue before the  FtT  judge  therefore  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had provided to  the  Secretary  of  State  the  intermediate
    certificate examination Rawalpindi dated 25th May  2010.   It  was  the
    Secretary of State's case that the document had not been received.

 5. The appellant did not attend the  hearing  which  took  place  on  11th
    August 2014.  A fax  message  was  sent  from  the  offices  of  Edward
    Marshall, solicitors, to the IAC in Birmingham on that date.   It  gave
    notice of a change of address for correspondence to a "New address:  80
    Nightingale Lane, Wanstead E11 2EZ.  Kind regards Awayi Kayani."    The
    address given is that of the solicitors.

 6. There is no reference in the letter to the  hearing  that  day  and  no
    reference to the fact that the appellant would not  be  attending.   No
    explanation was given to the FtT judge for his absence.  Before  us  it
    was accepted that the appellant knew of the hearing.  We were told that
    on that  day he was  feeling  unwell,  he  could  not  afford  a  legal
    representative and so was afraid to come.  No complaint is  made  about
    the FtT's judge's decision to hear the case in his absence.  There  was
    plainly no reason to do otherwise.

 7. In setting out the detail of the appellant's claim at  paragraph  8  of
    his decision, the judge accurately set out the history of  the  matter.
    He correctly identified that it was the appellant's case  that  he  had
    submitted  all  relevant  documentation  to  demonstrate  that  he  was
    entitled to a Tier 4 student extension.  In the course of  the  hearing
    before us we clarified other factual matters.  Confirmation  was  given
    that the original application was sent to the  Secretary  of  State  on
    behalf of the appellant by Edward Marshall, solicitors.  The grounds of
    appeal to which we referred at paragraph 3 were sent by  the  appellant
    himself.

 8. The judge recorded the appellant's assertion in the grounds  of  appeal
    that he had provided the relevant  documents  but  he  noted  that  the
    missing documents were not in the respondent's  bundle  nor  were  they
    attached to the notice of appeal and grounds.  They were not before the
    tribunal.  The judge went on to observe  that  the  appellant  had  not
    "attended before me today to give evidence in support of his appeal and
    nor has he produced either the original or a copy  of  the  certificate
    referred to above"  -  he  was  there  referring  to  the  Intermediate
    Certificate Examination, Supplementary 2008 to which we refer above.

 9. Unsurprisingly, therefore, given the totality of  the  evidence  before
    him the judge concluded that  the  appellant  had  not  discharged  the
    burden of proof upon him and he found that the  reasons  given  by  the
    respondent  justified  the  refusal  to  grant  the  application.   The
    decision of  the  FTT  judge  was  dated  7th  October  2014.   It  was
    promulgated on 10th October 2014.

10. The application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    dated 17th October 2014.  It is completed by Edward Marshall Solicitors
    of 18  Nightingale  Street,  Wanstead  E11  2  Z.   It  says  that  the
    application is made in time as the decision was received  on  the  14th
    October 2014.  The grounds for permission  to  appeal  are  dated  16th
    October 2014.  Paragraphs 1-4 set out  the  background.   We  reproduce
    paragraph 5 verbatim,

         "The applicant filed an appeal  to  the  Honourable  Court  on  the
         ground that the all original certificates are with the Home  Office
         but court passed the remarks that the certificate  is  not  in  the
         although the certificate has to be with the bundle.  The  applicant
         was not present in the court that is why there was no statement was
         presented in the court".

    Paragraph 6 reads:

         "The  original  intermediate  certificate  of  the  applicant   has
         received by the applicant on 15.10.2014 from the Home Office.   The
         common practice is that the sponsor always looks the  all  relevant
         documents and then issue the CAS letter."

    Paragraph 7 reads:

         "The error of  law  is  very  clearly  identified  in  the  present
         determination that the original documents are available  which  was
         presented to the sponsor at the time of getting CAS and also at the
         time of the application made to Home Office."

    Paragraph 8 reads:

        "It is requested that the applicant is a genuine  student  and  his
        intention  is  to  continue  his  studies  but  only   by   mistake
        certificate was overlooked by the Home Office".

    Paragraph 9 reads:

         "The applicant is sending original certificates with the permission
         to appeal which were received by the applicant from the Home Office
         on 15.10.2014."

11. There is on  the  file  a  letter  from  Edward  Marshall  received  at
    Loughborough support centre on 20th October 2014.   It  is  dated  17th
    October 2014.  It reads as  follows,  "we  have  sent  application  for
    permission to appeal and the original form by fax on  16.10.2014.   The
    original  document  put  in  needs  to  be  dealt  with  the   original
    application.  Yours sincerely Edward Marshall."  It  is  puzzling  that
    this letter omits  to  mention  that  Edward  Marshall  solicitors  had
    submitted the original application and (if it be the  case)  that  they
    had submitted with it all relevant  documents  including  the  original
    certificate.

12. We note that the original grounds of appeal against the initial refusal
    did not mention that it was the  solicitor  had  sent  the  certificate
    which the Secretary of State asserted was missing.

13. Original documents, including the 2010 certificate in relation  to  the
    2008 attainment were duly received by the Tribunal  and  put  onto  the
    file.

14. In the reasons for granting permission to appeal, FtT  Judge  de  Haney
    said:

         "(2) The grounds of appeal claim that the certificate  referred  to
             by the judge (and respondent) has not been produced [we  think
             this should read "as not being produced"] was  either  in  the
             bundle before the judge or in the respondent's bundle;

         (3)  the fact that this document is now in the  file,  having  been
             returned by the respondent to the  appellant  and  resubmitted
             with the grounds, adds weight to this argument;

         (4)  the grounds reveal an arguable error of law."

15. It is not entirely clear what arguable error of  law  was  there  being
    referred to.  It may be that the FtT judge had in mind that were it the
    case that there had been a mistake as to fact by the  FtT  judge  as  a
    result of inaccurate and misleading information from the  Secretary  of
    State the decision could arguably be set  aside  on  the  grounds  that
    there  had  been  procedural  unfairness.   We  should  say  that   the
    observation at (3) that the document is now in the file  only  confirms
    that Edward Marshall had sent it on the 17th  October.   There  was  no
    evidence that the document sent by Edward Marshall on 17th October  had
    originally been sent to the Home Office and/or to the Tribunal.  It may
    well be that had this been known to the FT judge who granted permission
    he would  have  taken  a  different  course.   In  the  event  we  have
    considered the appeal.

16. It was not always entirely easy to follow the submissions of Mr Lourdes
    who appeared on behalf of the appellant. Stripped to  their  essentials
    they were three in number,  two  of  them  new  grounds  that  had  not
    previously been relied upon or foreshadowed.

17. The first was that the judge had erred in concluding that the  document
    had not been sent.  As we have already observed,  there  was  no  other
    possible finding open to him.  We turn then to whether, as a matter  of
    fact, the document had  been  sent  to  the  Home  Secretary.   In  our
    judgment the evidence comes nowhere near satisfying  us  of  that.   In
    particular, Edward Marshall (who have instructed Mr Lourdes today) have
    not at any stage produced any evidence in  support  of  the  contention
    that they sent that document  to  the  Secretary  of  State.    On  the
    contrary, in their letter of 17th October they do not suggest that they
    had sent that document previously  to  the  Tribunal  or  to  the  Home
    Office.   While it is asserted in the grounds of appeal that they  were
    able to send a copy on 17th October because it had been  received  from
    the Secretary of State on the 15th October there was  no  statement  to
    that effect either.  Nor was there any envelope with a  date  stamp  or
    indeed any covering letter from the Home Office returning the document.
      Whilst the Home Office Presenting Officer said  he  supposed  it  was
    possible that some caseworker had simply pushed all the documents  into
    an envelope without a covering letter, the fact that the documents were
    allegedly received has to mean that there would have been  an  envelope
    which would have borne a date stamp and  receipt  of  which  would  and
    should have  been  recorded  on  the  solicitors'  file.   Nothing  was
    produced.

18. Nothing we heard today led us to conclude that there was any mistake as
    to fact which led to the wrong conclusion  being  reached  by  the  FtT
    judge about the receipt by the Secretary of State of that document.

19. At an early stage of the hearing Mr Lourdes sought  to  raise  a  point
    about unfairness, based on the  absence  in  this  case  of  evidential
    flexibility by the Secretary of State.   This  point,  raised  for  the
    first time, 15 months after the decision of the Secretary of State, was
    far too late.  We did not permit him to argue this ground.

20. Finally, Mr Lourdes sought to argue an Article 8  point.   Again,  this
    was the first time that this had been  mentioned.   This  was  far  too
    late.  We remind ourselves in any event  of  the  observations  of  the
    Supreme Court in Patel and Others against the Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72.  At paragraph 57 of the judgment of
    Lord Carnwath the following appears;

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected Human  Rights....  One  may
         sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in Pankina for common sense in the
         application of the Rules to graduates who have been studying in the
         UK  for  some  years.   However,  such  considerations  do  not  by
         themselves provide grounds for appeal under  Article  8,  which  is
         concerned with private or family life, not education as such.   The
         opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in  this
         country, however desirable in general terms, is  not  in  itself  a
         right protected under Article 8."

21. It was not clear to us how a successful Article  8  argument  could  be
    mounted in this case.  For those reasons we are  quite  satisfied  that
    the decision of the FTT judge was correct.  There was no error  in  his
    approach.  There was no error of law.  We  are  not  satisfied  on  the
    balance of probabilities that the  relevant  document  was  before  the
    Secretary of State.  Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.




Signed        Date 28 April 2015

[pic]
Pp Mrs Justice Thirlwall
