

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Numbers: IA/01141/2016
                                                           IA/01142/2016
                                                           IA/01143/2016
                                                           IA/01144/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 September 2018                     |On 11 October 2018                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                               MR  AHMAD KHAN
                              MRS  SAHARA KHAN
                               MR  BAHRAM KHAN
                                   MR S K
                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    M K Khan         (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni      (Senior [Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    Each claimant has appealed to the Upper Tribunal, with the permission
of a Judge of the  First-tier Tribunal,  from  a  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made after a hearing of 23 March 2017
and which it sent to the parties on 10 April 2017; whereupon it  dismissed
their appeals against decisions of the  Secretary  of  State,  all  made  on
8 February 2016, to refuse to grant leave to remain in the United Kingdom
(UK) on the basis of their family and private life under Article 8  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

2.    I have not made an anonymity order.  The  tribunal  had  not  done  so
and, at the hearing before me, I was not urged to do so.  In  any  event  it
does not seem that there is any sensitive information to protect.

3.    The claimants are a family.  The first named claimant  is  the  father
and the second named claimant is the mother of the third  and  fourth  named
claimants.   I  shall,  from  now  on,  simply  refer   to   them   as   the
first claimant, the second claimant, the third  claimant  and  the  fourth
claimant.  The first claimant says that he was born on 1 January 1965  but
the Secretary of State believes that he was born on 1 February 1961.   The
second claimant says she was born on 1 January 1975 but the Secretary  of
State believes she was born on 1 January 1968.  The third claimant says he
was born on 1 January 1997.  The Secretary of State thinks he was born  on
17 July 1998 but the tribunal seems to have accepted that he was born when
he says he was  he  was.   The  fourth claimant,  it  seems  to  have  been
accepted, was born on 1 January 2001.  It is perhaps worth noting that  on
the basis of what the tribunal accepted regarding the dates  of  birth,  the
third claimant was aged 20 years at the date of the tribunal  hearing  and
the fourth claimant was aged 16 years and was, therefore, a minor.

4.     As  to  nationality,  whilst  I  cannot  see  that   the   third   or
fourth claimants have made  any  assertions  as  to  this,  the  first  and
second claimant claimed to  be  nationals  of  Afghanistan.   However,  the
Secretary of State believes that all four claimants are, in fact,  nationals
of Pakistan.  There is something of a history as to all of this in that  the
first claimant sought asylum in May 2007 on the basis  that  he  was  from
Afghanistan and would be at risk if he  were  to  be  returned  there.   The
other three claimants were dependants upon that  asylum  claim.   The  claim
was  initially  refused  but  after  a  successful   appeal   he   was,   on
14 November 2007, granted humanitarian protection as, in  line  with  him,
were the remaining three claimants.  However, in September 2008, the second
appellant was fingerprinted whilst seeking to enter the UK  at  an  airport,
having travelled from Pakistan using a different identity.  It was that  and
fingerprint evidence which principally led  the  Secretary  of  State,  upon
investigation, to conclude that the claimants were all, in  fact,  nationals
of Pakistan.  On 24 April 2014 the Secretary of State decided to revoke the
humanitarian protection status of each claimant.  No challenge was  made  to
that decision.  Eventually, on 8 February 2016,  the  Secretary  of  State
decided to refuse leave to remain to all  the  claimants  and  it  was  that
decision which led to the appeal before the tribunal and the decision  which
was sent to the parties on 10 April 2017.

5     Both parties were represented before the  tribunal.   The  only  issue
for it was whether or not the claimants could succeed on Article 8 grounds.
 The claimants did  not  concede  that  they  are,  in  fact,  nationals  of
Pakistan but the tribunal found that they are.  The tribunal heard  evidence
concerning certain health difficulties which the first  two  claimants  have
and the way in which the third claimant and the fourth claimant (a child at
all material times) had integrated  into  UK  society.   It  was  argued  in
particular, with respect to the fourth claimant, that it was  in  his  best
interests, as a child, to remain in the UK.  Mr Khan, who  represented  the
four claimants before me, had also represented them  before  the  tribunal.
His closing submissions to the tribunal were summarised in this way:

      "     32.  Mr Khan said the eldest son has now spent  more  years  in
      the United Kingdom than abroad and the younger son has lived here for
      more than seven years.  The best interests of the two  sons  have  not
      been properly assessed.  They  both  see  themselves  as  British,  as
      settled and integrated and  to  diminish  the  nationality  they  have
      adopted is not in their best interests.  It would be  unreasonable  to
      expect them to leave the United Kingdom.   Taking  into  account  the
      medical conditions of the parents, it  would  be  disproportionate  to
      insist on removal.  The appeal should be allowed."

6.    As to  the  health  difficulties  of  the  first  two claimants,  the
tribunal had recorded at paragraph 18  of  its  written  reasons  that  the
first claimant has epilepsy, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and back
pain  and  that  the  second  appellant  has  fibromyalgia,   diabetes   and
depression.

7.    Having summarised the competing submissions,  the  tribunal  then  set
out the law it had to apply with  respect  to  Article 8  both  within  and
outside the Immigration Rules.  Its self-direction as to that appears  from
paragraphs 34-39 of the written  reasons  and  has  not  been  subsequently
criticised.

8.    The tribunal, having found that the claimants are from Pakistan,  then
went on to conduct its Article 8 analysis.  This is what it said:

      "     Article 8

            46.  First  and  foremost,  in  dealing  with  the  claim  under
      Article 8 is a consideration of the best interests of any child who is
      impacted  by  the  decision  under  appeal.   I  must  deal  with  the
      circumstances at the date of the hearing, which means  that  only  the
      Fourth Appellant falls into this category.

            47.  The Fourth Appellant is now sixteen  years  old.   He  has
      lived in the United Kingdom as  part  of  the  family  unit  with  his
      parents and brother for more than seven years.  He has integrated into
      British society, has friends here, and is doing well  at  school.   He
      has expressed a very strong desire to remain in the United Kingdom.

            48.  It is a well-established principle that the best  interests
      of children are to be with their parents, and I see  nothing  in  this
      appeal; to displace this principle.  The Fourth  Appellant  has  lived
      with his family all his  life,  and  neither  the  Respondent  or  the
      Appellant suggests that the family should not remain as a family unit.
       The Fourth Appellant has spent many years in the United Kingdom with
      his family, has integrated here, has friends here, and is  doing  well
      at school here.  He considers himself to be British and does not  want
      to leave the United Kingdom.  He knows very little about his  country
      of origin because he has been in the United Kingdom since he was four
      years old.  In these circumstances, it is also in his  best  interests
      that he remains in the United Kingdom.

            49.  My starting point in considering the claim under Article 8
      is  the  Immigration Rules.   The  Appellants  do  not  satisfy  the
      requirements of the family life provisions of the Rules because of the
      revocation of their humanitarian protection status.

            50.  It is at the point that I consider the private life of  the
      Appellants, that the route to my ultimate decision differs between the
      three adult Appellants, and the  Fourth  Appellant,  who  is  still  a
      child.

            51.  The First, Second and Third Appellants,  might  conceivably
      contend that they qualify under section 276ADE(vi) of the Rules on the
      grounds of private life in the United Kingdom because there  would  be
      very significant obstacles to their integration in  the  country  they
      came from.  The Third Appellant had not been in the United Kingdom for
      half his life at the date of the application,  and  his  private  life
      falls to be considered under the same provision.

            52.  Since the Appellants have provided no significant  evidence
      of  the  circumstances  they  might  face  in   either   Pakistan   or
      Afghanistan,  they  do  not  satisfy  me  that  there  would  be  such
      significant obstacles, bearing  in  mind  the  test  of  'integration'
      outlined in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA  Civ 813,  and  that  of  'very
      significant obstacles' in Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A  -
      compelling circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC).

            53.  The  First  and  Second  Appellants  have  lived  in  their
      country of origin for many years before coming to the United kingdom,
      are familiar with the culture, and there is no reason given  why  they
      cannot renew that familiarity, and re-establish  their  private  lives
      there.  The Third Appellant does not have the same history because of
      his age, and has now spent many years in the United Kingdom.  However,
      he is clearly an intelligent young man who has built  friendships  and
      relationships in this country through  his  educational,  social,  and
      leisure activities.  I see no reason why he  cannot  do  so  elsewhere
      than in the United Kingdom.  The  transition  for  him  may  be  more
      difficult than that of his parents, and may  inconvenience,  upheaval,
      and some difficulties, but these do  meet  the  threshold  that  'even
      where multiplied,  will  generally  be  sufficient  in  this  context'
      (Treebhawon).

            54.  For these reasons, I find that  none  of  the  three  adult
      Appellants meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  regarding
      their private life.

            55.  The test to  be  applied  to  the  Fourth Appellant  under
      paragraph  276ADE  is  different  because  of  his   age.    Paragraph
      276ADE(iv) imposes the test, because  he  has  lived  here  for  seven
      years, of whether it  is  'reasonable  to  expect  him  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom'.  This is the same test to be applied  under  section
      117B(6) of the 2002 Act, to which I will return.

            56.  Setting aside, for the time being, any considerations  that
      might arise as a result of considering the  Fourth Appellant,  I  now
      consider  the  position  of  the  adult  Appellants  outside  of   the
      Immigration Rules,  and  encompassing  considerations  under  section
      117B(1)-(5).

             57.   Firstly,  I  do  not  consider  there  to  be  compelling
      circumstances regarding these three Appellants.   They  point  to  the
      medical conditions of the First and Second Appellants, but  these  are
      neither sufficiently  serious  or  severe  to  qualify  as  compelling
      reasons to remain  in  the  United Kingdom.   No  evidence  has  been
      presented  that  their  conditions  are  not  treatable  outside   the
      United Kingdom.  They point to the educational and social achievements
      of the Third Appellant, but, again,  there  is  no  evidence  that  he
      cannot continue to achieve elsewhere, apply for entry clearance to re-
      enter the United Kingdom to continue his studies here, or continue the
      relationships and friendships he has established  here  through  other
      means than his presence here.

            58.  For these  reasons,  I  find  there  to  be  no  compelling
      circumstances.

            59.  Secondly, I must consider the provisions  of  section 117B
      of the 2002 Act.  Disregarding those provisions of the Act which  are
      of no relevance to this appeal, I give  effect  to  the  legislature's
      instruction to have regard to  the  specified  considerations  in  the
      following way:

                 (i)   The public interest in the maintenance  of  effective
                 immigration controls is engaged:  section 117B(1).

                 (ii)  It is not disputed that  the  Third Appellant  is  a
                 capable English speaker, with the  result  that  the  pubic
                 interest  which  is  engaged  in  cases  where  the  person
                 concerned does not possess this  ability  does  not  arise:
                 section 117B(2).  However, this is not the case  with  the
                 First and  Second Appellants,  and  therefore  the  public
                 interest is engaged.

                 (iii) There is little, if  any  evidence  before  me,  that
                 these  Appellants  are  financially  independent.   Indeed,
                 their  engagement  in  publicly   funded   healthcare   and
                 education suggests the contrary, with the result  that  the
                 public interest is engaged:  section 117B(3).

                 (iv)   I  have  considered  the  position  so  far  as  the
                 Appellant's immigration history above.  I find  that  their
                 sojourn in the United Kingdom has been based on the  false
                 representations made when they claimed asylum purporting to
                 be from Afghanistan, when they are not.  Their presence has
                 been unlawful, or at the very least  precarious  throughout
                 their time here.  Thus, their private lives qualify for the
                 attribution of little weight.  I consider  that  the  First
                 and Second Appellants' cases lie at the lower end  of  the
                 notional  'little   weight'   scale   discussed   in   Kaur
                 (children's  best  interests/public   interest   interface)
                 [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC).  This is because there has been no
                 significant evidence of its nature or quality, and, indeed,
                 they appear to rely almost wholly on the private  lives  of
                 their two children as the basis of their claim.  The  Third
                 Appellant's private life is evidence by his  own  evidence,
                 that of  his  parents,  and  the  documentary  evidence  in
                 support.  I place it at the higher end of the spectrum, but
                 nevertheless attribute to it little weight.

            60.  Thus, to summarise the position regarding the  three  adult
      Appellants.  The parents have a highly blemished  immigration  history
      because of a significant misrepresentation about who they are, and why
      they came to the United Kingdom.  Their stay here, for many years, has
      been founded on this false representation.   During  this  time,  they
      have established their  private  lives,  and,  in  all  reality,  have
      accessed public services to which they would not have  been  entitled.
      They do not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  nor  the
      public interest factors in section 117B.  Their eldest son, the Third
      Appellant, does not fall into quite the same category because  he  was
      guided by his parents when he came here,  and  his  ability  to  speak
      English also sets him apart from them, as does  the  stronger  private
      life he has established.

            61.  Having regard to all these factors, if it were not for  the
      considerations I must make regarding the  Fourth Appellant,  I  would
      firmly conclude that the strong public  interest  in  firm,  fair  and
      consistent immigration control, designed to secure the economic  well-
      being and  national  security  of  the  country,  would  significantly
      outweigh the private interests  of  these  Appellants,  and  that  the
      decision of the Respondent should be upheld.

            62.  My analysis of  this  appeal  cannot  end  there,  however,
      because I must return to the Fourth Appellant, whose best interests I
      started with, and to whom I now return, I remind myself of my findings
      above that his best interests lie in him remaining  with  his  parents
      and in him remaining in the United Kingdom.  I also note that there is
      no suggestion in this appeal of any separation of the Third  Appellant
      from his parents.  The Respondent proposes removal as  a  family,  and
      the Appellants  propose  no  other  scenario  other  than  the  family
      remaining together.

            63.  I also remind myself that, although his best interests  are
      a  primary  consideration  but  not   the   primary,   paramount,   or
      determinative consideration.

            64.  Since the Fourth Appellant has been  here  for  more  than
      seven years, section 117B(6)(b) requires me to  consider  whether  it
      would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United Kingdom.
      The material aspects I have considered in  deciding  this  issue  are:
      the strong ties which the Appellant has in the United Kingdom; he has
      lived here most of his life; he would  return  to  Pakistan  with  his
      parents; he could continue his education in Pakistan; Pakistan is  the
      country of his origin; the immigration history of  his  parents  which
      has meant that he has  lived  in  the  United Kingdom  unlawfully  or
      precariously throughout his stay here; he  has  not  acquired  British
      citizenship, or any other right to remain.

            65.  Looking at these factors in the round, I do not  find  that
      it would be unreasonable to expect the Fourth Appellant to leave  the
      United Kingdom.  He would be leaving with his  parents  and  brother,
      and, like his brother, there is nothing  to  suggest  that  he  cannot
      continue his studies  in  Pakistan,  develop  new  relationships,  and
      maintain the friendships he has made in the United Kingdom.   I  find
      that he is not a qualifying child for the purposes of section 117B(6).



            66.  I am strongly  consciously  of  the  seventh  principle  in
      Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC74 that the child must  not  be  blamed  for
      matters for which he or she is not responsible, such as the conduct of
      a  parent.    This   was   considered   in   Kaur   (children's   best
      interests/public interest interface) [2017], in which it was said that
      this does not preclude an outcome whereby  the  best  interests  of  a
      child must yield to the public interest, and where it was said that:

                 '... an outcome for  a  family  which  has  a  prejudicial
           impact upon a child member is not incompatible with the  seventh
           principle of the Zoumbas code.  Where, in any  given  case,  the
           evaluation of parental immigration misconduct in  the  balancing
           exercise contributes to a  conclusion  which  will  involve  the
           entire family unit departing the United Kingdom, this does  not
           (per Elias LJ) 'amount to' blaming the children.'

            67.  It is with these principles in  mind  that  I  approach  my
      final task of determining where  the  overall  balance  lies  in  this
      appeal, and I do so by weighing, the main facts and factors above.   I
      attach  significant  weight  to  the  best  interests  of  the  Fourth
      Appellant, but recognize that there is a  strong  public  interest  in
      immigration control, and that there is a significant feature  in  this
      appeal in the attempts made to thwart immigration control by the false
      misrepresentations made in 2007.

            68.  Considering all these factors  in  the  round,  I  conclude
      that the Respondent's decision regarding these  four  Appellants  does
      not interfere disproportionately with the right to respect to  private
      and family life under Article 8.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  public
      interest in immigration control outweighs other considerations in this
      appeal, and that the decision is proportionate.

            69.  Accordingly, I dismiss the appeals of all  four  Appellants
    under Article 8."

9.    So, the appeals were all dismissed.  But that was not the end  of  the
matter  because  each  claimant  sought  permission   to   appeal   to   the
Upper Tribunal.  The written grounds of appeal, prepared by Mr Khan, assert
(I paraphrase) that the tribunal erred in failing to adequately assess  what
was in the best interests of the third and fourth  claimant  and  failed  to
properly understand what was meant by the word "reasonable"  as  it  appears
in section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.
Permission to appeal was granted and the granting Judge observed that  there
appeared to be an  error  at  paragraph 65  of  the  written  reasons,  the
tribunal having found that the fourth claimant was "not a qualifying  child"
for the purposes of section 117B(6) in circumstance where, in fact, he  was
because he had already  resided  in  the  UK  for  over  seven  years.   The
granting Judge thought that mistake might have  affected  the  reasoning  of
the tribunal in coming to its conclusions concerning the fourth claimant.

10.   Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  consideration  could  be  given  as  to
whether the tribunal had, in fact, erred in law  and,  if  so,  what  should
flow from that.  Representation was as indicated above and I am grateful  to
each representative.

11.   Mr Khan, in his  submissions  to  me,  focussed  primarily  upon  the
situation of the fourth claimant.  He took me to paragraphs 47, 48  and  62
of  the  tribunals  written  reasons  which  contained  what  he  said  were
significantly favourable findings concerning Article 8 and what was in  the
best interests of the fourth claimant. He argued,  in  effect,  that  having
made those findings it  was  impermissible  for  the  tribunal  to  conclude
anything other than that it would not be reasonable (see section 117B(6) to
expect the fourth claimant, as  a  child,  to  leave  the  UK.   As  to  the
position of the third claimant Mr Khan pointed out that he  had  done  well
educationally and has been in the UK a long time.   The  implication  being,
in light of that, that the tribunal had erred  in  failing  to  conclude  he
could lawfully be required to leave the UK too.  As  Mr Khan  then  pointed
out, the claimants, together, form  a  family  unit,  the  implication  then
being that if only one of them cannot be removed on Article 8 grounds  none
of them should be.

12.   Mrs Aboni, for the Secretary of State, argued that the  tribunal  had
carefully considered the position of the fourth claimant.   What  was  in  a
child's best interests was a  primary  consideration  but  not  the  primary
consideration.  As to paragraph 65 of the tribunal's written  reasons,  the
tribunal had simply expressed itself badly.  What it had meant  to  say  was
not that the fourth claimant is not "a qualifying child"  for  the  purposes
of section 117B(6) but that, notwithstanding  that,  it  is  reasonable  to
require his return.

13.   Mr Khan, replying to Mrs Aboni, maintained his original arguments and
said that there was no public interest element with respect to  the  removal
of the third and fourth claimant.  He said, in effect, that the sins of  the
parents ought not  to  be  visited  upon  their  children.   He  could  not,
however, point to anything in the written reasons (despite my invitation  to
him to do so) which suggested that the tribunal had, in fact, done that.

14.   I have concluded, as I informed the parties at the hearing,  that  the
decision of the tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law.

15.   I have chosen to set out much of what the  tribunal  had  to  say.   I
have done so because,  in  my  judgment,  its  analysis  of  the  Article 8
arguments with respect to all four claimants was thorough and cogent.   What
it had to say about the first two claimants had not been the subject of  any
criticism.  As to the third claimant, I was not able to detect  anything  in
what  Mr Khan  had  said  in  writing  or  orally  which  was  capable  of
demonstrating any error of law on the part of  the  tribunal.   It  is  true
that the third claimant has done well academically and  that  he  has  spent
much of his relatively young life in the UK.  But the tribunal was aware  of
all  of  that  and  factored  it  into  its  analysis.   In  particular,  at
paragraph 53 of its written reasons, it explained why it was, despite that,
deciding that he could not succeed under  Article 8.   That  reasoning  was
clearly open to it.

16.   The main issue, at the hearing, concerned the position of  the  fourth
claimant.  It is true, as Mr Khan points out,  that  the  tribunal  made  a
number of favourable findings from  his  perspective  with  respect  to  the
Article 8 exercise it was required to undertake.  It noted, for example, at
paragraph 47 of its written reasons that he had been in  the  UK  for  more
than seven years, that he had  integrated  into  UK  society,  that  he  has
friends in the UK, that  he  is  doing  well  at  school  and  that  he  had
expressed a strong desire to remain in the UK.  At paragraph 48 it  pointed
out that he had integrated and now regarded himself as  being  British.   It
accepted it would be in his best interests to remain  in  the  UK  with  his
other family members.  But as Mrs Aboni points out, what was  in  his  best
interests  pursuant  to  section 55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
Immigration Act 2009 was not, of itself, necessarily decisive and  whilst  a
primary consideration was not necessarily the primary consideration.

17.   Having identified what  it  regarded  as  positive  factors  from  the
claimant's perspective the tribunal then turned to countervailing points  at
paragraphs 64 and 65 of its written reasons.   Effectively,  what  it  was
doing, was carrying out a balancing exercise with respect  to  the  question
of whether it would  or  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  fourth
claimant to leave the UK.  In my judgment  it  carried  out  an  appropriate
balancing exercise in which  it  took  into  account  relevant  matters  and
reached a conclusion  which  was  open  to  it.   I  agree  that,  from  one
perspective  at  least,  its  conclusion   was   perhaps   what   might   be
characterised as a "tough one" if I can put it  that  way.   But  I  do  not
accept, given the matters it referred to at paragraphs 64  and  65  of  the
written reasons, that its positive  findings  were  so  favourable  that  it
could not lawfully conclude as it did  which  was,  essentially,  Mr Khan's
argument to me.  That argument simply goes too far.

18.       As to the "qualifying  child"  point,  the  tribunal  did  express
itself somewhat clumsily at paragraph 65 of the written reasons.  But  those
reasons have to be read as a whole. I accept Mrs Aboni's submission  on  the
point. The tribunal clearly did not mean to say the claimant  had  not  been
in the UK for 7 years and so was not a qualifying child. What it  had  meant
to say was that despite his being a qualifying child it  was,  nevertheless,
reasonable, to require his return.

19.   In the circumstances I have concluded that the tribunal  did  not  err
in law.  In consequence, this appeal to the Upper Tribunal must fail.

Decision

The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the  making  of
errors of law.  Accordingly,
those decisions, with respect to each claimant, shall stand.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                Date: 8 October 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                Date: 8 October 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


