

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01964/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 February 2017                        |On 8 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                         MRS MAUREEN OMORE OMHENAKA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Tapfumaneyi, Just Legal Group
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background
1.    This appeal comes back before me  to  re-make  the  decision  in  this
appeal following the setting aside of the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Andrew promulgated on 11 August 2016.  My error of law decision is  appended
to this decision for ease of reference.

2.    The factual background to this case is set out at [2] of my  error  of
law decision.  The relevant law is set out at [7] of my decision.  As  noted
at [4]  of  my  decision,  the  Respondent's  decision  under  appeal  is  a
revocation of the Appellant's residence card  as  the  primary  carer  of  a
British citizen child.  The Appellant had been found to  be  entitled  to  a
residence card in an earlier appeal.  The Respondent's  decision  was  based
initially on regulation 20(1) and 21A(3)(a)  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  Regulations").   The  Respondent  has
now clarified in her skeleton argument that she relies  only  on  regulation
20(2) on the basis that the Appellant has ceased to have a right  to  reside
under the Regulations as a primary carer.

3.    I also noted at [3] of my decision that the Respondent has served  the
Appellant with a decision  that  she  is  liable  to  be  deported  and  has
provided her with a section 120 notice allowing her  to  raise  any  further
reasons on which she relies as a basis of  stay.   Mr  Tapfumaneyi  told  me
that the Appellant had responded to this notice in May  2016.   However,  Mr
Staunton confirmed that the  Respondent  had  not  received  that  response.
That response is not in the bundle before me.   Accordingly,  whether  there
is a breach of Article 8 ECHR is not an issue  which  I  have  to  determine
(see Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights)  [2015]  UKUT  00466
(IAC) as confirmed by the Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  1233)).   Mr  Staunton  also
confirmed that the Respondent is waiting  on  the  outcome  of  this  appeal
before making any decision  in  relation  to  deportation.   That  obviously
makes sense since if the Appellant is not entitled to remain  on  the  basis
of the Regulations, she presently has no other basis of stay.  The issue  of
whether the Appellant may be deported is also therefore not an issue for  me
to decide although I note that  the  outcome  of  this  appeal  may  have  a
bearing on the Respondent's entitlement to deport.

Evidence

4.    With that brief introduction, I turn to note the  evidence  which  was
before me pertinent to the  narrow  issue  which  I  have  to  decide.  That
evidence consists of a statement from  the  Appellant  (in  the  form  of  a
letter dated 23 January 2017), review minutes dated 3 August  2016  prepared
by Peterborough City Council and a letter from Ms Lyon, social  worker  with
that local authority.  I also received a letter in support of the  Appellant
from       Ms Cope who is a volunteer with a group called  The  Yarl's  Wood
Befrienders who has befriended the Appellant and her partner, both  of  whom
remain detained at  Yarl's  Wood.   Ms  Cope's  evidence  is  more  properly
directed at the impact of separation of the Appellant from her children.  As
such, it is more relevant to the Article 8/deportation issues which are  not
before me.   I take it into account though as further  independent  evidence
of the contact which the Appellant  continues  to  have  with  her  children
whilst detained.

5.    Ms Omhenaka was produced at the  hearing  from  detention.   She  gave
oral evidence.  She confirmed that her children (that is the eldest  British
citizen child - "Ty" - and the youngest non-British child - "Ti")  initially
remained with her in prison immediately following her conviction.   However,
Ty then attained the age of  eighteen  months  and  the  prison  authorities
would not allow him to remain with her.  Accordingly,  the  local  authority
took the children  into  temporary  foster  care  in  January  2016  as  the
Appellant had no-one else to look after them.   I  pause  to  note  that  it
appears to be accepted by the Respondent that Ty's father plays no  part  in
his life and Ti's father (the Appellant's  current  partner)  was  convicted
with the Appellant for  his  part  in  the  same  offence.  He  too  remains
detained at Yarl's Wood.

6.    The Appellant confirmed  that  after  the  children  were  taken  into
temporary foster care, she continued to see them during prison visits  twice
per week for two hours each time.  When her criminal  sentence  came  to  an
end,  she  and  her  partner  were  transferred  on  3  November  2016  into
immigration detention at Yarl's Wood.  She confirmed that  visits  continued
thereafter although those are temporarily suspended as  Ty  has  chickenpox.
She also confirmed that the local authority wished to  return  the  children
to her care once she went  into  immigration  detention  but  that  was  not
possible as there were no family places available.

7.    In relation to what would occur if she were released  from  detention,
the Appellant indicated that the local authority was  continuing  to  assist
her to find  accommodation.   She  had  written  to  them  to  seek  council
accommodation.  However, her solicitors had also told her to  apply  to  the
Respondent for accommodation under section 4,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
1999.  She told me that the Respondent had offered her accommodation  on  17
December 2016 but the offer  stood  only  for  one  month  and  she  was  in
detention at the time and therefore unable to take up  the  offer.   I  note
that although the  Appellant's  solicitors  have  not  produced  documentary
evidence of  this  offer,  Mr  Staunton  did  not  dispute  the  Appellant's
evidence.

8.    In response to questions from Mr  Staunton,  the  Appellant  confirmed
that her solicitors had applied for bail when she came to  the  end  of  her
criminal sentence.  However, the tenancy agreement on which  she  relied  as
showing that she would be accommodated  on  release  was  not  available  to
produce to the Judge and she  was  therefore  asked  to  withdraw  the  bail
application and re-make it.  When that was re-made, the Respondent  objected
to bail being granted as a result  of  the  hearing  of  this  appeal  being
imminent.

9.    In  relation  to  the  Appellant's  continuing  involvement  with  her
children,  she  confirmed  that  Ty  is  now   in   nursery   education   in
Peterborough.  She was unable to tell Mr Staunton the name of the school  or
any of the names of his teachers.  That is though scarcely surprising  where
she can have no direct contact with the school as  a  result  of  detention.
She confirmed that  she  has  regular  contact  with  Social  Services  and,
through them, the foster carer.  She is not allowed to have  direct  contact
with the  foster  carer  (although  she  is  allowed  to  send  things  like
greetings cards to her children directly).  She is though able  to  continue
to influence her  children's  upbringing  and  development  via  the  Social
Services.  By way of example, she confirmed that if  the  children  are  ill
(as Ty is now), she is contacted for her consent to the proposed  treatment.
 If the children are  to  be  taken  on  holiday,  her  consent  has  to  be
obtained.  In her statement she gives further examples,  such  as  when  the
children should enter education, whether they should be allowed to  continue
to use a dummy and when they should go for GP check-ups.  She accepted  that
the foster carer had responsibility for the children's day to day  care  but
said that this was simply as a result of the  situation  she  was  in.   She
noted that the Local Authority would be obliged to return  the  children  to
her if she withdrew consent to them being accommodated  by  a  foster  carer
(subject to her being able to accommodate them in  a  way  which  the  Local
Authority accepted was adequate).  She confirmed  that  there  is  no  court
order in place for the foster care arrangements and, although she said  that
she had refused to sign anything regarding the children's placement  as  she
did not want them taken into care on a more permanent basis,  she  confirmed
that she had provided consent for the temporary arrangements.

10.   The letter from the Appellant's Social Worker, Ms Lyons,  corroborates
the Appellant's evidence.   She confirms  that  the  children  are  in  care
under section 20 Children's Act 1989.  She also confirms that  the  plan  is
for the children to be  returned  to  the  Appellant's  care  when  she  has
sourced appropriate accommodation and that  the  children  would  have  been
returned to her in immigration detention but that option  was  prevented  by
there being no family placements available.  Her letter concludes  with  the
following paragraph:-
    "Once  Ms  Omhenaka  or  Mr  Amayo  [the  Appellant's   partner]   have
    appropriate accommodation for themselves and their children,  either  a
    family placement at the detention centre or in the local community  the
    Local Authority will work with Ms Omhenaka and Mr Amayo in  respect  to
    returning [Ty] and [Ti] to their care."

11.   The review minutes from the Local Authority confirms  the  Appellant's
evidence and Ms Lyons'  letter  in  relation  to  the  nature  of  the  care
arrangements.  Of note is also the  comment  that  "Legal  advice  was  sort
[sic] and the Local Authority was informed that there  were  no  grounds  in
respect to issuing Care Proceedings and applying for a Court Order.   [Ty's]
care plan has been updated and the plan remains the  same  with  regards  to
[Ty] returning to the care of his mother  and  step-father  following  their
release  from  prison".   The  minutes  also  corroborate  the   Appellant's
evidence about her continued involvement in Ty's health care  and  education
and the arrangements concerning regular visits by the children to see  their
parents.

Skeleton arguments and submissions

12.   The Appellant's skeleton argument asserts that the  Appellant  is  the
sole carer of  Ty  and  as  such  is  entitled  to  a  derivative  right  of
residence.  Although Mr Tapfumaneyi's oral submissions at times appeared  to
suggest that the Appellant is not in fact Ty's primary carer at the  moment,
the general thrust of his submissions was that the  Appellant  is  prevented
from exercising full care as sole carer only by the Respondent's actions  of
continuing to detain her and not facilitating accommodation of her  children
with her.  He reminded me that the Appellant's evidence is  that  she  would
withdraw her consent to the  temporary  arrangement  rather  than  lose  her
children and that, if she were removed, she would return with  both  Ty  and
Ti (and her partner) to Nigeria (as to which see the review minutes  of  the
Local Authority which confirm this).  If that occurred, Ty  who  is  British
and therefore an EU citizen would be deprived of his  rights.   Accordingly,
Mr Tapfumaneyi submitted, the Appellant  remains  entitled  to  a  residence
permit under the Regulations as the  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen
child.

13.   Mr Tapfumaneyi's skeleton argument also  draws  my  attention  to  the
case of Sanneh and others v Secretary of State for  Work  and  Pensions  and
others [2015] EWCA Civ 49.  The Appellant relies on this case  as  authority
for the proposition that the Appellant's derivative  right  arose  prior  to
her incarceration and continues in spite of it.  The  (consensual)  reliance
on the local authority and foster carer  to  discharge  her  obligations  as
primary carer is simply an extension of her right.

14.   Mr Tapfumaneyi repeated his submissions that the only reason  why  the
Appellant  is  unable  to  exercise  full  parental  responsibility  is  the
Respondent's refusal to release her and  objection  to  bail.   Although  he
accepted that the Respondent might still seek to deport  the  Appellant  and
her partner even if she succeeds in this case,  she  would  be  entitled  to
appeal against that decision.  In any event, that was not  currently  relied
upon as a reason for detention.   The  Respondent's  objection  to  bail  is
because removal is imminent based on  the  present  appeal.   As  such,  the
Respondent is detaining her directly in order to prevent her fulfilling  the
requirements under the Regulations.

15.   Mr Staunton's skeleton  argument  summarises  the  Respondent's  case.
The Appellant's case that she is entitled to a derivative  residence  permit
is accepted to fall within Regulation 4A of the Regulations.   However,  the
Respondent says that this  right  has  ceased  and  that  she  is  therefore
entitled to revoke the residence permit applying  regulation  20(2)  on  the
basis that the Appellant has ceased to be the primary  carer  as  Ty  is  in
foster care.  The  Respondent  relies  on  the  limited  contact  and  daily
influence which the evidence shows that the Appellant  has  in  relation  to
Ty.

16.   In his oral submissions, Mr Staunton reminded me that the question  of
whether the Respondent is entitled to revoke the  residence  permit  depends
on the position as at date of hearing.  He accepted that it  is  for  me  to
decide whether and if so at what point primary care  ceases.   He  submitted
that this should be tested by whether the  Appellant  has  the  day  to  day
decision making responsibility for  the  children.   Although  the  evidence
shows that the Appellant has to consent to milestone decisions  in  relation
to the children, he submitted that it  does  not  show  that  the  Appellant
continues to have the requisite level of responsibility for Ty  as  that  of
his primary carer.   He  also  reminded  me  that  the  position  of  Social
Services is that the Appellant will only have the children released  to  her
once she has secured accommodation and the position as at the  date  of  the
hearing is that section 4 accommodation  is  not  presently  on  offer  (the
previous offer having lapsed).  Although he accepted that  the  Respondent's
objection to bail being granted would play a part in whether  the  Appellant
should be released,  he  submitted  (and  I  of  course  accept)  that  this
decision was a matter for the Immigration Judge.

17.   In response to a question from me whether it is the legal  or  factual
responsibility which is important in relation  to  the  question  whether  a
person  is  the  primary  carer,  Mr  Staunton  submitted  that  neither  is
determinative.  Resolution of this issue turns on  the  natural  meaning  of
that phrase.  In conclusion, Mr Staunton submitted that  the  Appellant  was
not entitled to a derivative residence permit on the facts before me  as  at
the date of the hearing.



The Relevant Law

18.   Section 20(2) of the Regulations is set out at [7] of my error of  law
decision as appended.  I do not need to repeat that.  The issue  is  whether
the Secretary of  State  may  revoke  the  residence  permit  to  which  the
Tribunal confirmed she was entitled on the basis  that  she  has  ceased  to
have a right to it.

19.   Regulation 15A of the Regulations is also  therefore  relevant  to  my
consideration as that sets out the criteria which the Appellant must  fulfil
to remain entitled to the derivative residence  permit.   I  set  out  below
what I perceive to be the relevant parts of Regulation 15A:


      "Derivative right of residence

      15A.-(1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies
      the criteria in paragraph ... (4A) ... of this regulation is entitled
      to a derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom for as long as P
      satisfies the relevant criteria.
      .....
      (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
      (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant British
citizen");
      (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom;
and
      (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
      the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.
      ..........
      [6]   For the purpose of this regulation -
      (c) "an exempt person" is a person-
      (i) who has a right to reside in the United Kingdom as a result of any
      other provision of these Regulations;
      (ii) who has a right of abode in the United Kingdom by virtue of
section 2 of the 1971 Act;
      (iii) to whom section 8 of the 1971 Act, or any order made under
      subsection (2) of that provision, applies; or
      (iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United
Kingdom.
      (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if
      (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person; and
      (b) P-
      (i) is the person who has primary responsibility for that person's
care; or
      (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's care with one
      other person who is not an exempt person.
      (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person by
      virtue of paragraph (7)(b)(ii) the criteria in paragraphs .... (4A)(c)
      shall be considered on the basis that both P and the person with  whom
      care responsibility is shared would be required to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom.
      (7B) Paragraph (7A) does not apply  if  the  person  with  whom  care
      responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to reside in  the
      United Kingdom as a result of this  regulation  prior  to  P  assuming
      equal care responsibility.
      (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility  for  a  person's
      care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis of a financial
      contribution towards that person's care.
      (9) A person who otherwise satisfies the  criteria  in  paragraph....
      (4A)... will not be entitled to a derivative right to  reside  in  the
      United  Kingdom  where  the  Secretary  of  State or  an  immigration
      officer has made a decision under-
      (a) regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1), 20A(1) or 23A; or
      (b) regulation 21B(2), where that decision was taken in the preceding
twelve months."

20.   Also relevant is section 20 Children Act 1989 as  that  is  the  legal
basis on which the  Appellant's  children  are  currently  cared  for.   The
relevant parts of that section are as follows:-




      "20 Provision of accommodation for children: general.

      (1) Every local authority shall provide accommodation for any child in
      need within their area who appears to them to require accommodation as
      a result of-
      (a) there being no person who has parental responsibility for him;
      (b) his being lost or having been abandoned; or
      (c) the person who has been caring for him being prevented (whether or
      not permanently, and for whatever reason) from providing him with
      suitable accommodation or care.
      .........
      (4) A local authority may provide accommodation for any child within
      their area (even though a person who has parental responsibility for
      him is able to provide him with accommodation) if they consider that
      to do so would safeguard or promote the child's welfare.
      .......
      (6) Before providing accommodation under this section, a local
      authority shall, so far as is reasonably practicable and consistent
      with the child's welfare-
      (a) ascertain the child's wishes and feelings regarding the provision
of accommodation; and
      (b) give due consideration (having regard to his age and
      understanding) to such wishes and feelings of the child as they have
      been able to ascertain.
      (7) A local authority may not provide accommodation under this section
      for any child if any person who-
      (a) has parental responsibility for him; and
      (b) is willing and able to-
      (i) provide accommodation for him; or
      (ii) arrange for accommodation to be provided for him,
      objects.
      (8) Any person who has parental responsibility for a child may at any
      time remove the child from accommodation provided by or on behalf of
      the local authority under this section.
      (9) Subsections (7) and (8) do not apply while any person-
      (a) who is named in a child arrangements order as a person with whom
the child is to live;
      (aa) who is a special guardian of the child; or
      (b) who has care of the child by virtue of an order made in the
      exercise of the High Court's inherent jurisdiction with respect to
      children,
      agrees to the child being looked after in accommodation provided by or
      on behalf of the local authority.
            ....."

21.   I do not find the Appellant's reliance on Sanneh as of  assistance  to
the issue I have to decide.  True it is that the Court of Appeal deals  with
when and why the status of primary carer arises in the first place.  It  has
nothing to say though on the issue which I have to decide  of  when  and  in
what circumstances  the  status  ceases.   I  doubt  for  example  that  the
Appellant could successfully resist a decision by  the  Respondent  applying
regulation 20(2) if Ty had been taken  into  care  under  a  more  permanent
arrangement such as adoption.

Discussion and conclusions

22.   As I have already noted, there  is  one  very  narrow  issue  in  this
appeal, namely whether the Appellant can be said to have lost her status  as
the primary carer of Ty by reason of her incarceration  first  when  serving
her  criminal  sentence  and  since  November  2016  whilst  in  immigration
detention.  There are four reasons why I find she has not.

23.   First, the legal arrangement in relation to Ty relies  on  section  20
Children Act 1989.  That is a  temporary  arrangement.   It  relies  on  the
Appellant's  consent  which  can  be  withdrawn  at  any  time.   The  Local
Authority has also made  it  plain  that,  if  the  Appellant  were  not  in
detention or the children were able to be  placed  with  her  in  detention,
they would return the children to her so long as suitable  accommodation  is
available.  This is not for example a case where the Local Authority  relies
on the welfare of the children as a reason for the  care  arrangements  (see
[11] above in relation to the evidence there referred to as confirmation  of
that position).  The arrangements are temporary and depend only on the  fact
of the Appellant  being  in  detention  and  not  able  to  accommodate  the
children  in  the  short  term.   The  legal  arrangement  shares   parental
responsibility for the children whilst the  children  are  placed  with  the
foster carer between the Local Authority and the Appellant.   She  therefore
retains parental control over the children in law as is clear from the  fact
that her consent is needed, for example, for medical treatment to be given.

24.   Second, the fact that some other person  (here  the  Local  Authority)
shares responsibility with the primary carer does not preclude  the  primary
carer retaining that status.  So much is clear  from  regulation  15A(7)  of
the Regulations.  I accept of  course  that  this  regulation  cannot  apply
directly due to  regulation  15A(7)(b)(ii)  and  the  requirement  that  the
person with whom responsibility is  shared  be  a  non-exempt  person.   The
local authority (so far as it can be said to be a person  at  all)  and  the
foster carer are both exempt.  However,  that  provision  makes  clear  that
shared responsibility does not preclude a  person  being  a  primary  carer.
The issue is whether the Appellant is the primary carer and not whether  she
is the sole carer.

25.   Third, I turn  to  the  factual  position.   Here,  I  find  that  the
responsibility is shared between the Appellant and the foster carer (and  to
some extent with the Local Authority which controls that  arrangement).   Of
course, the  foster  carer  has  the  day  to  day  responsibility  for  the
children's care.  She has to do so due to the Appellant's  situation.   That
means, for example, that it is she who will  liaise  with  Ty's  nursery  in
relation to, for example, taking and collecting  him  from  school  and  any
behavioural difficulties while he is there.  However,  that  arrangement  is
forced upon  the  Appellant  because  of  her  detention.   It  remains  the
situation that it is she who decides whether Ty should be  sent  to  nursery
at all.  If he suffers an accident whilst there,  it  is  she  who  must  be
consulted before he can receive treatment.  As such,  she  retains  parental
responsibility over Ty.  Of  course,  the  issue  is  not  whether  she  has
parental responsibility but whether she can be said to be the primary  carer
but the position in relation to responsibility for  Ty  is  instructive.   I
repeat also what I say above that shared responsibility  does  not  preclude
the status of primary carer.

26.   Fourth, there is an additional reason why I find  as  I  do  that  the
Appellant retains status as a primary carer.  That  relates  to  the  reason
why the Appellant finds herself in the situation  she  does.   I  accept  Mr
Staunton's submission that I have to consider the position as  at  the  date
of the hearing.  There is however an air of unreality about  the  submission
that because the Appellant is detained and does not - at  least  as  at  the
date of hearing - have immediate  access  to  adequate  accommodation  which
would permit the  Appellant  to  ask  the  local  authority  to  return  the
children to her care, she is for that reason no longer  the  primary  carer.
Whilst it might have  been  the  case  while  detained  under  her  criminal
sentence that the  Respondent  had  no  control  over  the  reason  why  the
Appellant was separated from her children, that is no longer the case.   But
for  the  Appellant  being  detained  and  not  presently  being   able   to
accommodate the children (the earlier offer having lapsed precisely  because
the Respondent was detaining her), the children would be in her  sole  care.
I accept Mr Staunton's submission that it was for the Immigration  Judge  at
the  bail  hearing  to  decide  whether  or  not  to  grant  bail  but   the
Respondent's submission, I was told, as to why bail  should  be  denied  was
due  to  the  imminence  of  the  hearing  in  this  appeal.   Thus,  as  Mr
Tapfumaneyi, submitted, the Respondent is using the fact of having  detained
the Appellant to prevent her  (on  the  Respondent's  case)  continuing  her
status as primary carer whilst resisting her release on the basis  that  the
continuation of that status is in  dispute.   The  Appellant  finds  herself
therefore in a "catch 22" situation as a  result  of  the  Respondent's  own
actions.  Those circumstances are not my main reason  for  finding  for  the
Appellant.  If, as a matter of law, I could not find her to be  the  primary
carer as a result of her current circumstances, the fact that  this  is  due
to the actions of the Respondent could not alter  that  position.   However,
it is relevant to the question of whether the Appellant is  able  to  resume
those aspects of Ty's care  which  prevent  her  currently  exercising  full
responsibility for him and which would then put beyond any doubt her  status
as primary carer.

27.   For the above reasons, I find that  the  Appellant  has  retained  her
status as primary carer for Ty.  It is not suggested that, if  I  so  found,
there is any other reason why the Appellant would not remain entitled  to  a
derivative residence permit, an earlier Tribunal having determined that  she
is so entitled.  As a result, I find that the Respondent's was not  entitled
to revoke the residence permit.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

DECISION
The Respondent  was  not  entitled  to  decide  to  revoke  the  Appellant's
derivative residence permit as  the  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen
child.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Signed      [pic]Dated:     February 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
                                  APPENDIX
                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background
1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease  of  reference,
I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal  albeit
that the Secretary of State is technically the Appellant in this  particular
appeal.

2.    The Appellant is  a  national  of  Nigeria  who  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision dated 3 May 2016  revoking  her  derivative  residence
card on the basis that she has ceased to be the primary carer of  a  British
Citizen child.  An earlier application for a residence card was  refused  on
the basis that the Respondent did not accept that  the  child's  father  had
ceased  to  have  any  contact  but  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed.
However, prior to  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  on  that  basis,  the
Appellant and  her  husband  (not  the  father  of  her  first  child)  were
convicted of an offence of converting criminal  property  and  sentenced  to
two years' imprisonment.  The Appellant's first child and her  second  child
who is the child of her husband and therefore Nigerian are in  foster  care.


3.    The Appellant has also been served  with  a  decision  to  deport  her
dated 5 May 2016.  There is no right of appeal  against  that  decision  but
she was given a  section  120  notice  in  order  to  raise  any  additional
grounds.  It is not clear to me whether she has raised  additional  grounds.
The grounds of appeal refer to Article 8 ECHR which is  not  relevant  to  a
decision revoking a residence card but may be relevant  to  the  deportation
decision.  However, there is nothing which suggests that the  Appellant  has
raised a human rights claim with the Respondent.  The  case  of  Amirteymour
and others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466  (IAC)  (as  upheld
by the Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233) precludes consideration of Article  8  ECHR
where no response is made to a section 120 notice and the  decision  is  not
one to remove.

4.    The Respondent  decided  to  revoke  the  Appellant's  residence  card
applying  regulation  20(1)  and  21A(3)(a)  of  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations").   The  Appellant
appealed and her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew  in
a decision promulgated on 11 August 2016 ("the Decision").  The Judge  found
that although the Appellant is not the primary carer of the British  citizen
child (because that child is in foster care), the fact  that  the  Appellant
is not still the primary carer of that child does not justify revocation  on
grounds of public security, public policy or public health.

5.    Permission was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell  on  30
August 2016 but granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  on  21  September
2016 because, on the basis of the Judge's finding at [13] of  the  Decision,
the Appellant did not satisfy the Regulations.

6.    The appeal comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains  an
error of law and if so to either remake the decision or remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.



The EEA Regulations
7.     The  EEA  Regulations  relevant  or  potentially  relevant   to   the
Appellant's case are as follows:-
                        20 Refusal to  issue  or  renew  and  revocation  of
residence documentation
              (1) The Secretary of State may refuse  to  issue,  revoke  or
              refuse to renew a registration certificate, a residence card,
              a document certifying  permanent  residence  or  a  permanent
              residence card if the refusal or revocation is  justified  on
              grounds of public policy, public security or public health or
              on grounds of abuse of rights in accordance  with  regulation
              21B(2).
              .........
              (2)  The  Secretary  of  State  may  revoke  a   registration
              certificate  or  a  residence  card  or  refuse  to  renew  a
              residence card if the holder of the certificate or  card  has
              ceased to have, or never had a right to  reside  under  these
              Regulations.
              21A Application of Part 4 to persons with a derivative  right
           of residence
              (1) Where this regulation applies Part 4 of these Regulations
              applies subject to the modifications listed in paragraph (3).
              (2) This regulation applies where a person-
              (a) would, notwithstanding Part 4 of these Regulations, have
              a right to be admitted to, or reside in, the United Kingdom
              by virtue of a derivative right of residence arising under
              regulation 15A(2), (4), (4A) or (5);
              (b) holds a derivative residence card; or
              (c) has applied for a derivative residence card.
              (3) Where this regulation applies Part 4 applies in  relation
              to the matters listed in paragraph (2) as if-
              (a) references to a matter being justified on grounds of
              public policy, public security or public health in accordance
              with regulation 21 referred instead to a matter being
              "conducive to the public good";
              ............
              21B Abuse of rights or fraud
              21B. (1) The abuse of a right to reside includes-
              (a) engaging in conduct which appears to be intended to
              circumvent the requirement to be a qualified person;
              (b) attempting to enter the United Kingdom within 12 months
              of being removed pursuant to regulation 19(3)(a), where the
              person attempting to do so is unable to provide evidence
              that, upon re-entry to the United Kingdom, the conditions for
              any right to reside, other than the initial right of
              residence under regulation 13, will be met;
              (c) entering, attempting to enter or assisting another person
              to enter or attempt to enter, a marriage or civil partnership
              of convenience; or
              (d) fraudulently obtaining or attempting to obtain, or
              assisting another to obtain or attempt to obtain, a right to
              reside.
              (2) The Secretary of State may take an EEA  decision  on  the
              grounds of abuse of rights where there are reasonable grounds
              to suspect  the  abuse  of  a  right  to  reside  and  it  is
              proportionate to do so.
              .................

Submissions
8.    Mr Staunton for the Respondent conceded that regulation 20(2)  of  the
EEA Regulations was not raised by  the  Respondent  in  her  decision  under
appeal.  However, he submitted  that,  since  the  appeal  was  against  the
decision revoking the derivative residence  card,  the  Judge  should,  when
determining whether the residence card could  or  should  be  revoked,  have
regard to all bases on which it could be revoked.  He adopted the  reasoning
of Judge Perkins when granting permission to appeal.  Paragraph [13] of  the
Decision  was  sufficient  for  the  Judge  to  find  that  the  Appellant's
residence card should be revoked as she is no longer the  primary  carer  of
the British citizen child.

9.     Mr  Tapfumaneyi  submitted  that  the  Decision  is  based   on   the
Respondent's  refusal  letter  which  the  Respondent  herself  accepts  was
technically incorrect both in substance and form.  He argued  that  [13]  of
the Decision should not be read in isolation and that  I  should  also  have
regard to [14] of the  Decision  which  also  formed  part  of  the  Judge's
reasoning.  He also pointed me to the fact that the children are  in  foster
care applying section 20 Children Act 2009 and therefore  with  the  consent
of the Appellant.  She had therefore opted to allow the children to go  into
foster care, still has rights in relation to them and still plays a  pivotal
role in relation to the children.

10.   Mr Tapfumaneyi also pointed out, in agreement  with  the  Respondent's
submissions, that the relevant point in time for the  Judge's  consideration
of the position is at the date of the hearing.  If I were reconsidering  the
matter at today's date, he submitted, the position  would  be  different  as
the Appellant is no longer in criminal detention but,  having  finished  her
criminal sentence, is now  in  immigration  detention.   I  assume  although
neither party was able to confirm the position that this is on the basis  of
a deportation decision having been made against her.   As  I  understood  Mr
Tapfumaneyi's submission, it is that any error of law in  the  Decision  may
not be material if in fact the Appellant is able to resume her  position  as
primary carer subject to the Respondent releasing her from detention.

11.   Mr Tapfumaneyi also submitted that, since the Respondent accepts  that
her decision was technically incorrect, if I  find  an  error  of  law,  the
appropriate course is for me to remit the matter to the Respondent  for  her
to make the correct decision.  I do not  accept  that  submission.    It  is
open to me, if I find an error of  law  in  the  Decision,  to  re-make  the
decision based on the current position in relation to the Appellant's  right
to a derivative  residence  card.   I  accept  however,  given  the  factual
changes referred to at [10] above, that it would be appropriate  for  me  to
do so based on further evidence as to the up-to-date position.

12.   At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision and  indicated  that
I  would  provide  that  in  writing  which  I   now   do.    The   parties'
representatives agreed that, if I were to find an  error  of  law,  I  could
proceed to re-make the decision in this Tribunal but,  as  indicated  above,
the Appellant  would  wish  to  have  the  opportunity  to  provide  further
evidence of the current factual position.

Discussion and conclusions
13.   The relevant paragraphs of the Decision are as follows:-
            "[10]      As a result of  the  parents'  imprisonment  the  two
      children were placed into foster care by  the  Local  Authority  under
      Section 20 of the Children Act 1989.  This means that the children are
      accommodated with the consent of those with  parental  responsibility,
      that is the Appellant in respect of both children and her  husband  in
      respect of the younger child.  I have noted  the  letter  from  Leanne
      Lyon of Peterborough City Council Children Services at page 26 of  the
      Appellant's Bundle.  I note that the current plan is for the  children
      to be returned to the care of their parents (sic) dependant  on  their
      release from prison and their situation.  The  letter  is  clear  that
      before the children  are  returned  the  parents  will  need  suitable
      accommodation, appropriate equipment for the children and  to  undergo
      assessment should this be deemed necessary.  In fact, under Section 20
      the parents of the children can ask for their return but,  of  course,
      it is possible at that stage the  Local  Authority  may  take  further
      action should they not consider  it  in  the  best  interests  of  the
      children for them to be returned.
            [11] The Appellant told me, however, that she is to be  provided
      with a two bed roomed house and everything else she needs by the Local
      Authority.  I only have  the  assertions  of  the  Appellant  in  this
      regard.
            [12] She also told me in evidence that the children are  brought
      to the prison to see her.  In addition she receives updates  from  the
      foster carer and it is she that makes  decisions  as  to  whether  the
      children should receive medical treatment or go to  nursery.   I  have
      noting before me from the Local Authority to confirm that this is,  in
      fact, the case.
            [13] However, I am satisfied that as at the date of the  hearing
      the Appellant cannot be the primary carer for the children.   This  is
      because she is incarcerated and the children are being  cared  for  by
      foster parents.  This may, of course, change as and when the Appellant
      is released but this is the situation as at the date of the hearing.
            [14] The reliance the Respondent has placed on Regulation  20(1)
      and 21B(2) is that the Appellant is no longer the  primary  carer  for
      the British citizen child.  However, I have to be satisfied  that  the
      Respondent has shown that the fact she is no longer the primary  carer
      for the child shows that the decision is justified on the  grounds  of
      public policy, public security or public health.
            [15] In Land Baden-Wurttemberg  v  Tsakouridis  (Case  C-145/09)
      CJEU (Grand Chamber) 23rd November  2010  the  ECJ  held  that  public
      security covers both a Member State's internal and external  security.
      The ECJ also held that 'a threat to the  functioning  of  institutions
      and essential public services and the survival of the  population,  as
      well as the risk of a serious  disturbance  to  foreign  relations  or
      peaceful co-existence on nations, or a risk to military interests  may
      affect public security...' It can hardly be said  that  the  fact  the
      Appellant is no longer  the  carer  of  her  British  child  justifies
      revocation of her Residence Card on the basis of public security.
            [16] Similarly I am satisfied that it  does  not  give  rise  to
      public policy grounds either.  There is no suggestion  that  it  would
      give rise to public health grounds either.
            [17] Accordingly, and for these reasons I allow the  appeal.   I
      would add, however, matters may be considered differently  should  the
      Respondent  make  a  decision  on  the  grounds  of  the   Appellant's
      offending, a matter acknowledged by the Respondent's representative at
      the hearing."

14.   I find an error of law in relation to the point  on  which  permission
was granted.  Even if the revocation  cannot  be  justified  on  grounds  of
public policy, the finding at [13] is without more fatal to the  Appellant's
case (at least as  it  stood  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  before  Judge
Andrews).  For that reason, I set aside the Decision.

15.   I note that the Respondent's grounds of appeal do  not  challenge  the
findings at [14] to [16] of the Decision and I have  considered  whether  it
is appropriate for those findings to  be  preserved.   The  Judge  may  have
misdirected herself by reference to regulation 21B(2) rather than  21A(3)(a)
on which the Respondent's  decision  relies.   This  is  not  an  "abuse  of
rights" case.  However, nothing turns on that.  I am however concerned  that
the Judge did not consider the right  question  in  these  paragraphs.   She
appears to have thought that the question was  whether  the  fact  that  the
Appellant was no longer  the  primary  carer  justified  the  revocation  on
grounds of public policy, public security or public  health  grounds  rather
than the question of whether the revocation was justified for those  reasons
based on the Appellant's offending.  This  appears  to  have  led  her  into
further error at [17] where she  states  that  if  the  Respondent  were  to
consider revocation based on the Appellant's offending the answer  might  be
different.  The finding at [16] that  the  Respondent's  decision  does  not
give rise to public policy grounds is not backed by  reasons,  and  for  the
foregoing reasons also appears to be inconsistent with what is said at  [17]
(particularly in light of the fact that  a  deportation  decision  has  also
been made albeit not under the EEA Regulations).  The Judge's  findings  are
therefore unclear.  Whilst some of the blame for  that  may  attach  to  the
Respondent's decision, and although I am not clear  whether  the  Respondent
continues to rely on regulation 20(1) of the EEA Regulations in  any  event,
I have decided to set aside the Decision in its entirety.

16.   As I have  noted,  the  factual  position  has  moved  on  and  it  is
appropriate  to  permit  the   Appellant   to   adduce   further   evidence,
particularly in relation to the  current  position  of  Social  Services  in
relation to the children.  It would also be of assistance  to  me  to  know,
prior to re-making the decision, whether the Appellant has responded in  any
way to the deportation decision and, if so, whether Article 8 ECHR falls  to
be considered in this appeal.  I have therefore given directions  below  for
the Appellant to adduce further evidence and for  an  exchange  of  skeleton
arguments.  That latter direction gives the Respondent also the  opportunity
to  inform  the  Tribunal  whether  there  has   been   any   human   rights
application/claim made in response to the section 120  notice  and,  if  so,
what has happened to that and to make submissions in relation to  regulation
20(1) if that continues to be relied upon.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law. I set aside the Decision

In relation  to  the  re-making  of  the  decision,  I  make  the  following
directions:-

    1. Within 28 days from the date of promulgation of this  decision,  the
       Appellant shall file and serve any evidence on which she intends  to
       rely at the hearing to re-make the decision.
    2. Within 28 days from the date of promulgation of this  decision,  the
       Appellant shall also file and serve a skeleton argument which should
       include her submissions as to regulations 20(1) and 20(2) of the EEA
       Regulations and the extent to which Article 8 ECHR is  of  relevance
       in this appeal (see [3] of my decision above).
    3. Within 28 days from the date of service of the Appellant's  evidence
       and skeleton  argument,  the  Respondent  shall  file  and  serve  a
       skeleton argument responding to the Appellant's  skeleton  argument.
       That skeleton argument should also address the question  of  whether
       regulation 20(1)  continues  to  be  relied  upon  and  the  factual
       position in relation to the deportation decision and the section 120
       notice.
    4. Within 14 days from receipt of the Respondent's  skeleton  argument,
       the Appellant may file and serve  a  further  skeleton  argument  in
       reply if so advised.
    5. The appeal will thereafter  be  listed  for  hearing  on  the  first
       available date with a time estimate of two hours.
    6. The parties may apply to the Tribunal on notice to the  other  party
       if they seek a variation  of  these  directions  or  any  additional
       directions.


Signed      [pic]Dated:  14 November 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
