
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01188/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 January 2016                     |On 15 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                               Mr Sohel Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Haque & Hausman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought by the Appellant against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dated 20 July 2015 where Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Shaerf dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the
    Respondent's  decision  of  11  December  2014  refusing  to  vary  the
    Appellant's leave to remain and making a decision under Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 to remove him from the
    United Kingdom.

2.   The Appellant has had a number of periods  of  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student. On 24 January 2010 he was granted entry clearance valid to  31
    March 2011.  He entered the UK on 2 February 2010.  On 14 June 2011  he
    was granted further leave  to  remain  to  30  October  2013  to  study
    computing at City of Sunderland College. Prior to the  expiry  of  that
    leave to remain, on 6 February 2013, his leave was curtailed so  as  to
    end on 7 April 2013 on the basis that the  college  that  he  had  been
    attending had ceased to sponsor  him  on  the  basis  of  his  lack  of
    progress on the course at that institution.

3.   The Appellant applied for further leave to remain and was granted  such
    leave on 25 November 2013 until 29 February 2016.  That was to study  a
    level 6 diploma in healthcare management  at Swarthmore College.  Prior
    to the expiry of that leave on 27 June 2014 his leave was curtailed  to
    end on 31 August 2014 on the basis that the college's  Sponsor  licence
    had been revoked.  It was that that caused the Appellant  to  make  the
    application in August 2014 for further leave to remain.  He applied  to
    study an NVQ level 6 diploma in business management.

4.   The Respondent decided  to  interview  the  Appellant,  that  interview
    taking place on 10 November 2014, to  assess  the  genuineness  of  the
    Appellant's intention to study  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  being  a
    provision at paragraph 245ZX(o) that leave to remain may be refused  if
    the Secretary of State is not satisfied that the applicant is genuinely
    intending to study on the course that they claim they wish  to  follow.
    In that interview the Appellant was asked about  his  various  courses,
    why he had taken them and as to his views as to whether or not  he  was
    following a  particular  course  of  study  and  a  career  path.   The
    Respondent was not satisfied  with  the  Appellant's  answers  in  that
    regard, recording in her decision letter dated 11 December 2014 that:

          "The fact that you have studied courses  in  travel,  tourism  and
         hospitality, computing and healthcare management raises  doubts  as
         to your intentions in staying  in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  is
         because it would be expected that a genuine student  would  have  a
         defined career path prior to undertaking their studies.


         You now want to study for a CQF/NVQ level 6 in business management.
          When you were asked at interview  'how  does  it  relate  to  your
         previous courses?'  you  stated  'the  previous  courses  were  all
         related to business.  The only difference is that the awarding body
         has changed'.


         You have not explained clearly why your previous courses in travel,
         tourism and hospitality, computing and  healthcare  management  are
         related to business management or why  you  chose  to  study  those
         courses when you state that when you finish your course your  plans
         are 'to get a job or to start my own business in Bangladesh'."

5.   Upon the Appellant's application  being  refused  he  filed  notice  of
    appeal, that appeal coming before the judge at Taylor House on 16  July
    2015.  The Appellant had provided a witness  statement  in  support  of
    that appeal. It is recorded within paragraph 13 of the judge's decision
    that the Appellant gave further evidence as to how he had  come  to  be
    studying healthcare and management, being the last course which he  had
    commenced prior to the present application.

6.   The judge records the Appellant's evidence as follows:

         "He had referred to an administrative error at  Swarthmore  College
         which had resulted in him effectively having to pursue against  his
         wishes a course in healthcare and management although he  had  made
         no mention of this  at  interview  and  it  was  not  raised  until
         referred to at paragraph 5 of his statement of 8 July 2015 where he
         attributes this to Swarthmore College issuing a wrong CAS which the
         college was unable to cancel and re-issue for studies leading to  a
         diploma in business management instead of a diploma  in  healthcare
         and management."


7.   The judge had set out within the decision  the  issues  that  had  been
    raised by the Secretary of State in her decision letter of 11  December
    2014.  The judge had also noted as follows at paragraph 12:

         "He had then proceeded to study at JFC but after the Respondent had
         refused him further leave, he had not been  able  to  continue  his
         studies at the JFC because he had no current leave to  remain.   He
         had started at JFC in February or March 2015, following  the  issue
         of a CAS on 29 August 2014 of which  he  produced  a  copy  in  the
         course of the hearing.  He was asked for  documentary  evidence  of
         his studies at Swarthmore College and JFC  but  in  any  event  was
         unable to produce any such evidence  or  any  evidence  of  studies
         subsequent to  the  academic  transcript  of  September  2013  from
         Guildhall College.  The Appellant claimed to have left his  lecture
         notebooks at home."


8.   The judge concluded at paragraph 17 as follows:

         "17. The essence of  the  Respondent's  reasons  for  refusing  the
             Appellant further leave to remain is that she is not satisfied
             he is a genuine student.  The information about his studies in
             travel tourism is accurate in that the Appellant has  produced
             evidence  that  he  completed  the  course  and  acquired  the
             relevant diploma.  However, the  fact  is  the  Appellant  has
             produced  no  evidence  to  show  any  studies  subsequent  to
             September 2013.


         18.  The Appellant had instructed solicitors.  He had said that  he
             had left his lecture notes at home.  The hearing took place on
             Thursday 16 July.  The facts are  that  there  is  no  further
             evidence about these and that the Appellant has not  attempted
             subsequent to the hearing to file any further evidence such as
             his lecture notes and essays.


         19.  In the circumstances I conclude that even taking into  account
             the difficulties with the sponsorship  licence  of  Swarthmore
             College and the expiry of his leave to remain  while  at  JFC,
             the Respondent was entitled to find that the Appellant was not
             a genuine student and the Appellant has failed to produce  any
             evidence  to  show  he  is,  despite  his   protestations   of
             attendance at both Swarthmore College and JFC.


         20.  For these reasons his appeal under the Immigration Rules  must
             fail."


9.   The grounds of  appeal  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  against  that
    decision challenge the judge's decision  essentially  on  a  procedural
    fairness basis.  It is said that there was either procedural unfairness
    or the appearance of procedural unfairness in what the  judge  said  at
    paragraph 18.  It is said that upon seeing the decision, the  Appellant
    may have been led to believe that he had had the opportunity after  the
    close of hearing to submit  further  evidence,  but  that  he  was  not
    advised of this by the judge at the hearing.  It is said in the grounds
    of appeal that if the Appellant had been aware of  any  opportunity  to
    file further evidence after the close of hearing he would have done  so
    in the form of lecture notes and  other  evidence  that  supported  his
    assertion that he was a genuine student and  had  been  studying  after
    September 2013.

10.  Permission to appeal has been  granted  on  that  basis  by  Designated
    First-tier Judge Zucker on 18 November 2015 on the basis  that  it  may
    have given the impression of unfairness.   He  noted  though  that  the
    materiality of the same will be a matter for the Upper Tribunal.

11.  I heard submissions from Mr Miah on behalf of the  Appellant  and  from
    Ms Isherwood on behalf of the Respondent in the present appeal.

12.  I find that there is no material error of law in the  judge's  decision
    for the following reasons. Mr Miah in submissions today  confirms  that
    the nature of the challenge is limited to the procedural unfairness  or
    appearance of procedural unfairness  that  arises  from  paragraph  18.
    There is no other challenge to the findings of the  Immigration  Judge.
    I asked Mr Miah whether in the decision the judge had incorporated  the
    reasons advanced by  the  Respondent  in  her  decision  letter  of  11
    December 2014 into his own  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal.   Mr
    Miah's position was that it did not seem so.  Rather, Mr Miah says, the
    only reason the judge dismissed the appeal was on  the  apparent  basis
    that after the hearing the Appellant  had  not  submitted  any  further
    evidence in support of his appeal  and  that  it  had  been  unfair  to
    proceed in that way because the judge had not alerted the Appellant  to
    any opportunity for him to do so.

13.  I find, however, that  the  judge  did  incorporate  the  Secretary  of
    State's reasons for rejecting the application made by the Appellant  at
    paragraph 19 of the decision on the basis that he  confirmed  that  the
    Respondent was entitled to find that the Appellant was  not  a  genuine
    student.

14.  The judge also notes at paragraph 18 that the Appellant had  instructed
    solicitors. As Ms Isherwood points out,  this  Appellant  had  been  on
    notice that the genuineness of his studying in the United  Kingdom  was
    under scrutiny.  He had been called for interview on 11  December  2014
    to discuss that issue and had received  a  notice  of  decision  on  11
    December 2014 rejecting the  Appellant's  proposition  that  he  was  a
    genuine student.  It is  for  each  Appellant  to  advance  their  case
    supported by evidence before the First-tier, in  the  manner  of  their
    choosing.  A represented Appellant is in a better position to  identify
    evidence which would assist him to rely in support of their appeal.

15.  I find that it would have been commonsense for the  Appellant  to  have
    submitted in support of his appeal any evidence that he  had  available
    to him to demonstrate that he was a genuine student.  This  could  have
    taken many forms but it could easily have taken  the  form  of  lecture
    notes which were in his possession.  No such evidence was  relied  upon
    by the Appellant.  I find that there was no  procedural  unfairness  in
    the judge dismissing the appeal in the way that he did.

16.   On  the  separate  issue  of  whether  there  was  any  appearance  of
    procedural unfairness arising from paragraph 18 it is not  usually  the
    case that a judge would invite of his own motion an Appellant to submit
    evidence after a date of hearing and indeed there is no  evidence  that
    the judge did so  on  this  occasion.   The  first  occasion  that  the
    Appellant had drawn to his attention the issue of whether he should  or
    should not have submitted  any  further  evidence  after  the  date  of
    hearing was upon receiving the decision of the judge.  He had not  been
    invited by the judge to submit  any  further  evidence  and  it  is  my
    finding that the judge was not really expecting him to do so.

17.  I find that the observations of the judge at paragraph 18 are  comments
    in passing only.  They are not intended to have represented  a  genuine
    opportunity for the Appellant to submit evidence postdating the  appeal
    hearing and I find that although they are observations  which  are  not
    usually contained  within  judge's  decisions  their  presence  in  the
    present decision does  not  give  the  appearance  of  such  procedural
    impropriety as would cause the objective observer  to  think  that  the
    Appellant had been treated unfairly.

18.  The procedural fairness issue is the only ground  of  appeal  that  the
    Appellant relies upon in the present appeal.  There is no other  matter
    that the Appellant relies upon to challenge the outcome of the  present
    appeal and I find that the procedural fairness issue is not  made  out.
    I therefore find that there is no material error of law in the  judge's
    decision and I uphold the decision of  the  First-tier  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal.

    Notice of Decision


     The making of the decision by the First tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of any material error of law.

     I uphold the decision of the First tier Tribunal.

     I dismiss the Appellant's appeal under the immigration rules.



    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                     Date: 4.3.16

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

