
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01583/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 30 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                               FATIMETU UMORU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a national of Nigeria who was born on 12 November  1957,
    appeals with permission in the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    North. For reasons given in her determination dated 10 March 2014,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal against the decision refusing  to  vary  the
    applicant's leave to remain and to remove her dated 16 December 2013.

 2. The history is as follows. In an application dated 30 October 2013  the
    appellant applied further leave to remain  with  a  different  employer
    from the one for which  she  had  been  granted  leave  to  enter.  The
    respondent refused the application because she was  not  satisfied  the
    appellant had been continuously employed as a domestic  worker  in  the
    private household of the same employer with whom  she  had  entered  or
    joined the United Kingdom and thus did  not meet  the  requirements  of
    159D(iii):

         " ... has continued to  be  employed  for  the  duration  of  leave
         granted as a domestic  worker  in  the  private  household  of  the
         employer with whom the applicant entered or joined  in  the  United
         Kingdom; ..."

 3. Furthermore, the respondent considered in the light of the change  that
    if she did not meet the requirements of paragraph 159D(iv):

         "... continues to be required for employment for the period of  the
         extension sought as a domestic worker in  a private household  that
         the employer lives in ..."

 4. In her grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant
    relied on an endorsement on her visa that "changes must be authorised".
    She claimed to be entitled to change  employer  as  she  had  made  her
    application on 19 March 2012 before the Rules changed on 6  April  that
    year.  She had been granted her visa after a  successful  appeal.   The
    appellant relied on a letter addressed to the Secretary  of  State  and
    dated 4 October 2013 giving details of the change of employer.

 5. The judge determined the appeal on  the  papers  as  requested  by  the
    appellant. She concluded that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that
    approval had been  granted  for  the  change  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant was not employed by the same person for  which  her  original
    leave to enter had been granted and thus did not meet the  requirements
    of the above Rules.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that  the
    appellant was entitled to change her employer without the  respondent's
    consent, based on her application having been made before 6 April 2012.
     In her grounds of application the appellant referred to a  failure  by
    the judge to take into account the fact that  her  initial  application
    was made before the changes in April 2012 with reference to a  guidance
    from the Home Office website from which she quotes:

         "You are allowed to move from another job after you have arrived in
         the UK, if the job is similar in skill to your  original  job.   If
         you change your employer after you entered you must write  to  tell
         us.  You do not need to make a formal application until you need to
         apply to extend your stay."

 7. Mr Jack conceded that the Secretary of State had applied the wrong rule
    when deciding the application.  He provided me with a copy of the Rules
    in force at the time of the decision and drew my attention to paragraph
    159EA which is in these terms:

         "159EA.  The requirement for an extension of  stay  as  a  domestic
                  worker in a private household for applicants who enter the
                  United Kingdom under Rules in place before  6  April  2012
                  are that the applicant:

                  (i)  last entered the UK with a valid entry clearance as a
                      domestic worker in a private household under Rules in
                      place before 6 April 2012; and

                  (ii) has continued to be  employed  for  the  duration  of
                      leave granted as  a  domestic  worker  in  a  private
                      household; and

                  (iii)    continues to be required for employment  for  the
                      period  of  the  extension  sought  as  a   full-time
                      domestic worker in a private household under the same
                      roof as the employer or in the  same  household  that
                      the employer has lived in and where evidence of  this
                      in the  form  of  written  terms  and  conditions  of
                      employment in the UK are set out in  Appendix  7  and
                      evidence that the employer resides in the UK; and

                  (iv) does not intend to take employment except as a  full-
                      time  domestic  worker  in  the   private   household
                      referred to in sub-paragraph 159EA(iii); and

                  (v)  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph  159A(i)  and
                      (vii); and

                  (vi) must not be in the UK in breach of  immigration  laws
                      except that any period of overstaying for a period of
                      28 days or less will be disregarded."

 8. Mr Jack's initial view was  that  although  the  wrong  rule  had  been
    applied having regard to the appellant's immigration history, she could
    not succeed because she could not meet (iv) of paragraph 159A which  is
    in these terms:

         "(iv)    intends to leave the UK at the end of six  months  in  the
             United Kingdom or at the same time as the employer,  whichever
             is the earlier; and ..."

 9.  On  reflection  he  changed  this   submission   and   corrected   his
    misunderstanding that 159EA(v) provided that an applicant  should  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 159A(i) to (vii) rather than  as  appears
    in the Rule itself at 159A(i) and (vii).

10. Mr Jack accepted that the appeal should succeed and invited me to allow
    the appeal against the decision refusing leave to remain.

11. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the  basis  that
    the judge had applied  the  wrong  rule.   I  remake  the  decision  by
    allowing the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated  16
    December 2013.  The application for leave  to  remain  remains  pending
    before the Secretary of State for lawful consideration.


Signed                                           Date 29 July 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
