
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/01312/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated |
|On 14 March 2016                    |On 4 April 2016                   |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               GURINDER BAJWA
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms M Malhotra (counsel) instructed by Malik Law
Chambers, solicitors.

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings  this  appeal,  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki, promulgated  on  30July  2015,
which allowed the Appellant's appeal to the limited extent  that  the  Judge
found the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 12 August 1984. He is a national of India.


4. On 17 December 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK as a tier 4 (general) student.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Thanki ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision and remitted the case to the respondent to make a lawful  decision,
directing that no such decision should be made for 60 days from the date  of
promulgation of his decision to enable the appellant to obtain a  fresh  CAS
and to enable the appellant to vary his existing  application  to  study  at
the address given in the new CAS letter.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and, on 28 January 2016,  Judge  Ford  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "3. The decision records that the CAS was issued by a sponsor that was
      no longer on the register and  that  it  was  also  withdrawn  by  the
      sponsor. The sponsor appears to have lost its licence on the same  day
      that the decision was made. It is unclear from reading the papers when
      the CAS was withdrawn by the sponsor (although the appellant  says  it
      was withdrawn on the date of decision).


      "4. If the CAS had been withdrawn prior to the date of decision,  then
      the grounds are arguable because the policy did not apply.  But  if  a
      CAS was withdrawn on the same day as the decision was  made  then  the
      grounds may not be arguable. As no clear findings were  made  on  this
      issue permission is granted.


      "5. There is an arguable material error of law"

7. Mr Staunton, for the respondent,  produced  a  printout  which  indicated
that the licence of the sponsoring College was revoked on 16 December  2014.
He reminded me that the date of decision was 17 December 2014, so  that  the
CAS licence was revoked the day before the decision was  made.  He  told  me
that possession of that knowledge made it difficult for  him  to  argue  the
grounds of appeal.


8. Miss Malhotra, counsel for the appellant, restricted  her  submission  to
telling me that the decision does not contain a material error of  law.  She
urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.


Analysis


9. In Patel (Tier 4 - no '60-day extension') India  [2011]  UKUT  187  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i)   Where a sponsor's Tier 4 licence is  withdrawn,
the UKBA Policy Guidance as at November 2009 (page 52) operates to  restrict
the remaining leave granted to 60 days where a student  has  more  than  six
months' of the original leave remaining.  It has no  effect  on  periods  of
less than six months; (ii) The policy does not operate to extend  leave  and
in particular, it does not provide a 60 day extension of leave to remain  in
a case where that leave to remain has already  expired;  (iii)  The  60  day
restriction, if applicable, runs from the time when the Secretary  of  State
notifies the student of the imposition  of  the  restriction  following  the
withdrawal of the licence.


10. In Kaur (Patel fairness: respondent's policy) [2013] UKUT 344 (IAC)   it
was held that (i)  The respondent has produced a policy, which  is  intended
to give effect to the principles of common law fairness identified in  Patel
(relocation of sponsor licence - fairness) [2011]  UKUT  211  (IAC)  and  is
designed to deal fairly with applicants whose  college  of  choice  loses  a
sponsor licence whilst the application for leave to remain  is  outstanding;
(ii)   In  essence,  the  policy  provides  that,  in  cases  of   potential
discretionary  refusal  under  paragraph  322  of  the  immigration   rules,
caseworkers should follow the 'Patel' process.  Where this is not done,  the
resulting decision will not be in accordance with the law.

11. It is now common ground that the CAS licence was revoked the day  before
the decision was  made  this  case.  At  [15]  of  the  decision  the  Judge
correctly takes guidance from the case of Kaur. At [16] of the decision  the
Judge explains why he finds that the duty of fairness has not been  complied
with by the respondent.

12. The Judge clearly directs himself  correctly  in  law  at  [15]  of  the
decision. The finding that the Judge makes at [16]  of  the  decision  is  a
finding which is manifestly open to the Judge  to  make  and  is  a  finding
which (logically)  leads  to  the  Judge's  conclusion  at  [17],  that  the
respondent's decision is not in accordance with the  law.  The  respondent's
policy is quoted by the respondent in the grounds of  appeal.  It  is  clear
that the appellant's case falls within the category of  cases  envisaged  by
the respondent when formulating that policy. It is equally  clear  that  the
respondent did not extend the benefit of that policy to the appellant.

13.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

14. The Judge considered each strand  of  evidence  placed  before  him.  He
records the submissions that were made and then, after  correctly  directing
himself in law, makes reasoned findings of fact before reaching  conclusions
which were manifestly open to the Judge to reach.

15.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

CONCLUSION

16. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

17. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 21
March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


