
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal Number: IA/01726/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Field House                |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 August 2014                      |On 2 September 2014       |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               RACHEAL AMEYAA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wells, Maliks & Khan

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1.  This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State   against   the
       determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oliver  in  which  he
       allowed the appeal of Ms Ameyaa, a citizen  of  Ghana,  against  the
       Secretary of State's decision to refuse to issue a residence card as
       confirmation of a right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
       family member of an EEA national. I shall refer to Ms Ameyaa as  the
       Applicant, although she was the Appellant in the proceedings below.


    2. The Secretary  of  State's  application  for  permission  to  appeal
       against the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was  granted  on  9
       July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge T R P Hollingworth.

    3. At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell appeared for the  Secretary  of
       State and Mr Wells represented the Applicant. Mr Wells  submitted  a
       mother and  baby  discharge  summary  from  the  Luton  &  Dunstable
       delivery suite confirming the birth of the Applicant's  daughter  on
       22  August  2014  and  also  an  email  from  the  French  Consulate
       confirming that the Applicant's marriage could not be recognised  by
       French law until registered in the French civil register.

    4. Mr Wells said that it was accepted that the Applicant's marriage was
       not recognised as valid under French  law  and  therefore  that  the
       Judge erred in law to the extent that he found the  marriage  to  be
       valid. However despite it  being  considered  and  rejected  in  the
       refusal letter the Judge did not make any finding in respect of  the
       durability of the Applicant's relationship  with  the  sponsor.  The
       decision in respect  of  durability  could  not  be  remade  without
       hearing oral evidence from the Applicant. As she  was  not  able  to
       attend due to the birth of her child last week  it  was  appropriate
       for an error of law to be found and the decision to allow the appeal
       set aside but for the  matter  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal so that oral evidence could be called.

    5. Mr Whitwell on behalf of the Secretary of State agreed that  in  the
       circumstances this was the appropriate course  particularly  due  to
       the  fact  that  the  grant  of  a  registration  certificate  under
       regulation  16(5)  is  discretionary  and  the   question   of   the
       Applicant's potentially adverse immigration history had been raised.




    Error of law

    6. The Applicant applied for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
       right to reside in the United  Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
       national exercising treaty rights. She claimed that  having  met  in
       May 2012 she and her husband Gabriel  Baffour,  a  French  national,
       went through a customary marriage by proxy in Accra  on  5  November
       2012. The Secretary of State  refused  the  application  firstly  by
       reference to regulation 7  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
       Area) Regulations 2006 on the basis that it was  not  accepted  that
       the proxy marriage  was  valid  and  secondly  because  it  was  not
       accepted that  the  Applicant  was  in  a  durable  relationship  by
       reference to regulation 8(5).


    7. At  the  appeal  hearing  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  properly
       directed himself to the authority of  NA  (Customary  marriages  and
       divorces - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009. However he failed  to
       have regard to Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT  00024
       (IAC). Had he done so he would have been bound to  consider  whether
       the marriage was valid according to the law of  the  EEA  national's
       home country, in this case France. As it was the  Judge  heard  oral
       evidence  and  found  on  the  basis  of  that  evidence   and   the
       documentation  submitted  that  the  marriage  was   valid   without
       considering whether it was valid according to the  law  of  the  EEA
       national's home state. The failure to follow the guidance  given  in
       Kareem was an error of law. The fact that it was a material error is
       borne out by the evidence now  submitted  to  the  Tribunal  by  the
       Applicant confirming that the marriage, not having been entered into
       the French Civil Register, is not recognised as valid  under  French
       law. On this basis the decision to allow  the  appeal  must  be  set
       aside.


    8. Having set aside the decision it would be possible on  the  evidence
       that was before the First-tier Tribunal to remake  the  decision  in
       respect of regulation 7 and inevitable  in  this  respect  that  the
       appeal would be dismissed. However the Secretary of State's decision
       was not confined to regulation 7  but  also  made  by  reference  to
       regulation 8 (5). Neither advocate was content for me to remake  the
       decision in this respect without  hearing  oral  evidence  from  the
       Applicant. It may seem apparent that the Applicant and  Mr  Baffour,
       who both gave evidence accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal  to  the
       effect that they had been living together since July 2012  and  that
       the  Appellant  was  expecting  their  child,  are  in   a   durable
       relationship. Further given that the Appellant has now  given  birth
       to a child it may appear that  there  is  further  evidence  of  the
       durability of that relationship. Nevertheless it is the wish of  the
       representatives that the durability of the relationship be evidenced
       further and, as pointed out by Mr Whitwell, the issue  of  residence
       documentation  is  discretionary  and  in  these  circumstances  the
       Applicant's immigration history may also be a relevant factor in the
       consideration.


    9. Due to the nature of the error of law and in particular the need  to
       hear detailed oral evidence from the Applicant it is appropriate for
       this matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.







   Conclusion

   10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error of law for the reasons set out above.


   11. I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
       accordance with the President's direction this  matter  is  suitable
       for and should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.








Signed:                                                  Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
