
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01271/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd September 2015                |On 11th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                       MISS LAURA Wilke Montoya Gomez
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 7th December 1973 is a citizen  of  Brazil.   The
    Appellant  was  present.   The  Respondent  was  represented  by   Miss
    Johnstone a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for an EEA  residence  card  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national who was exercising treaty rights in  the  UK.
    The Respondent had  refused  the  Appellant's  application.   That  was
    refused on 16th December 2014 on the basis that there was  insufficient
    evidence that the couple were in a durable relationship.  The Appellant
    had appealed that decision and  her  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy sitting at Manchester on  14th  April  2015.   The
    judge had allowed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

 3. The Respondent had appealed on the basis that the Home Office  had  not
    yet exercised their discretion under Regulation 17(4) and the judge had
    therefore made an error in law.

 4. Directions have been issued for the matter to be  heard  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal firstly to decide whether or not an error of law had been made
    in this case.

The Proceedings

 5. It is clear that an error  was  made  in  this  case.   The  judge  was
    entitled for the reasons given to have found that the Appellant and her
    EEA national partner were in a durable relationship such that she  fell
    within the terms of Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations.   However  in
    terms of her application for a residence card given that she was not  a
    family member under Regulation 7 but an extended  family  member  under
    Regulation 8 the provision of a  residence  card  was  a  discretionary
    matter for the Home Office within the terms of Regulation 17(4) of  the
    2006 Regulations.  Given that the  Respondent  had  not  accepted  that
    there was a durable relationship in the first  instance  they  had  not
    considered one way or the other the issue of discretion in relation  to
    the granting of a  residence  card.   To  that  extent  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was entitled to allow the appeal but only to the  extent
    of remitting it back to the Home Office to exercise their discretion in
    whether or not to issue a residence card under the terms of  Regulation
    17(4).

 6. The findings of the judge that  this  was  a  durable  relationship  of
    course stand and are not challenged.

 7. To the extent that this was therefore no more than a technical error it
    is not necessary to hear  further  evidence  or  submissions.   I  have
    therefore dealt with  this  matter  which  is  encapsulated  under  the
    decision paragraph below.

Notice of Decision

 8. A material error of law  was  made  by  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I set aside that decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   In
    remaking that decision I allow the  appeal  of  the  Appellant  to  the
    extent that the case is remitted back to the Home Office in  order  for
    them to exercise their discretion under Regulation 17(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
