
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01673/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th September 2013                          |On 22nd October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                            MAYUTA LEONORA BARNES
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Osadebe of Zuriel Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born  on  23rd  May  1945.   She
    arrived in the UK on 16th March 2010 with six months' leave  to  remain
    as a visitor.  She applied for settlement three  months  later  on  1st
    June 2010 as a dependent relative.  Her  application  was  refused  and
    subsequent appeals dismissed and she became appeal rights exhausted  on
    10th June 2011.

 2. She made a second application for settlement on 4th July 2011 which was
    again refused.  She appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 28th February 2012 Immigration Judge Majid
    dismissed her appeal.  The Appellant applied for leave to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal. Permission was granted on 21st March 2012 and, on  26th
    April 2012, Upper Tribunal Judge Craig set aside the decision.

 3. The matter then came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Chana  on  7th
    June 2012 and she again dismissed  the  appeal.  The  Appellant  sought
    permission from the Upper Tribunal to appeal to the Court of Appeal and
    permission was granted on 3rd October 2012 by Senior Immigration  Judge
    Chalkley.

 4. The Respondent agreed with the Appellant  that  it  was  arguable  that
    there was a material error of law in the determination of Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chana  and  the  parties  agreed  to  the  matter  being
    remitted for an appeal hearing.

 5. By consent, on 1st July 2013, the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal to
    the extent that it be remitted to the Upper Tribunal to be heard  by  a
    differently constituted Upper Tribunal.  Thus the  matter  came  before
    me.

The Issues

 6. This application was refused under  paragraph  319  with  reference  to
    paragraphs 317(iii) and (v) of HC 395.  The Secretary of State was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant was financially wholly or mainly dependent
    on the relative present and settled in the UK.  Nor was  she  satisfied
    that she had no other close relatives in her own country  to  whom  she
    could turn to for financial support.

 7. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Tarlow confirmed  that  he  would
    not be arguing that the Appellant was not financially wholly or  mainly
    dependent on her son Fabian in the UK.  Accordingly the sole issue  for
    determination would be whether she had  family  in  Jamaica  who  could
    support her, and Article 8 issues.

The Evidence

 8. The Appellant gave oral evidence.  She confirmed that the  contents  of
    her witness statement were true.  She is  a  widow  and  used  to  sell
    fabrics in her local market until she suffered a stroke as a result  of
    high blood pressure from 2002 when she  became  dependent  on  her  son
    Fabian Barnes.  He sent money to  her  through  the  Jamaican  National
    Money Transfer System and she had no other source of support.  She said
    that she had another son, Calvin Morgan, who lives in Jamaica.  He is a
    butcher by profession.  In her statement she said that  he  was  unwell
    and only able to work twice a week and has five  children  to  maintain
    with  his wife.

 9. In her oral evidence she said that she was not  really  in  touch  with
    Calvin Morgan but then said that she last spoke  to  Fabian  the  other
    night and she talked to him.   She  said  that  he  used  to  work  but
    repeated twice that he was now not working at all.  When asked  how  he
    survived she said that his wife worked.

10. The Appellant said that she had another child in America  who  did  not
    support her at all because she was not employed and  she  hardly  heard
    from her.  She also had a son, Benton Morgan ,but she last saw  him  in
    2005.  He had two children, one, Elvis, who is now 20 and who  used  to
    live with her before she came to the United Kingdom.  She was not  sure
    where Elvis was now but he might be with his mother  in  Kingston.  She
    was asked about other relatives.  She said  that  she  had  an  elderly
    mother in Jamaica and a sister who took care of her.   The  sister  was
    not married but she had two children of her own.   She  said  that  her
    sister had never worked. When asked how she  survived  financially  she
    said that she earned money from sewing now and then.

11. The Appellant was asked about her accommodation in  Jamaica.  She  said
    that she used to have a house which she had a life interest  in  but  a
    large tree fell on it and damaged it.

12. She said that she came to the UK in 2010 for  the  christening  of  her
    granddaughter Rachel Barnes and whilst she was here her grandson Joshua
    Barnes was born.  She has a strong bond with her grandchildren and  the
    thought of separation from them is unbearable.  She would have  nowhere
    to live and nowhere to go back to  if  she  returned  to  Jamaica.  She
    suffers from high blood pressure, arthritis,  high cholesterol and  has
    had a nervous breakdown.  Her removal would have a  devastating  effect
    on her  family  life  in  the  UK  and  her  son,  daughter-in-law  and
    grandchildren would be severely affected.  She cannot live  by  herself
    or on her own in Jamaica because of her frailty and illness.

13. Fabian Barnes also gave evidence.   He confirmed that he had  supported
    his mother since 2002.  He said that his brother Calvin worked two days
    a week doing butchering but could not afford to give her money  nor  to
    offer her accommodation because he had a two bed roomed house and  five
    children. When asked whether he had regular contact with his brother he
    said it depended what was meant, but then agreed that he had spoken  to
    him four days ago.

14. Fabian Barnes was asked about  whether  the  Appellant  had  any  other
    relatives in Jamaica.  He said that her mother lived there but she  was
    feeble and helpless. He could not think of  any  others,  only  distant
    relatives.  It was then put to him that she had a sister there  and  he
    agreed.

15. Fabian Barnes said that his mother's house was  damaged  beyond  repair
    and not liveable in.  She  could  not  live  with  his  brother  Calvin
    because he had five children. He accepted that two were of working  age
    but did not think that any of them were actually working.

16. His wife Sasha Lee Barnes also gave evidence.  She said that the family
    could not cope without the Appellant.  She was  a  vital  part  of  the
    family and like a mother to her.  She was  the  anchor.  She  was  also
    asked whether the Appellant had any other relatives in Jamaica and  she
    said that there were none to her knowledge. However when it was put  to
    her she agreed that there might be a sister and she thought  that  some
    of Calvin's children could be of working age.

Submissions

17. Mr Tarlow asked me to find that the Appellant and her  family  had  not
    been truthful in giving evidence.  He asked me not to accept  that  the
    family were destitute in Jamaica as claimed. When the Appellant came to
    the UK as a visitor on her application, she said that she had  a  total
    monthly income of 18,000 Jamaican dollars she received money  from  her
    children in Jamaica and in the UK.

18. Mr Tarlow submitted  that  even  if  the  Appellant's  house  had  been
    damaged, that was no bar to her  return  and  even  if  damaged  beyond
    repair, the land would still be valuable.  He said that no evidence had
    been produced other than the oral evidence of the witnesses to  confirm
    the family's circumstances in Jamaica.  He accepted that she  preferred
    to live in the UK but she had been here for a relatively  short  period
    of time, since 2010, and her removal was proportionate.

19. Mr Osadebe submitted that the Appellant had given clear evidence  which
    had not been embellished. She was a frail old lady and had said as much
    as she could  remember.  She had been to the UK before and had returned
    twice but now enjoyed family life with her son and daughter-in-law  and
    her grandchildren.   She was on medication and her health would  be  in
    jeopardy if she were to return.

20. He said that the Appellant had nothing to return  to  in  Jamaica,  had
    nowhere to live and there was no  one  to  look  after  her.   She  was
    financially dependent on her son in the UK  and  there  were  no  other
    close relatives in Jamaica who were able and willing to care  for  her.
    Calvin could not support himself and his five children and there was no
    evidence that they were working.

21. He relied on the case of Beoku-Betts and submitted that there would  be
    a direct impact on other family members by her  removal  including  her
    daughter-in-law and her grandchildren.  He relied on  the  Respondent's
    IDIs and asked that the appeal be allowed  under  the  Rules  and  with
    respect to Article 8.

Findings and Conclusions

22. I find that the Appellant has close relatives in Jamaica  to  whom  she
    could turn to for financial support.

23. The evidence in relation to  her  family  there  was  discrepant.   The
    Appellant herself said that her son Calvin  was  not  working.   Fabian
    Barnes said that he worked two days a week at  butchering.   Sasha  Lee
    Barnes was sure that he was not working.  The Appellant said  that  she
    was not really in touch with Calvin but it  then  transpired  that  the
    family had spoken to him a couple of days ago on the phone.

24. The Appellant said that Calvin could not support himself and his family
    but then admitted that his wife worked.  Fabian Barnes was evasive when
    asked whether he was in regular contact with his brother,  saying  that
    it depended on what you call regular.

25. Initially none of the family mentioned the fact that the Appellant  has
    a sister in Jamaica.  The Appellant said that she had never worked  but
    then said that she earned money from sewing.  Fabian could not think of
    any relatives in Jamaica except for his old grandmother  until  it  was
    put to him that he had an aunt there.

26. In fact the Appellant also has a son Benton Morgan in Jamaica  although
    she said that she was not in contact with him.  I do not  believe  her.
    Benton has two children, one of   whom,  Elvis,  was  living  with  her
    before she came to the UK.

27. In the light of the contradictory evidence given today, I conclude that
    there are indeed a number of relatives who would be able to support the
    Appellant  on  return  and  that  her  statement  in  the  Visit   Visa
    Application Form that she was supported by relatives both in the UK and
    in Jamaica is, on the balance of probabilities, true.

28. I do not accept that the Appellant would have no home to return to.  As
    the reasons for refusal letter commented, her claim that her house  was
    destroyed by Hurricane Dean in Jamaica in November 2010 was not  raised
    in her two unsuccessful appeals which were both  heard  after  November
    2010.  She has a life interest in that  house and could return to it.

29. I accept that she enjoys family life in the UK with Fabian Barnes,  his
    wife and two children.  She has been  financially dependent on  him  at
    least since her arrival here in 2010.

30. Removal would be an interference with her  family  life  but  would  be
    lawful because she has no other basis of stay in the UK and in  pursuit
    of a legitimate aim.  It would also be proportionate.

31. The Secretary of State has a significant public interest  in  deterring
    applications of this nature. The Appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  as  a
    visitor in March 2010 and within three months had made  an  application
    as a dependent relative.  Whilst I have no doubt that she has  a  close
    bond with her grandchildren in the UK, she also  has  grandchildren  in
    Jamaica and there is no barrier to her UK family visiting her there.  I
    accept, although there is no medical evidence, that  she  suffers  from
    high blood pressure and is on medication, but there is  no  reason  why
    she could not obtain the relevant medicine in Jamaica.  She  says  that
    she sometimes does not remember to take it but she has other  relatives
    in Jamaica who could remind her.  Clearly  her  family,  including  her
    grandchildren, in the UK will miss her, but they can  visit  and  their
    interests do not outweigh those of the Respondent.

32. With respect to the IDIs, Mr Osadebe produced a document dated  October
    2004  which states that where an  applicant  is  over  the  age  of  65
    detailed enquiries will not be necessary.  However he also  provided  a
    document  dated  July  2011  which  states  that  the  applicant   must
    demonstrate that he/she has no other close relatives to turn to in  his
    own country.  If there is a relative in the applicant's own country who
    is able and willing to support him, then it would not  be  unreasonable
    to expect him to turn to that relative for support even if the  sponsor
    in the UK is financially in a better  position  to  do  so.   There  is
    nothing therefore in the IDIs which assists this Appellant.

Decision

33. The original judge erred in law and the decision has been set aside. It
    is remade as follows.   The  Appellant  's  appeal  is  dismissed  with
    respect to the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds.






Signed                              Date 3rd October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

