

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01059/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th August 2014                           |On 15th August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                     AN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwinycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Nicholson, instructed by Levi Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Secretary of State seeks to appeal a decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal allowing the appeal of the claimant against a decision of the
      SSHD refusing her a derivative residence card for reasons set out in a
      letter dated 16th December 2013.


        Background

   2. The claimant made an application for a derivative  residence  card  on
      13th December 2013 on  the  grounds  that  she  was  a  third  country
      national  (a  Gambian  citizen)  upon  whom  a  British  citizen   was
      dependent. The SSHD in her reasons for refusal held
    . The claimant did not come under the definition of 'family  member'  as
      set out in Article 2 of the Directive  2004/38/EC  and  was  thus  not
      entitled to  a  Residence  Card  in  accordance  with  regulation  18A
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
    .  The claimant has not provided adequate proof that the British Citizen
      child lives with her, that she makes  decisions  in  relation  to  the
      child or provided reasons why the  child's  father  could  not  assume
      responsibility for the child;
    .  The claimant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules/Article 8 for leave to remain as primary carer of the child.


   3. The First-tier Tribunal judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
      Regulations, apparently with the consent of Counsel although  we  were
      informed this was not in fact the case but, apparently  on  the  basis
      that the decision of the SSHD was not  in  accordance  with  the  law,
      allowed the appeal to the extent that it was remitted back to the SSHD
      for a decision to be taken on the claimant's application to remain  in
      the UK as the primary carer of the child.


   4. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  following
      ground:

             "the  Immigration  Judge  has  found  that   the   Immigration
             (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the  "Regulations")
             do not apply since the  "EEA"  citizen  is  a  United  Kingdom
             Citizen. As such the Immigration Judge remits  the  mater  for
             the Secretary of State to make a decision on  the  Appellant's
             application to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  the  primary
             carer of a UK minor citizen:
             It is respectfully submitted that this finding  amounts  to  a
             material misdirection of law"


   5. Regulation 18A of the regulations (in  so  far  as  relevant  to  this
      claimant) states



             18A.- Issue of a derivative residence card
             (1) The Secretary of State must issue a person with a
             derivative residence card on application and on production of-
             (a) a valid identity card issued by an EEA State or a valid
             passport; and
             (b) proof that the applicant has a derivative right of
             residence under regulation 15A.


   6. Regulation 15A states, in so far as is relevant to this claimant:

            15A. Derivative right of residence
            (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies
            the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of this
            regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the
            United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.


            .........
            (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
             (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
             British citizen");
             (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United
             Kingdom; and
             (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
             the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.
            ......
            (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person
            if
             (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and
             (b) P-
               (i) is the person who has primary responsibility for that
               person's care; or
               (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's care
               with one other person who is not an exempt person.
                 .......
            (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a
            person's care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis
            of a financial contribution towards that person's care.


   7. The respondent acknowledges in the letter dated 16th December 2013


    . the child is a British citizen
    . the claimant is a non EU citizen
    . the child lives with the claimant and she makes the decisions for her
    . the child's father has infrequent parental contact with the child;
    . the child's father lives with his wife and she does not  know  of  the
      existence of the child;
    . there is no or little evidence of who financially supports the child.


   8. The test as relevant in  this  appeal  is  whether  the  claimant  HAS
      primary responsibility for the child's  care  OR  shares  equally  the
      responsibility with one other person who is not exempt.

   9. Before us both parties accepted that the judge was wrong to find  that
      regulation 15A did not apply and therefore erred in law in  dismissing
      the appeal. With the consent of both parties we set aside the decision
      which is therefore at large before us to be remade.

      Remaking the decision

  10. The child was born in July 2007. Her father is a British  Citizen  who
      lives with his wife (not the  claimant)  who  does  not  know  of  the
      existence of this child. Mr Diwinycz accepted before us  that  on  any
      sensible view in the light of the evidence produced, the  claimant  is
      the primary carer. He also  accepted  that  the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter  imports  an  incorrect  test  namely   that   a   failure   or
      unwillingness of a parent or carer  who  might  otherwise  be  thought
      capable of being a primary carer to assume care and responsibility  is
      insufficient to assert that another direct  relative  is  the  primary
      carer.


  11. It was also common ground between the parties and agreed  between  the
      parties that the claimant meets all of the requirements of  regulation
      15A(4A) and 15A (7) so that under 15A (1) she is a person  to  whom  a
      derivative right to reside in the UK should be granted.


  12. The consequence is that given all the circumstances, particularly  the
      age of the child, the claimant satisfies all of  the  requirements  of
      the applicable regulations and is therefore entitled to reside in  the
      UK.

     Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     We set aside the decision  and  substitute  a  decision  allowing  the
    appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  a
    derivative right of residence card.





                                    Date 14th August 2014
        Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
