
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01859/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 July 2019                  |On 29 October 2019               |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                FOYAJ AHAMMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Simret, a legal representative from Londonium
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national who  was  born  on  23  October
    1986.  He appeals against a decision which was issued by the First-tier
    Tribunal on 2 July 2018, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
    refusal of his application for leave to remain outside the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. The appellant entered the UK in February 2011.  He held entry clearance
    as a student, under Tier 4 of the Points  Based  System  ("PBS").   Two
    applications for further leave to remain in that capacity were granted,
    resulting in leave which was valid  until  28  February  2015.   On  27
    February 2015, the appellant applied for further leave  as  a  student.
    That application was accompanied by a document described as  a  "Letter
    of Acceptance for Studies" from a college called St Peter's College  of
    London, situated on the third floor of an address on  Commercial  Road.
    The letter stated that the  appellant  had  been  made  a  'conditional
    offer' for a course in Tourism and Hospitality Management.  The  course
    was due to run from 2 March 2015 to 2 March 2016 and the offer was said
    to be subject to "Proof of Maintenance Funds".

 3. A month later, the appellant varied that application so that it  became
    one for leave outside the Immigration  Rules.   The  reasons  for  that
    change of tack were explained in a letter dated 26 March 2015 from  his
    then solicitors.  It was said that the appellant had realised that  the
    letter  from  St  Peter's  College  did  not  satisfy  the  sponsorship
    requirements of Tier 4 of the PBS.  Because it was not possible to  get
    a Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  ("CAS")  without  leave  to
    remain, the appellant sought a short period of leave which would enable
    him to secure a new sponsor and a CAS and apply  for  leave  to  remain
    under the PBS.  Although he had submitted the letter  from  St  Peter's
    College, his intention was to study for  a  qualification  in  Business
    Management.  The letter requested leave outside the  Rules  and  stated
    that the appellant would be retaining his original passport in order to
    'look for CAS letter', although he was content to send the passport  to
    the respondent if requested to do so.

 4. The application was refused on 5 October 2015.  The respondent  refused
    the application under paragraphs 322(1) and 322(5) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The former ground of refusal was based on the fact  that  leave
    was sought for a purpose not covered by the Rules.  The  latter  ground
    was based on the respondent's conclusion that the appellant had used  a
    proxy to take a TOEIC English Language test at New College  of  Finance
    on 17 April 2012.  This decision carried no right of appeal and, having
    received a negative response to a Letter Before Action,  the  appellant
    issued  a  claim  for   judicial   review   in   the   Upper   Tribunal
    (JR/14082/2015).  We need not  mention  the  grounds  upon  which  that
    application was made.  It suffices for present purposes to record  that
    it was settled by consent on 17  February  2016,  with  the  respondent
    agreeing to serve a decision which attracted a right of appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Very shortly thereafter, on 20 February 2016, the respondent issued the
    decision under appeal.  She refused to grant  the  appellant  leave  to
    remain to enable him to find another  sponsoring  college  because  she
    considered that such a decision would place him at unfair advantage  as
    compared to others in a similar position, and because it  was  open  to
    him to return to Bangladesh and make an application for entry clearance
    as a  student.   In  addition,  she  maintained  that  the  appellant's
    presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good because he  had
    used a proxy to take an English language test in 2012.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge Bowler  found
    that the respondent had not discharged the legal  burden  upon  her  of
    establishing that the appellant had cheated  in  his  English  Language
    Test.  She found that he was unable to meet the Immigration  Rules  for
    leave to remain as a student or for leave to  remain  on  Private  Life
    grounds.  In assessing Article 8 ECHR, Judge Bowler accepted  that  the
    appellant had a protected private life in the UK but she concluded,  by
    reference to Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002,  that  the  interference  proposed  by  the  respondent   was   a
    proportionate one.  She dismissed the appeal for these reasons.

 7. Permission to appeal was sought  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Two
    grounds were advanced.  By the first, it was submitted that  the  judge
    had 'failed to appreciate the fact the decision of the  respondent  was
    confined to Immigration paragraph 322(1) and not related to  Article  8
    rights or  Immigration  Paragraph  276ADE'.   By  the  second,  it  was
    submitted that the judge had 'failed to  consider  the  fact  that  the
    respondent's decision denying opportunity to find  a  new  sponsor  was
    unfair: fettering discretion'.  Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by
    Judge Boyes on 2 October 2018.

 8. The application was renewed on the papers before Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Hanson.  The first ground was as originally  pleaded  before  the  FtT.
    The second ground was that the respondent's decision  was  procedurally
    unfair because the appellant should have been given additional time  in
    which to secure a new Tier 4 sponsor.  Judge Hanson refused permission,
    concluding that it was not arguable that the judge should have confined
    his enquiry as suggested in ground one and that  it  was  not  arguable
    that any procedural unfairness had arisen out of the  manner  in  which
    the appellant had been treated by the respondent.

 9. The appellant then made an  application  to  the  Administrative  Court
    under CPR 54.7A.  The grounds  were  settled  not  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors but by leading counsel.  It was submitted that the appellant
    only needed a short period of time with leave to  remain  in  order  to
    obtain a 'formal CAS' and that the issue of  law  was  'the  extent  to
    which a so-called "near  miss"  under  the  Immigration  Rules  can  be
    relevant to  the  decision-making  under  A8  of  the  ECHR.'   It  was
    submitted that the judge's assessment of  proportionality  was  clearly
    flawed in that:

      i) The judge had failed  to  consider,  in  accordance  with  Rhuppiah
         [2018] UKSC 58; [2018] 1 WLR  5536,  whether  the  'little  weight'
         provisions in Part 5 NIAA 2002 should have been overridden  by  the
         particularly strong features of the appellant's private life.

     ii) The judge had characterised the appellant's private  life  unfairly
         in concluding that he was not in the middle of a course of study.

    iii) The judge had overlooked the fact that the failure to  comply  with
         the Immigration Rules was 'miniscule', since the appellant had  not
         been unable to satisfy a 'substantive qualifying criteria' and  had
         submitted a document (from St Peter's College) which showed that he
         met 'the policy of the Immigration Rules'.

     iv) He had failed to weigh in the balance the fact that  the  appellant
         had not been  engaged  in  fraudulent  activity  in  obtaining  his
         English language test.

10. In an order which was sent to the parties on 22 March  2019,  Mostyn  J
    granted the appellant permission to  apply  for  judicial  review.   He
    observed:

         "The claimant argues that following his acquittal of dishonesty  he
         was, in effect, in a Catch 22: he could not obtain  a  CAS  without
         LTR, but could not gain LTR without a CAS.  This  dilemma  was  not
         considered either by the first-tier tribunal  or  by  either  judge
         refusing permission to appeal.  It seems to me that  this  omission
         renders the refusal of permission to appeal arguably incorrect  and
         that there is an important principle which should be considered."

11. There having been no request for a  substantive  hearing  in  the  High
    Court, Judge Hanson's decision was quashed by order of Master Gidden on
    1 May 2019.  So it was that the application for  permission  to  appeal
    came before the Vice President on 22 May 2019.  He  granted  permission
    in light of the decision of the High Court, reminding the parties  that
    the Upper Tribunal's  task  would  be  that  set  out  in  s12  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

12. Shortly in advance of the hearing, Mr Simret had  produced  a  skeleton
    argument in which he adopted the submissions made by leading counsel in
    support of the application for judicial review.  Before us,  he  stated
    that he was not pursuing the  first  of  the  grounds  which  had  been
    advanced before Judge Hanson.  The sole point he wished to  pursue  was
    that material matters had been overlooked by the judge in assessing the
    proportionality of the respondent's decision.  Although the  judge  had
    done 'very well' in certain respects, Mr Simret submitted that  he  had
    failed to consider whether the appellant should have been given a short
    period of leave within which to find a  new  sponsoring  college.   The
    judge should, Mr Simret submitted, have 'told the respondent'  to  give
    the appellant 'a little bit of extra time'.

13. For the respondent, Mr Bramble submitted that the judge had  considered
    the  appellant's  appeal  inside  and  outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    correctly, with proper cognisance of  all  relevant  matters.   It  was
    seemingly suggested by the appellant that he  had  been  placed  in  an
    invidious position by the respondent's erroneous conclusion that he had
    cheated in his ETS test but that was never suggested to the respondent.

14. Mr Simret replied, submitting that  the  judge  had  been  required  to
    consider  the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's  decision.    The
    appellant was asking for a very limited time in which  to  resolve  his
    situation and it was not in the public interest for the appellant to be
    returned to Bangladesh.  He had been absolved of the TOEIC fraud by the
    judge.  Mr Simret accepted that  the  appellant  had  done  nothing  to
    secure further leave during the time that his  leave  was  extended  by
    operation of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 (whilst this appeal
    has been pending) and said that he had remained in the UK, being funded
    by his parents in Bangladesh.

15. We reserved our decision.




Discussion

16. In Shah [2018] UKUT 5 (IAC); [2018] Imm  AR  707,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Lane J and UTJ Blum) stated that an application under  CPR  54.7A  was
    'emphatically not an opportunity for a party to raise  new  grounds  of
    appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal'.   The  points
    raised in the grounds before Mostyn J were certainly not  to  be  found
    within the first of the two grounds pleaded before FtT Judge  Boyes  or
    Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson.  We very much doubt that those points  can
    be located in the second ground advanced before the FtT or the UT.   Mr
    Bramble did not suggest that he was disadvantaged, however, and we were
    able to hear argument on the points Mr Simret wished to advance.

17. As we have recorded above, the submission made in the  grounds  settled
    by leading counsel was that Judge Bowler had failed to  come  to  grips
    with the essential point of the appellant's case.  The essential  point
    was said to be that he only required a short additional period of leave
    within  which  to  secure  a  new  Tier  4  sponsor  and  that  it  was
    disproportionate to expect him to return  to  Bangladesh  in  order  to
    secure a new  Tier  4  sponsor.   It  was  submitted,  in  reliance  on
    authorities we need not cite, that the appellant's case was  clearly  a
    "near miss" and that it would be disproportionate for him to start  all
    over again by returning to Bangladesh to make an application for  entry
    clearance.

18. As we were taken through the evidence by Mr Simret, however, it  became
    abundantly clear that this case cannot properly be described as a  near
    miss.  When the appellant made his application  for  further  leave  to
    remain, he relied on the 'Letter of Acceptance for Studies' to which we
    have already referred.  Contrary to the submissions made  in  the  High
    Court and before us, this letter did not state that the appellant would
    be granted a CAS if only he  was  granted  leave  to  remain.   On  the
    contrary, it stated that the offer was subject to "Proof of Maintenance
    Funds".  Before Judge Bowler, therefore, the appellant was not a person
    who was demonstrably certain to secure a new sponsor if only he  had  a
    short period of further leave to remain; he was a person who  had  been
    unable to secure a sponsor because, on his own  evidence,  he  had  not
    been able to show proof of adequate funding to that sponsor.

19.  The  appellant  appeared  before  Judge  Bowler  in  June  2018.   His
    application for further leave to remain had been made more  than  three
    years before that hearing.  The application was in time, as a result of
    which the appellant has had leave to remain as a result of  section  3C
    of the Immigration Act 1971 throughout,  including  the  period  during
    which his ultimately successful application  for  judicial  review  was
    pending: Saimon  [2017]  UKUT  371  (IAC);  [2018]  Imm  AR  188.   The
    appellant adduced no evidence at all to show that he had been unable to
    secure a sponsoring college in  the  UK  during  this  lengthy  period,
    whether  because  of  his  immigration  status  or   because   of   the
    respondent's erroneous allegation that he had  cheated  in  an  English
    language test in 2012.  There was, quite simply, no proper  basis  upon
    which it could have been submitted that the appellant merely  needed  a
    short additional period of leave to remain in order to secure a sponsor
    and regularise his position.

20. We need not repeat or analyse the review of 'near miss' authorities  in
    the grounds which were before Mostyn J because we do not consider  that
    this case can, in any rational sense, be described as a near miss.  The
    appellant wishes to secure leave to remain as a student under Tier 4 of
    the PBS but he does not have a sponsor.  The reason he did not secure a
    sponsor in 2015 was - on his own evidence - because he  was  unable  to
    persuade his potential sponsor that he had sufficient funds.  Without a
    college at which to study or funds with which to fund his studies,  the
    appellant could not  be  said  to  be  anywhere  near  to  meeting  the
    requirements for leave to remain as a student.   To  suggest  that  his
    case was a near miss was to mischaracterise the situation.  The  margin
    by which he failed to meet the Rules cannot properly be  said,  as  was
    suggested to the High Court, to be 'miniscule'.  Were that  label  apt,
    it would apply equally to a single person who sought leave as a  spouse
    or an individual with no relevant medical training who sought leave  to
    undertake a clinical attachment.  On any proper view of the facts,  the
    appellant's miss was as good as a mile, to use Sedley  LJ's  expression
    from Pankina [2010] EWCA 719; [2011] QB 376, as cited with approval  by
    Lord Carnwath (with whom the other Justices agreed) at [46] and [53] of
    Patel [2013] UKSC 72; [2014] 1 AC 651.

21. Nor, with respect to the author of the grounds, could  it  properly  be
    said that there were very strong features of  the  appellant's  private
    life which came close to  overriding  the  general  normative  guidance
    provided by s117A(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 on the little weight which is to be attached  to  a  private  life
    which  accrues  during  a  period  of  precarious  immigration   status
    (Rhuppiah refers, at [49]-[50]).  On the evidence before the  FtT,  the
    appellant was fortunate to secure a finding that  Article  8  ECHR  was
    engaged in its private life aspect.

22. The appellant made two statements before the FtT.  The first, dated  10
    October 2017, recounted the history, denied the allegation of cheating,
    and concluded by stating that  the  appellant  wanted  to  undertake  a
    further course in Business Administration.  The second statement,  made
    on 31 May 2018, responded in greater detail to the allegation of  fraud
    and  referred  to  the   appellant's   educational   achievements   and
    aspirations in the UK.  He said that he had worked in the  care  sector
    and made friendships in the UK and that it would be a blow if he had to
    return to Bangladesh.  This was not a private  life  with  very  strong
    features.  It could  not  conceivably  override  the  statutory  public
    interest factors in Part 5A NIAA 2002.  The nature of  the  appellant's
    case before the FtT and before us is instead to attempt to use what  is
    inaccurately described as a  near  miss  under  the  Rules  to  provide
    substance to a human rights case which is otherwise lacking  in  merit,
    contrary to what was said by Lord Carnwath at [56] of Patel.

23. Although the argument before us explored  the  proportionality  of  the
    respondent's decision in greater detail than the arguments before Judge
    Bowler, our consideration of the additional arguments  serves  only  to
    confirm the correctness of the decision reached at first instance.  The
    appellant would very much like to continue his studies in this  country
    but his desire in that regard is outweighed by the public  interest  in
    his removal, as Judge Bowler correctly held.  There is no error of  law
    in her decision, which shall stand.

24. We add this.  It is particularly unfortunate that the appellant,  whose
    position was correctly determined by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  July
    2018 should have been able to  remain  in  the  UK  for  more  than  an
    additional year by advancing to the High Court grounds which it appears
    could not have  shown  any  error  in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision
    refusing the  permission  application  and  which  were  in  any  event
    inaccurate in  their  assertions  on  the  evidence.   Equally,  it  is
    particularly unfortunate that the appellant has been put to the cost of
    such  proceedings.   This  serves   to   demonstrate   the   particular
    responsibilities shared by all  those  with  any  involvement  in  Cart
    applications.  Because there is in practice no opportunity  to  correct
    errors or overstatements before the routine treatment  of  cases  where
    permission is granted, practitioners must ensure that there is a  focus
    on  the  specific  decision  under  challenge,  that  the  grounds  for
    challenge to that decision and that the grounds are wholly accurate and
    realistic.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law and its decision  dismissing  the
appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
                               24 October 2019
