
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01647/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 August 2015                    |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                 MAZHAR FIAZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Khan, instructed by Kabir Ahmed & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on  4  September
         2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge A Parker which allowed the appeal
         on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

      2. The background to this matter is that the appellant, a  citizen  of
         India, entered the UK on 5 July 2012  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
         visitor valid until 20  December  2012.  On  26  November  2012  he
         married Safaa Nazir, a British national. On  19  December  2012  he
         applied for further leave to  remain  under  Article  8  ECHR.  The
         respondent refused that application on 11 December 2013.

      3. Before the First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  common  ground  that  the
         appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
         paragraph 276ADE. It was conceded that he did not meet the  English
         language or the financial requirements of Appendix FM.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal therefore proceeded  to  conduct  a  second
         stage Article 8 assessment. The genuine nature of the  relationship
         was not in dispute so at [14] Judge Parker accepted that family and
         private life  in  the  UK  had  been  established.  There  was  the
         additional factor of the couple having a daughter by  the  time  of
         the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. That child is British.

      5. At [15] to [17] Judge Parker set out that he did  not  accept  that
         anything, including medical  problems,  prevented  the  appellant's
         wife from living in Pakistan; see [15], [16], [17], [25] and  [26].
         At [23] the Judge notes that the appellant's wife speaks a language
         used in Pakistan which would make it easier for her live there.  It
         was found that the appellant could work in Pakistan; see [27].

      6. Having set out section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 at [18],  Judge  Parker  appears  to  reference  s.
         117B(2) at [28] where he states "he cannot show  that  he  will  be
         integrated in this country  as  he  has  not  been  able  to  speak
         English". It is undisputed that the appellant did not speak English
         well, using an interpreter at the hearing.

      7. At [19] and [21], s.117B(3) is weighed against the appellant as the
         couple were not financially independent.

      8. At [20] the  judge  reminds  himself  that  the  Immigration  Rules
         regarding finance were also not met.

      9. Judge Parker also found at [23] that the couple knew the  appellant
         did not have the correct immigration status  to  remain  when  they
         married so had no grounds of complaint when the appellant  was  not
         granted leave.

     10. At [28], the judge notes that the appellant has been in the UK  for
         a short time and that the factors identified thus far were  "strong
         public policy considerations."

     11. How  is  it  then  that  Judge  Parker  allowed  the  second  stage
         assessment? As set out above, he identified  that  the  Immigration
         Rules were not met, a central and strong  aspect  weighing  against
         the appellant; see Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558  at  [40]
         and [41]. It was correctly pointed out that section 117B(2) and (3)
         weighed against the appellant where he did not  speak  English  and
         was not financially independent. It was found  entirely  reasonable
         for his wife to go to Pakistan where the appellant could expect  to
         be able  to  work  and  that  they  should  have  anticipated  this
         eventuality when they married.

     12.  The  answer  appears  to  me  to  be  at  [33]  and  [34]  of  the
         determination. At [33] the judge states:

             "It is in the best interests of the  child  to  be  with  both
             parents. It is unclear how the appellant can make a successful
             settlement application. Third party support  is  not  possible
             and she is not working. The child is a little over three weeks
             old and needs her mother. The separation between the child and
             the mother and the appellant could be for several years.  they
             (sic) do not wish to reside in India and as  British  citizens
             that is an important consideration."

     13. At [34] the judge  identifies  that  following  s.117B(6)  he  must
         assess whether it is reasonable for the appellant's child to  leave
         the UK. He states:

             "These provision s (sic) provide an exception to  the  English
             and income requirements at 117(2)  they  (sic)  recognise  the
             excisting (sic) case law on British Citizenship As  (sic)  the
             appellant has no realistic prospect under the current rule  of
             making a settlement appl4eication (sic) in the near  future  I
             find this is a case were (sic) the law  should  intervene  and
             the appeal should be allowed under Article 8."

     14. In my view the judge  takes  a  materially  incorrect  approach  in
         paragraphs  [33]  and  [34].  He  appears  finds  that  if  it   is
         unreasonable for the child to go to Pakistan this is an "exception"
         to the weight going against the appellant arising  from  the  other
         s.117B factors. That it not  correct.  The  reasonableness  of  the
         child going to Pakistan falls to be weighed with the other  factors
         in s.117B and other factors. It is not a determinative factor  that
         must outweigh other matters.

     15. Further, the only reason I can discern for the finding that it  was
         not reasonable for the child to go to India is the reference to the
         "case law on British Citizenship". But, as the  judge  pointed  out
         himself, that does not identify British  nationality  as  a  "trump
         card", quite the opposite. Everything else here weighed  in  favour
         of the family being expected to  go  to  Pakistan.  Even  the  best
         interests assessment was for the child to remain with its  parents,
         not for that to be in the UK.

     16. Also,  where  the  decision  weighs  the  difficulty  in  making  a
         successful entry clearance application in the  appellant's  favour,
         as it appears to at [33]  (and  [24])  it  is  also  in  error.  An
         inability to meet the  Immigration  Rules  in  the  future  is  not
         something that can weigh in an appellant's favour so as to remedy a
         current inability to do so.

     17. For  these  reasons  I  found  that  the  second  stage  Article  8
         assessment disclosed an error on a point of law such that it should
         be set aside.

     18. I proceeded to re-make the  appeal.   Nothing  suggested  that  the
         assessment of the child's best interests  being  with  its  parents
         should be substantially disturbed. I take that as  a  starting  and
         primary factor.

     19. The failure to meet the Immigration Rules is also to be weighed  as
         a starting point in the Article 8 assessment and a mater attracting
         weight. The failure  here  is  substantial,  the  English  language
         requirement is not met and  the  couple  cannot  meet  the  finance
         requirements.

     20. The provisions of s.117B weigh against the appellant.  In  addition
         to the public interest being served in his leaving the UK where  he
         cannot meet the Immigration Rules, further weight goes against  him
         in line with paragraphs 117B(2) and (3).

     21. The appellant's private life was established  only  whilst  he  was
         here as a visitor and can properly be characterised  as  precarious
         in line with s.117B(4). It weighs little, therefore, and  does  not
         add substance to his side of the balance. As Judge  Parker  pointed
         out, he has been here for only a short time, in any  event,  having
         lived the remainder of his life in Pakistan.

     22. To my mind there is simply nothing  here  other  than  the  British
         nationality of the child and, the s.117B(6) issue,  whether  it  is
         reasonable  for  her  to  go  to  Pakistan,  that  can  assist  the
         appellant. As above, the best interests of the child are to be with
         her parents. Even had it been identified that it was  also  in  her
         best interests to be in the UK to  be  able  to  benefit  from  the
         healthcare and education here, I did not find that this could begin
         to outweigh the public interest here, a great deal weighing against
         him as set out in the previous paragraph.  Without  more  than  the
         factor of a British chid, the current legislation does not  readily
         allow for a visitor to come to the UK, marry  and  then  remain  in
         order to exercise a family life. That is so whether  an  assessment
         is carried out under the Immigration Rules or  in  a  second  stage
         Article 8 assessment.

     23.  I  therefore  did  not  find  that  the  decision  amounted  to  a
         disproportionate interference with the family or  private  life  of
         the appellant and his family. It is proportionate to expect them to
         exercise their family and private lives in Pakistan.

     24. I refuse the appeal under Article 8.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside.

    I re-make the appeal, dismissing it under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:     [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt    9 September 2015
