

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA011452015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 25th February 2016                |On: 16th June 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Felix Setz Kaku
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:        Mr Garrod, Counsel instructed by Justice and Law



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Ghana date of birth 12th April 1972. On
    the 3rd September 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Devittie) allowed
    his  appeal  against  refusal  to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card
    confirming his right of residence  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights.  The  Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision[1].


 2. The matter in issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  the
    Respondent was validly married, and if not, whether he was in a durable
    relationship with an EEA national.


 3. The Respondent had married  his  German  wife  by  way  of  a  Ghanaian
    customary marriage where neither party  was  physically  present,  both
    being represented by proxies. Judge Devittie accepted on  the  evidence
    before him that this marriage was considered valid by Ghanaian law, and
    applying the principles in CD (Brazil) [2008] UKIAT 00080,  found  that
    it must too be recognised by operation  of  UK  law,  and  allowed  the
    appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State now complains that the First-tier  Tribunal  has
    entirely failed to engage with the decisions in Kareem (Proxy  Marriage
    - EU Law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) and TA  and  Ors  (Kareem  explained)
    Ghana [2014]  UKUT  00315  (IAC).   These  cases  hold  that  where  an
    applicant claims a right of residence as  a  family  member  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, he must show that he is entitled to
    that right in the relevant EEA country.  The  Respondent's  wife  being
    German, he would only be entitled to a right of residence as  a  result
    of his marriage where their  marriage  was  recognised  by  the  German
    authorities.

 5. Before me Mr Garrod accepted, notwithstanding  his  objection  to  that
    line of jurisprudence, that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  deal  with
    Kareem/TA. Mr Garrod pointed out that his own skeleton before the First-
    tier Tribunal had addressed these cases and that some evidence had been
    produced about the  recognition  of  Ghanaian  customary  marriages  in
    Germany.   The decision makes no reference at all to this evidence,  or
    to Kareem/TA.  Nor are any express  findings  made  about  whether  the
    couple are in a durable relationship, despite the fact that a good deal
    of evidence was produced going to that issue.  For  those  reasons  the
    reasoning was incomplete and the decision must be remade.

 6. Mr Tarlow confirmed that there is no challenge to the finding that  the
    marriage would be recognised as valid in Ghana.


    Decisions

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   Due  to  the
    extent of the fact finding required, and  with  the  agreement  of  the
    parties, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


 8. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and in the circumstances
    I see no reason to do so.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                 25th
                                February 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 19th January 2016 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Saffer

