
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01541/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 June 2013                               |On 1 November 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                              Mr Zeeshan Abbas

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who is a national of Pakistan, was born on 11 July 1979.
     On 8 October 2010 he applied for leave to remain in the  UK,  claiming
    to have arrived in this country on 29  January  1997  without  a  valid
    passport.  This application was refused by the respondent on 9 December
    2010 and on 19 December 2012 the respondent made a decision  to  remove
    him as an illegal entrant, certifying his claim as  clearly  unfounded.
    The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    at Hatton Cross on 25 March 2013 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe.

 2. In a determination promulgated on 8 April 2013,  Judge  Broe  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision,  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro on 16 May 2013.
     In setting out his reasons for granting permission  to  appeal,  Judge
    Pedro stated as follows:

         "...

         2.   The grounds of this application assert, inter alia,  that  the
             judge failed to apply  the  correct  burden  and  standard  in
             relation to the appellant's Article 8 claim and it is  unclear
             from the determination what burden and standard  was  applied.
             It is also claimed that the judge  incorrectly  speculated  on
             the position  of  the  appellant's  spouse  in  light  of  her
             accepted status as a refugee in the  United  Kingdom,  thereby
             giving rise to perverse or irrational findings material to the
             outcome of the appellant's appeal  (for  example,  finding  at
             para 30 that he did not accept the  evidence  about  any  risk
             faced by the spouse should she return to Pakistan).

         ..."

 4. The appeal then came before me, and I heard submissions  on  behalf  of
    both parties, which are contained  within  the  Record  of  Proceedings
    which I took, in which I attempted to set out everything which was said
    before me.  I accordingly do not intend to repeat what was said  to  me
    verbatim in this determination.  On behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Ahmed
    submitted that Judge Broe had made a finding with  regard  to  evidence
    which had not been challenged, without giving the witness  in  question
    an opportunity of addressing his concern.  As a result, he proceeded on
    an incorrect factual premise, that the appellant had not been here  for
    over fourteen years, which was a factor  relevant  to  proportionality.
    Also, even though his wife had been recognised as a refugee, the  judge
    effectively revisited the grant of asylum to her without giving her  or
    the appellant a chance to put in further evidence with  regard  to  the
    risk on return now.  There were other matters which were relied upon by
    Mr Ahmed in his submissions.  In particular,  at  paragraph  21,  Judge
    Broe had rejected the evidence of a Mrs Khan, on the basis that:

         "The only witness who claimed to have known him for longer was [Mrs
         Khan] who, in a statement dated 25 March 2013, said that [s]he  had
         'known the appellant for sixteen years, I met him in  1998'.   That
         cannot be right and I am therefore  unable  to  attach  significant
         weight to this evidence."

     Mr Ahmed told this Tribunal that that statement  had  been  written  by
    him, and he had meant to say fifteen years, but the key point was  that
    she had known the appellant since 1998 and she had not been  challenged
    on that.

 5. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan  accepted  that  the  issue  with
    regard to whether Mrs Khan had  known  the  appellant  for  fifteen  or
    sixteen years did appear to be a problem.  This might  be  relevant  in
    terms of Article 8.

 6. Having listened to the submissions made on behalf of  both  parties,  I
    found that Judge Broe's determination had contained a material error of
    law, and I communicated my reasons to the parties.  I will set out them
    out below.

 7. Before doing so, it  is  right  that  I  record  my  regret  that  this
    determination was not given earlier.  I indicated to the parties at the
    hearing, having considered  representations,  that  I  considered,  for
    reasons which again I will set out below, that the appeal ought  to  be
    remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing before  a  different  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I obtained a date for the hearing, 4  September  2013,
    which was agreed with the parties, and dictated  my  determination  and
    directions.

 8. Unfortunately, the file was then mislaid and the tape was lost, and the
    hearing was vacated.

 9. The file has now been located, but unfortunately not the tape  which  I
    dictated, but I am able to replicate the reasons I gave for finding  an
    error of law, and also the directions which I gave, which I now do.

Reasons for Finding Error of Law

10. My reasons for finding an error of law are as  follows.   Judge  Broe's
    reasons for rejecting Mrs Khan's evidence are not sustainable.  If  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was going to reject  this  evidence,  on  the
    basis he gave, Mrs Khan  should  have  been  given  an  opportunity  of
    dealing with the discrepancy which the judge identified.

11. Further, Judge Broe's finding that the appellant's wife could return to
    Pakistan with the appellant, even though she had  refugee  status,  was
    not, in my judgment, adequately reasoned.

12. These errors are material, because they were capable of  affecting  the
    proportionality exercise.

13. The appellant wishes to argue that his wife  could  not  return  safely
    with him to Pakistan and it is essentially his case that he did not get
    a fair hearing with regard to his Article 8 claim.   Having  regard  to
    paragraph 7 of the Practice Statements for the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber of the Upper Tribunal, I consider that the effect of the errors
    contained within the determination were such  that  the  appellant  was
    deprived of a  fair  hearing,  so  far  as  his  Article  8  claim  was
    concerned.  I consider further  that  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    judicial fact-finding which will now be  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision on this aspect of his appeal to be remade is such that, having
    regard to the overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal which I ordered, and shall again  order.   I
    shall accordingly make my decision below, and shall also add directions
    for trial.

Decision

I  set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Broe  as
containing a material error of law.

I direct that this appeal now be remitted for a rehearing by the  First-tier
Tribunal, sitting at Hatton Cross, to be put before  any  judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe.

Signed:                                 Date: 29 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

