
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01452/2016

                                                             IA/01455/2016

                                                             IA/01456/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12  January 2018                          |On 16 January 2018            |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  SYED [B]
                                 TAHIRA [A]
                                  SYEDA [B]
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:               Mr. T. Tarlow, Home Officer Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                    Mr. A. Chohan of counsel, instructed
by S. Z. Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The 1st Respondent was born on 18 March 1977. The  2nd  Respondent  was
    born on 6 January 1988 and the 3rd Respondent, who is  their  daughter,
    was born on [ ] 2008. They are all nationals of Pakistan. The  2nd  and
    3rd Respondents are dependent upon the 1st Respondent.

2.   The 1st Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 28  August  2010  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant with leave to remain until 30  January
    2012. This leave was subsequently extended until 17 April 2012 and on 1
    August 2012 he was granted leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  Post-Study
    Migrant until 1 August 2014.

3.   He applied for leave to remain on human rights  grounds  on  that  same
    day but varied his application to that of Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  on
    18 August 2014. His application was refused on  1  March  2016  on  the
    basis that he had used deception when he submitted a TOEIC  certificate
    when he applied for leave to remain on 20 December 2011. The  Appellant
    also refused his application on  the  basis  that  the  Certificate  of
    Sponsorship on which he relied did not provide  sufficient  information
    to show that there was a genuine vacancy for him.

4.   The 1st Appellant appealed on 15 March 2016 and his appeal was  allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rhys-Davies in a decision  promulgated  on
    28 April 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.    Both  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  and  counsel   for   the
    Respondents made oral submissions and I have referred to the content of
    these submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

6.   There are a number of general basis upon which leave to remain  can  be
    refused. One of them is found in paragraph 322(2)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and is based on the:
         "the making of false representations or the failure to disclose any
         material fact for the purpose of obtaining  leave  to  enter  or  a
         previous variation of leave or in order to  obtain  documents  from
         the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of  the
         application for leave to enter or a previous variation of leave".

7.   In addition, paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules is based on:
         "the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
         the  United  Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct   (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph  322(1C),  character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security";

8.   The 1st Respondent did not dispute  that  he  had  attended  Portsmouth
    International College on 16 November 2011 in order  to  sit  his  TOEIC
    tests.

9.   The Appellant relied on a  look  out  tool  and  an  ETS  Invalid  Test
    Analysis Test Sheet which confirmed that the 1st Respondent had sat the
    tests that day.  In the refusal letter,  the  Appellant  also  asserted
    that she had a copy of the 1st  Respondent's  speaking  test  and  that
    using voice verification software, ETS had been able to detect  that  a
    single proxy test taker had undertaken multiple tests.  The  Respondent
    had not provided a copy of this evidence or any  report  on  the  tests
    taken at Portsmouth International College.

10.   In paragraph  22  of  his  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    accepted that, as found in Shezhad and Chowdhury v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and Majumder  and  Qadir  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  1167,  that
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department bears the initial burden
    of proof, which is deemed to be the  "evidential  burden",  of  proving
    that deception had  been  used.  He  also  accepted  that  the  generic
    evidence in the form of statements by witnesses, Rebecca  Collings  and
    Peter Middleton, and the additional evidence from ETS  was  capable  of
    meeting this evidential burden.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also correctly noted that the  burden  of
    proof then passed to the 1st Respondent to show that he  had  not  used
    deception. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rhys-Davies had the  advantage  of
    considering  the  1st  Respondent's  written  statement  and  his  oral
    evidence at the hearing. In these he gave a detailed explanation of his
    journey to the test centre and explained that  he  had  signed  in  and
    produced his identity documents on  the  day  of  the  test.  This  was
    confirmed by the Look UpTool.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also relied upon the fact  that  the  1st
    Respondent had  been  awarded  a  CMI  Level  7  Diploma  in  Strategic
    Management and Leadership on 30 August 2011 and a  Master  of  Business
    Administration in November 2012.

13.  I have taken into account that there may be reasons why  a  person  who
    is able to speak English to the required level would nonetheless  cause
    or permit a proxy candidate to undertake an ETS test on  their  behalf.
    (See paragraph 57 of MA (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKUT 450.)  However,  in  this  case  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had taken into  account  the  evidence  before  him  and
    reached a  cogent  decision  that  the  1st  Respondent  had  not  used
    deception. Therefore, I find that there is no basis upon which to allow
    the Appellant's appeal on this basis.

14.  However, the 1st Respondent's application had also been  refused  under
    paragraph 245HD(a) on the basis that his certificate of sponsorship did
    not provide sufficient information to show that the  job  he  had  been
    offered was a genuine vacancy.  In the refusal  letter,  the  Appellant
    accepted that if the Applicant had not been refused because of the  ETS
    test, she would have sought further evidence about the  vacancy  before
    reaching a final decision on his application.

15.   As  a  consequence,   the   1st   Respondent's   application   remains
    outstanding, as was accepted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rhys-Davies.
    Therefore, given the date  on  which  the  application  was  made,  the
    decision reached by the Appellant was not in accordance with the law as
    she had not followed  her  own  policy  and  sought  further  evidence.
    Therefore, the finding  reached  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rhys-
    Davies was also sustainable on this basis.

16.  The Tier 2 application remains to be decided by the Appellant.





DECISION

(1)  The  Appellant's  appeal  is  refused  on  the  basis  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rhys-Davies did not err in law when he  found  that  the
    1st Respondent had not used deception when he obtained his  TOEIC  test
    and that the decision reached about his substantive application was not
    in accordance with the law.

(2)  The Tier 2 application remains to be decided by the Appellant  and  she
    should seek further evidence about his proposed employment from the 1st
    Respondent forthwith so that she can make such a decision.


Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 12 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


