
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01474/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 August 2013                              |On 14 August 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                         Mr Saheed Kolawole Aderemi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O A Olujinmi
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 15 July  1989.   He  has
    been granted permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rose dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    respondent refusing his application for a residence card on  the  basis
    of his marriage to an EEA national.

2.   The appellant arrived in the UK on 8 May 2011 with entry  clearance  on
    a Tier 4 (General) Student visa, valid from  21  April  2011  until  30
    August 2012.  He entered into a proxy marriage with  his  EEA  national
    spouse on 18 July 2012 and provided a marriage certificate as proof  of
    this.  He also sent in a sworn affidavit in which his father,  Mr  Sule
    Aderemi claims that the marriage took place with the  consent  of  both
    parents.  As evidence that his marriage is  subsisting  he  provided  a
    tenancy agreement dated 20 February 2012 for 9A  Lindley  Road  in  his
    name only.  He submitted a bank  statement  addressed  to  him  and  an
    online TV licence for his EEA spouse.  The respondent did not  consider
    his evidence sufficient to demonstrate that  the  appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.

3.   The  appellant  provided  a  Slovakian  passport  as  evidence  of  his
    sponsor's nationality.  The respondent said he had  failed  to  provide
    any other evidence to show how she entered the  UK,  therefore  raising
    the question as to when,  and  how,  the  relationship  was  originally
    formed.  Given the timeliness of this  marriage,  his  immigration  and
    lack  of  sufficient  evidence   regarding   the   claimed   subsisting
    relationship, the respondent concluded that  this  proxy  marriage  had
    been entered into to remain in the United Kingdom.

4.   The appellant's application was  refused  under  Regulation  7  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as the respondent
    did not accept  the  proxy  marriage  certificate  and  other  evidence
    applied  as  sufficient  to   demonstrate   the   validity   of   their
    relationship.

5.   The respondent also considered whether the appellant was in  a  durable
    relationship and would expect the appellant to demonstrate that he  had
    been living together with his EEA national sponsor  for  at  least  two
    years.  Again, the respondent considered that  the  appellant  had  not
    provided sufficient documentation to suggest that he was in  a  durable
    relationship.  His application was refused under  Regulation  8(5)  and
    17(4)(b) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

6.   The appellant chose  to  have  his  appeal  considered  on  the  papers
    without an oral hearing.

7.   The judge had before him  the  Home  Office  Country  of  Origin  (COI)
    Report on Nigeria referring to customary marriages, which in  principle
    may be valid.  He noted, however, that the  COI  Report  dated  January
    2012 cites, at  paragraph  24.23,  a  United  States  State  Department
    Reciprocity Schedule, according to which  it  was  necessary  for  both
    parties to the marriage to be physically present at the  same  location
    with witnesses to sign certain marriage documents, and "proxy marriages
    have ceased to be valid but still occur".

8.    The  judge  noted  the  submissions  provided   by   the   appellant's
    representatives which referred to an earlier COI  Report,  dated  April
    2011, which cited an email from the British High  Commission  in  Abuja
    stating  that  "although  proxy  marriages  are  not  registered  under
    Nigerian civil law, they are allowed under customary law".   The  judge
    noted that the email was dated 1 December 2008.  The statement  in  the
    more recent USS Reciprocity Schedule implies that at one time customary
    marriages had been valid.  The email from the British  High  Commission
    was not cited in the later COI Report.

9.   The judge had regard to the certificate of  marriage  provided  by  the
    appellant and to an affidavit by  his  father  which  referred  to  the
    marriage.  In  his  judgment,  however,  in  the  light  of  the  State
    Department Reciprocity Schedule, neither of those documents established
    the validity of the marriage.  The judge was  therefore  not  satisfied
    that the appellant was the sponsor's spouse.

10.  The judge  next  considered  whether  the  appellant  and  his  sponsor
    partner were in a durable relationship.  He considered that the tenancy
    agreement did not establish  that  there  was  a  durable  relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor.  The refusal letter referred  to
    a tenancy agreement dated 20 February 2012 as being in the  appellant's
    name only.  The tenancy agreement provided for the appeal was dated  19
    February 2012 but recorded the term of the tenancy as beginning  on  20
    February.  The judge inferred that it was this document referred to  in
    the refusal notice.  It purported to be signed by the sponsor  as  well
    as by the appellant, but the first section of the  document  identified
    the parties to the tenancy, and "the tenant" is shown as the  appellant
    alone.  The judge attached little weight to this document  as  evidence
    of cohabitation.

11.  The judge considered the more  recent  documents  which  related  to  a
    different address.  There was no evidence as to the  tenancy  on  those
    premises.  He said  the  documents  before  him  did  not  include  any
    documents relating to the sponsor's personal circumstances such as bank
    statements or tax returns, or any evidence as to her relationship  with
    him.  According to the Reasons for Refusal Letter,  the  appellant  had
    failed to provide any evidence other than  the  sponsor's  passport  to
    show how she entered the UK, "therefore raising a question as  to  when
    and  how  their  relationship  was  originally  formed".   The  further
    submissions maintained that the sponsor did not need to  show  how  she
    entered the UK.  The judge found that whilst it is not a requirement of
    the Regulations that such evidence be provided, it is for the appellant
    to establish that he meets the requirements of Regulation 17,  and  the
    evidence about the sponsor's entry into the UK was potentially relevant
    to the issue of their relationship with  the  appellant.   He  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was the sponsor's partner and in a durable
    relationship with her.

12.  Permission to appeal was granted by an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  on  the
    basis that a panel of the Upper Tribunal is to consider the whole issue
    of customary marriages  by  proxy,  and  in  the  circumstances  it  is
    appropriate to grant permission in order to await the  outcome  of  the
    panel hearing.
13.  I did not believe that  it  was  appropriate  to  adjourn  the  hearing
    pending the outcome of the panel hearing.  The panel  hearing  has  not
    been concluded and consequently its decision is not imminent.   In  any
    event Mr. Wilding alluded to one of the areas of interest to the panel.
     There was no  evidence  that  this  marriage  will  be  recognised  in
    Slovakia.


14.   Mr Olujinmi submitted that the judge confused  the  customary  law  in
    Nigeria with a civil marriage under the Marriage Act 1990, Chapter 218.
     He said that customary law regulates customary marriage but it is  not
    a written law.  The requirements of a customary marriage are  that  the
    parties have the capacity to enter into the  marriage;  they  have  the
    consent of the parents; there is a payment of a dowry by  the  intended
    husband to the parents or representatives of the intended spouse; and a
    marriage ceremony according to the customs of the people concerned.

15.  He said the marriage in this instance took place in Nigeria on 18  July
    2012 and was registered on 2 August 2012.  He did not  know  what  form
    the marriage ceremony on 18 July 2012 took.  His  instruction  is  that
    the marriage took  place  and  is  confirmed  in  the  sworn  affidavit
    submitted by the appellant.  The  judge  cannot  go  behind  the  sworn
    affidavit if there is no evidence to the contrary.  In  any  event  the
    judge has not given reasons  for  rejecting  the  documents  that  were
    before him  to  support  the  appellant's  evidence  that  a  customary
    marriage took place between him and his sponsor on 18 July 2012.

16.  Mr Olujinmi further submitted that the judge did not  accept  that  the
    appellant was in a durable relationship with his EEA spouse because her
    name was not on the tenancy agreement, although it was  signed  by  her
    and the appellant.  Mr Olujinmi said that there should be other factors
    other that just this reason for rejecting the tenancy agreement.

17.  He said that there is no requirement  on  an  EEA  national  to  submit
    evidence as to when she entered the UK in order to establish a  durable
    relationship.  This is not required by her under the case of  Metock  .
    There were other documents such as the TV licence, the  bank  statement
    from Lloyds TSB which he accepted was in the appellant's own name,  and
    the TV licence which was in both names.  The requirement to  show  that
    the appellant and the sponsor have been living together for  two  years
    is the Home Office policy which is contrary to the EEA Directive.

18.  Mr Wilding submitted that there was nothing wrong with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.  Much of what  Mr  Olujinmi  has  said  is  a
    disagreement with the determination.  The appellant chose to  have  his
    appeal determined on the papers.  There was no original  evidence  from
    him and his wife.  He did not submit any expert evidence  on  customary
    marriage and did not explain anything specific by which he was married.



19.  Mr Wilding submitted that one of the areas of  interest  to  the  panel
    hearing cases on customary marriage is the question  as  to  whether  a
    European national has the capacity to marry  by  proxy.   There  is  no
    evidence that this  marriage  will  be  recognised  in  Slovakia.   She
    exercised the right of movement as a Slovak national.   She  needed  to
    show that Slovak national law will recognise this marriage.

20.  Mr Wilding said there was no evidence as to  what  form  this  marriage
    took place.  There was no evidence as  to  what  requirements  of  this
    particular custom needs to be met.  The judge considered  the  marriage
    certificate and the affidavit,  but  with  the  lack  of  any  specific
    evidence as to whether the marriage met the customs of the  appellant's
    particular group of people, it cannot be said that the judge  erred  in
    law.

21.  The judge was presented with background evidence and he  preferred  one
    over the other.  The appellant requested a paper hearing, therefore  he
    could not have been cross-examined.  The  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    challenged every part of  the  appellant's  appeal,  but  he  chose  to
    proceed by providing no evidence to show that his marriage  was  valid.
    There is no evidence as to why he did not marry in the UK  or  Nigeria.
    The judge's findings rejecting the validity of the  customary  marriage
    were open to him.

22.  With regard to the durable relationship, Mr Wilding  said  he  did  not
    know what Metock has to do with this.  The sponsor exercised her  right
    to freedom of movement.  There  was  a  complete  absence  of  detailed
    evidence to show that the relationship is existing.  The appellant  has
    been in the UK for two years.  The sponsor is not here today to support
    him.  No adjournment has been requested for her to attend.  We have  no
    evidence from her friends or family to support the relationship.  There
    is no error in the judge's decision.

23.  In reply Mr Olujinmi submitted that it  is  not  relevant  for  an  EEA
    national to show that she  has  the  capacity  to  enter  into  such  a
    relationship or that her country  of  nationality  must  recognise  the
    marriage.  She has exercised her freedom of movement.   In  any  event,
    customary law is such that if somebody submits to the marriage then  it
    is valid.  Even though the appellant chose to have a paper hearing, the
    respondent should have submitted further reasons as to why she  opposed
    the appellant's father's affidavit and other papers  that  were  before
    the judge.

24.  I find that the judge did not make an error of law.

25.  With regard to the validity  of  the  proxy  marriage,  the  judge  was
    presented with COI Reports of April 2011 and  January  2012.   He  gave
    reasons why he preferred the later report.  He looked at  the  marriage
    certificate and the affidavit by the appellant's father in the  context
    of the US State Department Reciprocity Schedule, and it was open to him
    to reject the appellant's evidence that he was the  appellant's  spouse
    for the reason given by him.

26.  In any event, Mr Olujinmi submitted that customary law is  not  written
    down and it is subject to the customary law of the appellant's  people.
    He did not submit any evidence  either  from  an  expert  or  from  the
    appellant himself or his father as to what form the customary  marriage
    took and whether it conformed to the customary ceremony of his  people.
    The affidavit by his father was wholly inadequate in that regard.   The
    mere fact that there is an affidavit by his father confirming that  the
    marriage ceremony took place  on  18  July  2012  does  not  of  itself
    establish that there is a valid marriage between the appellant and  his
    EEA national partner.

27.  The appellant chose to have his appeal heard on  the  papers.   He  did
    not attend the hearing with his wife to give oral evidence about  their
    relationship.  There was no written evidence from  the  appellant,  his
    spouse, friends  of  the  couple  or  relatives  in  support  of  their
    relationship.  The judge looked at the documents before him  and  found
    they were woefully inadequate.  The fact  that  the  sponsor  signed  a
    tenancy agreement which does not  bear  her  name  does  not  make  the
    document legal as Mr. Olujinmi seemed to suggest.  The TV licence which
    bears both names was issued on 16 January 2013 and was valid  until  31
    December 2013.  The letter  from  the  Post  Office  about  their  Life
    Insurance cover was dated 29 January 2013.  The telephone bill  was  in
    the appellant's name only and was dated 7 January 2013.  There  was  no
    evidence before the judge as to when  their  relationship  started  and
    therefore no evidence as to the duration of their relationship.    Most
    of the documents submitted by the  appellant  were  issued  in  January
    2013.  While I accept, as did  the  judge,  that  the  sponsor  is  not
    required to prove when she came to the UK,  it  would  have  helped  in
    establishing how long they have been in their relationship.  We do know
    that the appellant came to the UK in 2011.  He has not said when he met
    the sponsor and when their relationship began.  Mr Olujinmi  said  that
    the two year cohabitation policy is against the EEA Directive.  He  has
    not submitted any case law to support his argument.   The  respondent's
    refusal letter says that the two year cohabitation  requirement  is  in
    line with the Home Office Immigration Rules.  There is no case law that
    this Rule is incompatible with the EEA Regulations.

28.  Mr. Olujinmi relied on Metock which is a decision by the ECJ.   I  find
    that Metock has not application to this case. The ECJ  decided  that  a
    national of non-member state could accompany or join  their  spouse,  a
    Union citizen, in a member state other than  that  of  which  he  is  a
    national and that benefit cannot depend on the prior  lawful  residence
    of such a spouse in another Member State.  This is not the case here.

29.  I note that the EEA sponsor was not in court today to give  support  to
    the appellant.  Due to the dearth of documentary or other  evidence  to
    support the appellant's claim that he is in a relationship with the EEA
    national, I find that the judge made no error of  law  in  his  finding
    that the appellant and the sponsor are not in a durable relationship.

30.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
