
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01997/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 19th May 2015                           |On 3rd June 2015               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE EDIS
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mrs Viktoriia Kravchenko
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For  the  Appellant:      Mr  S  Whitwell  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Noor (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent's appeal against decisions to refuse to vary  her  leave
    and to remove her from the United Kingdom to  Ukraine  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes ("the judge") in a decision promulgated
    on 17th November 2014.  The respondent applied for leave to remain with
    her  spouse,  settled  here.   The  application  was  refused  as   the
    eligibility requirements of the partner route under Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the rules") were  not  met,  the  respondent  being
    present  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  when  she  made  her
    application.

2.   The judge found that the requirements of the rules were, in  fact,  met
    as the respondent could rely upon EX.1 in the light of his finding that
    she and her husband were in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  and
    that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  with  her
    husband continuing outside the United Kingdom.  In the alternative, and
    on the basis that his analysis under the  rules  might  be  wrong,  the
    judge made an Article 8 assessment outside  the  rules.   Having  taken
    into account section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), and having weighed the competing  interests,
    the  judge  concluded  that  the  adverse  decisions  amounted   to   a
    disproportionate response.

3.    The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   She
    contended, first, that the judge misdirected  himself  in  relation  to
    paragraph EX.1 of the rules.  That paragraph  did  not  apply,  as  the
    respondent was present here as a visitor at  the  relevant  time.   The
    judge had failed to take into account and apply Sabir  (Appendix  FM  -
    EX.1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063.  The Upper Tribunal  held  in
    that case that  EX.1  was  "parasitic"  on  the  relevant  rule  within
    Appendix FM that otherwise grants leave to remain.

4.   Secondly, the Secretary of State contended that the judge's  Article  8
    assessment was flawed and that his conclusion that  family  life  could
    not be continued outside the United Kingdom was not  sustainable.   The
    respondent and her husband could choose where to continue  family  life
    and, if they wished to live in the United Kingdom, an  application  for
    entry clearance should be made.  Although  the  respondent's  husband's
    parents were elderly, there was support  available  to  them  from  the
    wider family and health care was available here to  meet  their  needs.
    The judge concluded that it would not be in the best interests  of  the
    husband's children from a previous relationship for him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom but this was, again, a  matter  of  choice  and  contact
    arrangements with the mother of the children might be agreed.   If  the
    respondent were genuinely at  risk  in  the  Ukraine  from  her  former
    husband, as the judge found, there were channels that she could  pursue
    and, in any event, the judge did not engage with  internal  relocation.
    Armed conflict in the Ukraine was not such as to pose a  general  risk.
    Overall, there was an insufficient basis  for  the  judge's  conclusion
    that the respondent's human rights would be breached  on  her  removal.
    She could continue family life with her husband  abroad  or  apply  for
    entry clearance to return to the United Kingdom.  The  public  interest
    in removal was informed by the failure on the respondent's part to meet
    the requirements of the rules.  The judge did not  properly  weigh  the
    public interest in removal.

5.   Permission to appeal was  granted  on  9th  January  2015.   The  judge
    granting permission found that  the  first  ground  was  arguable.   He
    described the second ground as no more than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings and the weight given to the evidence and concluded, in
    paragraph 4 of the grant of permission, as follows: "Nevertheless given
    the first ground is arguable permission is granted."

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Whitwell said that the first ground succeeded.  Paragraph  EX.1  was
    not available to the respondent in the light of her status as a visitor
    at the time she made her application, as is  clear  from  paragraph  R-
    LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) to (iii) and paragraph E-LTRP.2.1.(a) of the rules.  Mr
    Noor confirmed that this was so but said  that  the  second  ground  of
    application was not available to the Secretary of State in the light of
    the grant of permission.  She was unable to attack the judge's findings
    on Article 8.

7.   Mr Whitwell disagreed, in the light of Ferrer (limited  grounds;  Alvi)
    [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC).   Paragraph 4 of the grant  did  not  restrict
    the grounds available to the Secretary of State.

8.   Mr Noor said that it was accepted that the assessment made "inside  the
    rules", as the judge described it, must fail.  Paragraph EX.1  was  not
    available because the respondent applied for leave to remain while  she
    was a visitor.  If she had applied shortly  thereafter,  while  present
    here  as  an  overstayer,  EX.1  would  have  been  available  to  her.
    Nonetheless,  the  judge  made   clear,   cogent   findings   regarding
    insurmountable obstacles,  in  the  context  of  family  life  and  the
    possibility of continuing it abroad.  It was clear  from  the  decision
    that these were based on his  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    account given by the respondent.  The judge was entitled to  find  that
    there was a genuine and subsisting relationship  and  that  refusal  to
    vary   leave   and   the   respondent's   removal    would    interfere
    disproportionally with it.  The findings  on  insurmountable  obstacles
    were transferred to the Article 8 assessment,  outside  the  rules.   A
    sensible reading of the grant of permission showed that  the  Secretary
    of State was not able to challenge the Article 8 assessment.  There was
    a material difference between leave granted  to  a  person  within  the
    rules, for a period of 30 months, and success under Article  8  outside
    the rules, where a person would merely be given discretionary leave for
    a period of time, subject to the Secretary of State's discretion.   The
    grant of permission should be  read  in  the  light  of  that  material
    difference.

9.   Mr Whitwell said in response that there was  nothing  in  the  decision
    that gave the impression that the judge granting permission  to  appeal
    had in mind any particular period of leave.   Moreover,  if  the  judge
    erred in relation to insurmountable obstacles, that  would  infect  the
    Article 8 assessment outside the rules.

The Scope of the Grant of Permission

10.  We find that the grant of permission  does  not  restrict  the  grounds
    available to the  Secretary  of  State  and  that  the  second  ground,
    challenging the judge's Article 8  assessment  outside  the  rules,  is
    available to her.  We  have  taken  into  account  the  guidance  which
    appears at  paragraphs  21  and  22  in  Ferrer.   The  judge  granting
    permission failed to make clear, if this is what he intended, that  the
    grant was on limited grounds only.  Had he done so,  the  Secretary  of
    State would have realised that, in order  to  seek  permission  on  the
    second ground, she needed to apply to the Upper Tribunal for permission
    to do so.  The grant of permission is not, with respect to  the  author
    of it, as clear as it might have been but we conclude  that  the  judge
    did not intend to limit the grant only to the first ground and we  read
    paragraph 4 as amounting to a grant of permission  to  appeal  on  both
    grounds.   The first ground has been made  out.   The  judge  erred  in
    relation to EX.1.   That error is not material, however, if the Article
    8 assessment he made outside the rules is sustainable.

Submissions in Relation to the  Second  Ground:  the  Article  8  Assessment
"Outside the Rules"

11.  Mr Whitwell said  that  it  was  apparent  from  the  grounds  that  no
    challenge was made to the findings  of  fact.   In  the  light  of  the
    respondent's failure to meet the requirements  of  the  rules  on  what
    might be described as a  technical  ground,  namely  her  status  here,
    Article 8 was more at large.  In paragraph  25  of  the  decision,  the
    judge clearly imported the findings he made in the preceding  paragraph
    in relation to insurmountable obstacles and he noted  at  paragraph  26
    that the respondent had no adverse immigration history.   At  paragraph
    28, having moved on to weighing  the  competing  interests,  the  judge
    noted the respondent's lack of English  but  then  limited  the  weight
    given to that factor by explaining her lack of progress and the reasons
    for it.  The legitimate aim pursued by the Secretary of State  was  the
    maintenance of immigration control, in the interests  of  the  economic
    wellbeing of the United Kingdom but paragraph 28 contained  no  express
    balancing exercise and it was here that the judge erred.

12.  Mr Noor said  in  reply  that  the  decision  revealed  no  failure  to
    consider the public interest in the Article 8 assessment.  At paragraph
    26, the judge took into account the respondent's  immigration  history.
    He set out section 117B in paragraph 27  and  then,  in  the  following
    paragraph, dealt with matters arising in the light of  relevant  public
    interest considerations.  He considered  the  respondent's  ability  to
    speak English, noting that it was  limited.   On  the  other  hand  the
    respondent was well educated.  The judge considered whether  she  would
    be an economic burden and concluded that she would not, in the light of
    her sponsor's income and the respondent's  ability  to  integrate  into
    British society.  Overall, the public interest was  clearly  considered
    and taken into account and the conclusion could  not  be  described  as
    irrational or perverse.

13.  In a brief response, Mr Whitwell said that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge was not based on perversity.  There had  been  a  failure  to
    engage in an  adequate  balancing  exercise  at  paragraph  28  of  the
    decision.



Conclusion on Error of Law

14.  As Mr Whitwell accepted, the findings of fact made by  the  judge,  and
    particularly  those  appearing  in  paragraph   24   in   relation   to
    insurmountable obstacles, were not challenged.  Instead, the  Secretary
    of State contended that the overall Article 8 assessment was flawed and
    that, for example, the respondent's husband had no expectation that  he
    and his wife would be able to remain in the United Kingdom to care  for
    his elderly parents and that, in any event, support was available  from
    the wider family here.  Family life might be continued in Ukraine  and,
    if need be, the respondent's husband might agree  contact  arrangements
    with the mother of his children.

15.  It is clear that the judge's findings of fact were  carried  over  into
    his Article 8 assessment outside the  rules  and  that  those  findings
    weigh in the respondent's favour.  The judge did not err in taking into
    account the best interests of the respondent's husband's  children,  as
    they are part of the wider family.  The judge was entitled to find that
    the respondent has established family life here and  that  her  removal
    would represent an interference with it.  At paragraph  25,  the  judge
    took  his  findings  into  account  expressly  in   relation   to   the
    proportionality assessment, following on from his finding  that  family
    life had been shown.  Also material was the judge's finding that  there
    was no deceit in the respondent's immigration history.

16.  Having set out section 117B of  the  2002  Act  in  paragraph  27,  and
    directed himself that these factors were  required  to  be  taken  into
    account in the assessment of proportionality, the reasoning leading  to
    the overall conclusion appears at paragraph 28.  As Mr Noor  submitted,
    a close reading of that paragraph shows that the judge  did,  in  fact,
    expressly take into account and consider  material  factors,  including
    the respondent's limited ability to speak English, the extent to  which
    she would be a burden on taxpayers and the likelihood  that  she  would
    easily integrate into society here.  What is  not  plainly  visible  in
    that particular paragraph, however,  is  any  express  mention  of  the
    public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control and
    no express weighing of  the  public  interest  against  the  favourable
    factors identified by the judge.

17.  On the other hand, as is clear from  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Dube [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC), what is  important  is  that  a  decision
    should reveal reasoning which shows that the factors set  out  in  this
    section have been properly engaged with.  In this context, taking  into
    account  the  findings  of  fact  carried  over  into  the  Article   8
    assessment, we conclude that the judge has given adequate  reasons  for
    his  conclusion  that  removal  would  amount  to  a   disproportionate
    response.  Overall, we find that the decision shows that he had in mind
    the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls and that his reasoning was not confined to the  recitation  of
    section  117B  at  paragraph  27.   Taking  into  account  the  earlier
    findings, and in combination with what appears at paragraph 28, we find
    that the judge has adequately explained why the balance fell in  favour
    of the respondent, such that the public interest  in  her  removal  was
    outweighed by her particular circumstances,  and  those  of  her  close
    family members here.

18.  In  summary,  notwithstanding  the  Secretary  of  State's  success  in
    showing that the first ground has been made  out  and  that  the  rules
    assessment was flawed, no material error of law has been shown  in  the
    decision, which shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing  no  material  error  of
law, shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


