
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01447/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th August 2014                             |On 4th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES

                                   Between

                            JOEY MORALES GRANADA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the  Philippines  born  on  14th  January
    1981.  The Appellant's immigration history shows that he arrived in the
    United Kingdom in July 2008 with entry clearance as a student.  He  was
    granted further leave to remain in the same capacity until 24th January
    2013.  On 12th December 2012 the Appellant applied for further leave to
    remain on the basis of his private life under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
    His application was refused  on  11th  December  2013  and  his  appeal
    against that refusal was allowed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Malins on 30th May 2014.

 2. The Respondent's representative applied for permission  to  appeal  and
    permission was granted in the Upper Tribunal on 8th  July  2014.   Thus
    the matter came before me for an error of  law  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 30th May 2014.  The  Appellant  was  present  but  was  not
    legally  represented.   I  noted  a   letter   from   the   Appellant's
    representatives, Bespoke Solicitors of Wembley, stating that they would
    not be representing the Appellant  at  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. For the reasons which I will now give, I decided that the  decision  by
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a  point  of
    law such that it falls to be set aside.

 4. The Appellant was unrepresented before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    submitted a witness statement which was  adopted  as  his  evidence-in-
    chief.  It may be summarised as follows.

 5. The Appellant entered the UK with a valid student visa  in  July  2008.
    He completed an NVQ in health and social care but was unable  to  renew
    his student visa due to what he describes as a change in  his  personal
    circumstances.  That prompted him to submit  an  application  based  on
    human rights issues.

 6. The Appellant's mother, who is a British citizen, is in the UK and  the
    Appellant claims that she is the only family member  in  this  country.
    The Appellant claims to have severed all family,  social  and  cultural
    ties in the Philippines and would have nothing to  return  to  in  that
    country.  The Appellant claims that his  mother  suffers  from  various
    medical conditions and requires his  support  on  a  daily  basis.   He
    claims to have friends in the UK and to have  integrated  into  British
    society.  He  attends  church  regularly  and  has  never  claimed  any
    benefits.

 7. The First-tier Judge found the Appellant and his mother to be  credible
    witnesses.  The determination  records  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    working at a nursing home in High Barnet for nearly four years,  caring
    for elderly people with mental health problems.   He  worked  permanent
    night shifts, four nights per week.  The Appellant said that  he  lived
    with his grandmother in the Philippines before coming to the UK at  the
    age of 27.  His grandmother has since died.  He attended university  in
    the Philippines and also studied in the  UK.   The  Appellant's  mother
    said in evidence that she had been a single mother because her  husband
    abandoned the family when her sons were 7 and 8 respectively.  She  has
    two sisters living  in  the  UK  with  their  families  but  no  family
    remaining in the Philippines.  She claims to  be  in  poor  health  but
    continues to work as a nurse in Salisbury.  She and the Appellant  meet
    one another about once a week and the Appellant takes  her  to  medical
    appointments.

 8. At paragraph 10 of the determination the First-tier  Judge  found  that
    the Respondent's decision to refuse  the  application  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules was correct.  No appeal  could  succeed
    on that basis.  The First-tier Judge also stated that "The Respondent's
    finding that there are no grounds for a favourable decision outside the
    Immigration Rules is unappealable to me".  I have to say that I am  not
    entirely sure what is meant by that.  In the very  next  paragraph  the
    judge goes on to conclude that there  are  arguably  good  grounds  for
    granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  in   the
    circumstances which are then described.  The judge states as follows:

         "Nothing in paragraph 276ADE addresses the issue of  a  predictable
         benefit to society of the Appellant remaining  in  the  UK  in  his
         employment  as  a  dedicated  carer  of  old  people,  with  mental
         problems, overnight.  This is  plainly  difficult  and  challenging
         work and I have no doubt that it is poorly rewarded.   The  private
         care sector is huge and vital to society but, due to the precarious
         financial nature of the business, the workers upon whom it  depends
         are lowly paid.

         The points-based system which is the  mechanism  for  dealing  with
         leave to remain for workers necessary to  the  state,  could  never
         avail this Appellant -  he  is  too  lowly  paid  and  not  visibly
         necessary to the economy.  However, in my judgment,  the  Appellant
         is a necessary presence in the UK for his small contribution to the
         overall welfare of one of the most vulnerable  sectors  of  society
         where such persons are impossibly hard to recruit".

 9. It is unclear to me what evidence, if any, (apart from the  Appellant's
    own testimony) the First-tier Judge has relied  on  in  order  to  make
    these findings.  They are, in my estimation, more in the nature  of  an
    expression of the judge's personal opinion about people who work in the
    care industry, usually at a low wage.

10. The judge then went on to  consider  proportionality  but  without  any
    reference to the well-known five step process advocated in Razgar.  The
    judge found that the Appellant's mother, who is his only family member,
    is a UK citizen, the Appellant's immigration history is unimpaired  and
    the Appellant's example of undertaking antisocial work for the  benefit
    of society is desirable.   On  this  basis  the  judge  concluded  that
    removal would be disproportionate.

11. The grounds submitted by the  Appellant's  representative,  which  were
    adopted by Mr Jack in submissions, argue that the approach  adopted  by
    the First-tier Judge was wrong in law.  The grounds point out  that  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 confirms that the Immigration Rules  are
    a complete code but form the starting  point  for  the  decision-maker.
    Any Article 8 assessment should only be made after consideration  under
    these Rules.  That was not done in this case.  Furthermore, it was made
    clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 that the Article 8 assessment  shall
    only be carried  out  where  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
    recognised by the Rules.  In this case the Tribunal  did  not  identify
    such compelling circumstances.  Gulshan also makes clear that  at  this
    stage the appeal should only be allowed  where  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances.  The decision in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  endorsed
    the Respondent's guidance on the meaning of exceptional  circumstances,
    namely ones where refusal would lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.



12. It is further submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  provide
    adequate  reasons  why  the  Appellant's   circumstances   are   either
    compelling or exceptional.  At paragraph 9  of  the  determination  the
    Tribunal has found that the Appellant has no ties  to  the  Philippines
    but has provided no adequate reasons for this finding.  It is submitted
    that the Appellant has spent the majority of his life there,  including
    his youth, formative years  and  majority  of  his  education.   It  is
    submitted that he would be fully familiar with the culture and  customs
    there and would speak the language and so would  have  ties  and  could
    fully readapt to life there.

13. I am satisfied that the  First-tier  Judge  has  failed  to  adopt  the
    correct approach in assessing the Appellant's claim under Article 8  in
    accordance with the case law referred to above.  I am also  mindful  of
    the very recent guidance given by the Supreme Court in Patel where Lord
    Carnwath pointed out that Article 8 is not a general dispensing  power.



14. I have concluded that the error of law is such that  the  determination
    falls to be set aside and re-made.  In this case I have had  regard  to
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement  concerning  remittals.   I  am
    satisfied that this is a case which should properly be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for the appeal under Article 8 to be reassessed  by
    a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Malins.  No  findings  are
    preserved.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  I set  aside  the  decision  and  remit  the
matter to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal shall be heard at the Hatton Cross  Hearing  Centre  on  the
    first available date.

 2. The appeal shall be heard by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  other
    than Judge Malins.

 3. No interpreter is required.

 4. Time estimate is two hours.



Signed                              Date 1st September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 1st September 2014


Judge Coates
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates
