
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01083/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th September 2014                          |On 18th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                           Mr Brutus odame AsanTe
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Blundell, Counsel instructed by Kilic & Kilic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Brutus Odame Asante, date of birth 30 June 1967, is a
    citizen of Ghana.  Having considered the facts there is no need for  an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 27th June 2014, whereby the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 5 December 2013 to refuse the  appellant  a  residence
    card. The appellant was seeking a residence card as evidence of a right
    to reside in the UK as the spouse of an EEA qualified person.

 3. By decision made on 22 July 2014 permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. The case now appears before me  to  determine  in
    the first instance whether or not there was a material error of law  in
    the original determination.

 4. As a spouse the appellant would  be  seeking  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 7. By the time of the hearing before me the appellant was as
    an alternative seeking to rely upon Regulation 8 on the basis  that  he
    was in a durable relationship with his  partner  and  was  entitled  by
    reason thereof to have the respondent  exercise  a  discretion  in  his
    favour and grant him  a  residence  card.  In  Article  8  there  is  a
    discretion that is to be exercised by the respondent.

 5. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2006. He claims to have met
    his spouse, the sponsor Ms.  Maria  Da  Purificao  Soares  Da  Costa  a
    Portuguese national, in 2010 and they married in a proxy marriage on 28
    December 2012.  The  marriage  was  conducted  in  Ghana.  Neither  the
    appellant nor his spouse attended the ceremony.

 6. On 27 March 2013 the appellant submitted an application for a residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national.

 7. No issue has been taken that the EEA  national  was  exercising  treaty
    rights and was therefore a qualified person.

 8. The application was refused on 5 December 2013 by notice of decision by
    the respondent. The basis for refusing the  application  was  that  the
    respondent did not accept that the appellant was  lawfully  married  to
    the sponsor for the purposes of regulation 7 of  the  2006  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. It was not accepted that the
    couple were in a relationship and by reason of that it follows that the
    couple were not in a durable relationship so as to be able to rely upon
    regulation 8.

 9. The appellant appealed against the decision. The appeal  was  heard  on
    appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan on the 19th June 2014, who
    dismissed the appellant's appeal. It is against that decision that  the
    appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal.

10. At the commencement of the hearing before me counsel on behalf  of  the
    appellant conceded  that  in  light  of  the  cases  of  Kareem  (Proxy
    Marriages -- EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 and TA & Anor (Kareem) 2014 UKUT
    316 the appellant could not succeed  under  regulation  7  of  the  EEA
    regulations.

11. The judge has stated in the determination that there was no evidence as
    to how  Portuguese  law  would  treat  a  proxy  marriage  between  the
    appellant and his alleged spouse. It was a matter for the appellant  to
    prove and there was no evidence that Portuguese law  would  treat  that
    marriage as a  valid  marriage.  In  the  absence  of  such  proof  the
    appellant could not be considered to be a spouse or family member under
    Regulation 7.

12. Counsel on behalf of the appellant pursued the appeal on the basis that
    the appellant can succeed under Regulation 8 as a person in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national qualified person.   The  findings  of
    fact made by Judge are relevant to whether the appellant can  fall  for
    consideration under Regulation 8.

13. It is alleged that as  the  parties  are  in  a  durable  relationship.
    Consistent with the case of FD (Algeria) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 981  it
    is asserted that the respondent should recognise the  relationship  and
    consider exercising a discretion to  grant  a  residence  card  to  the
    Sponsor's partner, the appellant.

14.  The grounds of appeal allege that, whilst the judge finds the evidence
    of both the appellant and the spouse extremely vague and pervasive, the
    judge has failed to set out the basis for the findings.

15. In paragraph 30 the judge has specifically  identified  inconsistencies
    in the accounts given by the appellant and his claimed wife. The  judge
    noted problems with regard to the addresses,  at  which  bank  accounts
    were held. The addresses were not consistent with the address at  which
    the appellant or his spouse claimed to live together.

16. Whilst it is claimed that those details were not put to  the  appellant
    or  to  the  spouse,  it  is  clear  from  paragraph  26  that  it  was
    specifically put to the spouse that the bank account had an address  in
    Camberwell when she claimed to be living at Thamesmead.

17. Further within paragraph 26 of the determination the judge has examined
    the evidence given by the appellant and his spouse as to what they  had
    been doing on the days immediately  prior  to  the  hearing  and  again
    pointed out inconsistencies and vagueness in the evidence given.

18. Counsel on  behalf  of  the  appellant  asserted  that  there  were  no
    inconsistencies in  the  accounts  given.  It  was  asserted  that  the
    appellant saying that "they" had stayed at home on his wife's  birthday
    was not necessarily inconsistent with the account given by the  alleged
    spouse/partner that that she had gone to MacDonalds with her  son.  The
    judge was entitled to conclude on the basis of the evidence that  there
    were inconsistencies.

19. The judge has within the determination clearly  analysed  the  evidence
    put before him. He has specifically identified inconsistencies  in  the
    accounts given and has specifically identified areas where  consistency
    would have been expected. The witnesses should have been consistent and
    should have been able to give details  about  their  daily  lives.  The
    judge has given specific examples of where they  have  not  given  such
    detail.

20. It was further asserted that there was a large amount  of  evidence  to
    confirm that the appellant and the partner were living together and the
    judge had failed to make  findings  on  the  evidence.  The  judge  has
    identified those parts of the evidence where there are  inconsistencies
    and contradictions. In so doing the judge has given justifiable reasons
    for the conclusions reached. The judge has in paragraph 7  stated  that
    he has taken account of all  the  evidence  including  the  documentary
    evidence. Whilst the appellant  would  emphasise  other  parts  of  the
    evidence, the judge is not obliged to make findings on each  and  every
    part of the evidence. The judge has  given  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusions reached.

21. The judge was entitled to make the findings of fact that he did on  the
    basis of the evidence presented. On the basis  of  those  findings  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that it had not  been  proved  that  the
    appellant and his claimed wife had  been  living  together  or  that  a
    durable relationship existed. The judge was entitled to  find  that  if
    the parties had been living together then the  bank  account  would  be
    going to the address in which they claimed to be  living;  the  parties
    would have been able to say what gifts they gave each  other  on  their
    birthdays; and they would have been able to state what  they  had  been
    doing but a few short days before on the birthdays of one of the party.



22.  In  the  circumstances  the  finding  that  this  was  not  a  genuine
    relationship between the appellant and his spouse was material to  show
    that this was not a durable relationship in accordance with  Regulation
    8. I have to say that it had never been submitted  to  the  judge  that
    this was anything other than a marriage. The fact that  the  judge  did
    not rule upon the issue specifically  of  a  durable  relationship  was
    justified as it was never put to the judge that that was the basis upon
    which the case was being advanced.

23. In the circumstances the  judge  having  considered  the  evidence  was
    entitled to come to the conclusions that he did. The judge was entitled
    to make the findings, he did, on the basis of the  evidence  presented.
    The only conclusion to be reached was that it had not been proved  that
    there was a durable relationship.

24. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


