
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01476/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2018                             |On 28th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                 Taha Azwai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Libya born on 20th  July  1978.   He
    last entered the United Kingdom on 22nd August 2009 when he was granted
    leave to enter as a student until  31st  October  2012.   Following  an
    unsuccessful application for indefinite leave to remain on humanitarian
    grounds, on 10th April 2014 the Appellant applied again for  indefinite
    leave to remain  on  long  residence  grounds.   That  application  was
    refused for the reasons given in a Reasons for Refusal dated 2nd  March
    2016.  The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Shore (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House  on  25th
    July 2017.  He decided to allow the appeal for the reasons given in his
    Decision dated 4th September 2017.   The  Respondent  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on 20th December  2017  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal because he found at paragraph  17  of  the
    Decision that the Appellant was a credible witness and that  he  had  a
    family and private life in the United Kingdom.  The Judge  went  on  to
    find that there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant
    reintegrating into Libyan society and so allowed the appeal  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of HC 395.   The  Judge  followed
    the format given in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and decided that the decision
    of the Respondent to refuse the Appellant indefinite  leave  to  remain
    was not proportionate.

 4. At the hearing before me, Ms Ahmed argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in coming to this conclusion.  She argued as a  narrow  issue  that
    the Judge had failed to give his  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the
    Appellant had a family and a private life in the  United  Kingdom.   He
    did not state the details of the Appellant's  private  life,  nor  with
    whom he enjoyed a family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  in
    response to an enquiry from me, Ms  Ahmed  said  that  the  Appellant's
    family life had not been disputed in the Notice of Decision.

 5. In response, Mr Coleman submitted that there had been no such error  of
    law.  In his witness statement at paragraph 10,  which  the  Judge  had
    found to be credible, the Appellant gave  details  of  his  family  and
    private life.  In any event, it was accepted by the Respondent that all
    returnees were at risk on return to Libya and referred to the  decision
    in ZM (Article 15(c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 00263.  Therefore any  error
    of law as argued by the Respondent was not material.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The issue before me is the narrow issue  of  whether
    the Judge erred in law by failing to  give  detailed  reasons  for  his
    findings in respect of the Appellant's family and private life, and not
    to specify details thereof.  I find this not to be a material error  of
    law.  The Appellant gave ample details and examples of his  family  and
    private life in the United Kingdom in his witness statement  and  those
    details were not disputed in the Notice of Decision nor at the  hearing
    before the Judge.  The Judge found the Appellant  to  be  credible  and
    therefore it can be safely assumed that he had good reasons for finding
    that the Appellant had a family  and  a  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  For this reason I find no material error of law by the Judge.





Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Dated 26th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
