

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/01827/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        |        Decision and Reasons     |
|                                        |Promulgated                      |
|On 10 April 2018                        |        On 13 April 2018         |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   HENG LI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr B Price, of Latta & Co, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals  against  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clough, promulgated on 5 July 2017,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    "under article 8".

 3. The grounds of appeal to the UT are attached to the SSHD's  application
    dated 13 July 2017.  In short, they are that:

    (1) in basing her decision on the  appellant  having  been  in  the  UK
    lawfully, the judge overlooked that little weight was to  be  given  to
    family life formed while his status was precarious; and

    (2) the judge failed  to  explain  why  the  appellant  should  not  be
    expected to comply with rules requiring him to  apply  for  leave  from
    outside the UK.

 4. By an application dated 9 April 2018 the SSHD seeks  the  admission  of
    new evidence, to show that the appellant's status in  the  UK  has  not
    always been lawful; that his immigration history includes an  admission
    of attempting to obtain leave by deception; and that he must have known
    the position was contrary to submissions made on his behalf in the FtT.
     This is said to show mistake of fact such as to  amount  to  error  of
    law.  There is an accompanying application  to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the UT.

 5. Mr Price opposed the admission of the new evidence, on the grounds that
    it came very late.

 6. I found it clear that the FtT was mistaken  as  to  the  state  of  the
    objective facts of the immigration history.

 7. The mistake was material.  The FtT's  decision  is  based  to  a  large
    extent on the appellant's status in the UK having "always been  lawful,
    either with a valid visa, while appealing the  refusal  of  leave  [or]
    awaiting a decision" (paragraph 22).

 8. The evidence could and should have been provided by  the  SSHD  to  the
    FtT.  As Mr Price pointed out, it is not even mentioned in the original
    grounds of appeal to the UT.

 9. The appellant in his  statements  dated  3  November  2014  (FtT  first
    bundle, item 3; respondent's bundle, page C1) and 12  April  2017  (FtT
    second bundle, item 1) misled the FtT into taking the facts to be other
    than as they were.  (The responsibility lies with him and not with  his
    representatives, who were not acting for him at earlier stages  of  his
    immigration history).

10. Notwithstanding that the SSHD might have brought  this  to  light  much
    earlier, the appellant cannot as a matter of principle  be  allowed  to
    profit from misleading the FtT.

11. I allowed the new evidence  to  be  admitted  and  the  grounds  to  be
    amended.

12. Once that stage was reached, the decision had to be set  aside.   There
    was no argument open to Mr Price to the contrary.

13. (The same stage  might  have  been  reached,  even  without  the  fresh
    evidence.  The immigration history set out in the  SSHD's  decision  is
    not the full one, but it does not support the appellant's assertions in
    his statements; and the decision goes on to  hold  that  the  appellant
    does not meet eligibility requirements for reasons which include  being
    in the UK with no leave and in breach of the rules, at  page  3  of  8.
    The judge appears to have accepted the  appellant's  evidence  at  face
    value without reference to those matters.)

14. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The nature of the case  is  such
    that it is appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act
    and of Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the FtT for a  fresh
    hearing. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case  are  not
    to include Judge Clough.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]

            10 April 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
