
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01786/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th August 2014                             |28th August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                               qamar ul islam
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who is married to a  citizen  of
    Norway.  Until very recently he had leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-
    Study Work) Migrant.  He had applied to the Secretary of State for  the
    grant of a residence card as confirmation of  his  right  to  residence
    under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006.   The  application  was
    completed on the basis that his wife, as the EEA family member,  was  a
    job seeker (as indicated at section 9.2 of the application form).   The
    application was made on 8th July 2013.

 2. It was refused on 12th December 2013 on the basis it had not been shown
    that the EEA family member,  the  Appellant's  wife,  was  a  qualified
    person as referred to in Regulation 6  of  the  2006  Regulations.   No
    removal direction was made.  In an accompanying letter of the same date
    it was made clear that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  considered  the
    application under Regulation 6(2)(b) in which the  first  sub-paragraph
    refers to the qualified person having been employed  for  one  year  or
    more before becoming unemployed.  The letter noted that no evidence had
    been produced that the Appellant's wife had been employed in the United
    Kingdom for one year and it was stated that she had not shown that  she
    was a qualified person.  The Appellant appealed under the  Regulations,
    requesting that the appeal be dealt with on the papers.  In the Grounds
    of Appeal the Appellant contended that the application should have been
    considered under Regulations 6(1)(a) and  6(4).   Documents  were  sent
    supporting the contention that she was registered with a job centre and
    had been seeking work.

 3. The Notice of Appeal was received by  the  Tribunal  on  31st  December
    2013.  The case was allocated for determination on 11th March 2014  and
    was considered by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Iqbal.   She  agreed
    with the contention that the Respondent had considered the  application
    under the wrong section of Regulation 6.  The judge accepted that  when
    the application was made the  Appellant's  wife  was  actively  seeking
    employment (paragraph 22 of the determination) and she went on to  find
    that the wife was well-qualified and had  a  genuine  chance  of  being
    engaged.  However she also found that no up-to-date evidence  had  been
    provided to show that the Appellant's wife remained a job  seeker.   On
    that basis the appeal was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal.   He  noted  that  the
    judge had found that his wife had been a qualified  person  as  at  the
    date of application.  He contended that the  appeal  should  have  been
    allowed on that basis.  He also went on to argue  that  he  would  also
    have qualified as his wife  should  be  classed  as  a  self-sufficient
    person.

 5. Permission was initially refused on the basis that  the  relevant  date
    was the date of hearing.  The application was renewed to this Tribunal.
     On 2nd June 2014 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Macleman  granted  permission,
    stating as follows:

         "The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for a residence
         card because he had not shown that his wife had  been  employed  in
         the UK for a year before becoming a jobseeker.  He appealed to  the
         FTT on the grounds that it was sufficient to show that his wife was
         a jobseeker under Regulation 6(1)(a) and there was no obligation to
         show a year's  prior  employment.   Judge  Iqbal  agreed  with  the
         Appellant but dismissed the appeal for lack of  evidence  that  his
         wife was still a job seeker  at  the  date  of  the  determination.
         Judge Appleyard refused permission to appeal to the UT on the  view
         that Judge Iqbal was right about the relevant  date  for  decision.
         However I think that there might arguably be  error  in  dismissing
         the appeal when the Appellant succeeded on the point put  in  issue
         by the SSHD and had no reason to expect that his evidence would  be
         tested  about  whether  the  state   of   affairs   described   was
         continuing."

    The Secretary of State put in a response under Upper Tribunal Procedure
    Rule 24 contending that Judge Iqbal directed herself appropriately.

 6. At the hearing before  me  the  Appellant,  who  speaks  good  English,
    attended in person but was also assisted by his friend Dr Abdul Aziz. I
    described the procedure to the Appellant and went through  the  history
    of the case and the issues.  The essence of  the  grant  of  permission
    appeared to be based  on  procedural  unfairness.   Mr  Smart  for  the
    Secretary of State did not agree with that view and he  relied  on  the
    case of Marghia (procedural fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00366  (IAC).   He
    submitted  for  there  to  be  unfairness  the  Wednesbury   test   was
    applicable.  He said there was a further issue in that the  Regulations
    themselves had been amended with effect from 1st January 2014 and those
    amendments would have been binding on the judge.  He  agreed  that  the
    relevant date for consideration of  the merits was the date of  hearing
    and in that respect referred to the reported determination  of  Boodhoo
    (EEA Regs: relevant evidence) Mauritius [2013] UKUT 346 (IAC).  He said
    the judge was entitled to reach the decision she did and  in  doing  so
    there had not been procedural unfairness in his view.   He  noted  that
    there was no removal decision.

 7. The Appellant said that the judge had agreed that his wife did  qualify
    and that the Respondent had considered the matter on the  wrong  basis.
    He said that she was still a job seeker and  the  Regulations  had  not
    changed at the time the decision was made.  At the date of the  hearing
    it was still less than six months from the date of the decision and the
    new Regulations would not have had any impact.   He  also  pointed  out
    that the family had  sickness  insurance  and  income  and  were  self-
    sufficient. However Mr Smart made the point, which is correct, that the
    application had not been made on that alternative basis.

 8. Having considered the determination and the submissions I came  to  the
    view that there had been an error of law in the determination of  Judge
    Iqbal such that it should be set aside.  She  dealt  immaculately  with
    the issue of whether the Appellant  had  been  a  job  seeker  when  he
    appealed against the decision made by the Secretary of  State  and  she
    found that the Appellant's wife was well-educated  and  had  a  genuine
    chance of obtaining employment.  Where I find  that  she  erred  is  in
    dismissing the appeal on a basis which had not been put in issue by the
    Secretary of State and without giving the  Appellant  notice  that  she
    would be making a judgment on that point.

 9. The Appellant was unrepresented.  He had requested the matter be  dealt
    with on the papers and can have had no knowledge as to when the  appeal
    would be placed before a judge for determination.   I  have  of  course
    taken close note of the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State.  I have read the case of Marghia which  in  fact  relates  to  a
    judge's error in assessment of unfairness on the part of the  Secretary
    of State, not in respect of procedural unfairness in connection with  a
    hearing.  Procedural fairness for a tribunal  is not  governed  by  the
    Wednesbury test - see SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284  per
    Moses LJ.

10. Whilst this appeal concerned the 2006 Regulations  there  are  relevant
    analogies with appeals  relating  to  the  Immigration  Rules.   In  IO
    ("Points in Issue") Nigeria [2004] UKIAT  00179  it  was  decided  that
    unless a point had been put in  issue  an  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    assume that the matter would not be decided against him without putting
    him  on  notice  of  that  possibility  (see  paragraph   8   of   that
    determination).  Whilst it is clear  with  regard  to  the  Immigration
    Rules that an appeal is not necessarily limited to the issues raised in
    a Notice of Refusal, if new issues come into play then the parties must
    be able to deal with them.  See RM (Kwok On Tong: HC395 paragraph  320)
    India [2006] UKAIT 00039.  At paragraph 10 of that determination it was
    stated: "... if new elements of the Immigration Rules  come  into  play
    they are to be dealt with on  the  appeal,  and  the  parties  must  be
    allowed any appropriate adjournment in order to meet the  injustice  of
    being taken by surprise."

11. I agree with the view expressed in the grant  of  permission  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman that it was procedurally unfair of the judge of
    the first instance to take the point against the Appellant  that  there
    was no up-to-date evidence of his wife being a jobseeker when this  was
    a matter being decided on papers and the  Appellant  had  not  been  on
    notice that the point would be taken.  It was  open  to  the  judge  to
    issue a direction to the Appellant that the point was in  issue  or  to
    adjourn the matter for an oral hearing giving him notice of the  point.



12. In the circumstances I find that it  has  been  shown  that  there  was
    procedural unfairness and the judge's decision is set aside.

13. I have to remake the decision.  The Appellant asked  me  to  allow  the
    appeal on the basis that his wife was a self-sufficient  person  but  I
    found that there was force in Mr Smart's argument that this was not the
    application which had been made to  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to know what application  was  made  so
    the matter could be investigated.  On the other hand the  Secretary  of
    State was clearly in error in deciding the original application without
    considering elements of Regulation 6 under which the Appellant was able
    to establish that his wife  was  a  job  seeker  and  was  therefore  a
    qualified person.

14. The appropriate course I find is for me to reach the  conclusion  that,
    the  Secretary  of  State  having  considered  the  wrong  elements  of
    Regulation 6, the decision made was not in accordance with the law  and
    therefore remained outstanding to be decided.   As  was  quite  rightly
    pointed out to me the relevant dates  under  the  Regulations  are  not
    historic.  The Appellant is free to submit further  information  as  to
    his wife being a job-seeker, if that is the case, and he  may  wish  to
    seek to put in a further application or to amend his application on the
    basis of self-sufficiency.  He should be aware however that the amended
    Regulations are now in force and will need to be complied with if he is
    to succeed.

Decision

15. The original determination contained a material error on a point of law
    and I have set it aside.  I have remade the decision and this appeal is
    allowed as the decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law  and  the  application   therefore   remains
    outstanding.  I make no fee award as the appellant has not  proved  his
    case.






Signed                              Date 27 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

