

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/01124/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke      |            Decision & Reasons       |
|On 14 October 2015                 |Promulgated                          |
|                                   |On 16 October 2015                   |
|                                   |                                     |
|                                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     NB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      None
For the Respondent:     Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. This appeal is anonymised because it refers  to  medical  evidence
          relating to the appellant and her husband.

       2. In a decision dated 15 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge I.  F.
          Taylor heard the appellant's appeal in her  absence  and  declined
          to adjourn it.  Judge  Taylor  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
          against a decision dated 11 December 2014 to refuse to  grant  her
          leave to remain on the basis of her marriage with her husband  and
          her private life in the UK.

       3. Judge Taylor set out what happened on the day of  the  hearing  in
          his decision [2].   The  appellant  appeared  before  me  and  has
          clarified  events  slightly.   She  said  that  she  attended  the
          Tribunal with her husband but the court building  was  locked  and
          she returned home (a few miles from the relevant  court  building)
          as she did not know what else to do and her husband  became  short
          of breath.  She said that she rang  the  relevant  number  at  the
          Stoke hearing centre and indicated she could  not  return  to  the
          Tribunal because her husband was unwell.

       4. I must decide whether, in proceeding in  the  appellant's  absence
          and not adjourning the hearing, the  Tribunal  acted  unfairly  in
          all the circumstances, not  whether  it  acted  reasonably  -  see
          Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC).

       5. The appellant relied upon  the  very  helpful  grounds  of  appeal
          prepared by Mrs Sood of Counsel.  These submit that  the  Tribunal
          failed to get back to the appellant to explain what she should  do
          next and that the hearing could not be justly  determined  in  the
          appellant's absence as it  was  necessary  for  the  appellant  to
          update the Tribunal on her health needs and those of her husband.

       6. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to  and
          acted fairly in proceeding with the appeal in the absence  of  the
          appellant.   Rule  28  of  the  Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier
          Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 permits  the
          Tribunal to proceed in a party's absence if it is  satisfied  that
          (a) the party was notified of the hearing  and  (b)  it  considers
          that it is in  the  interests  of  justice  to  proceed  with  the
          hearing.  The appellant accepts  that  she  was  notified  of  the
          hearing.   The  judge  considered  the  overriding  objective  and
          decided to proceed with the hearing.

       7. I am satisfied that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed
          with the hearing.  As  the  judge  noted  the  appellant  made  no
          effort to provide any specified evidence regarding  her  husband's
          illness to the Tribunal  or  the  judge.   Had  the  illness  been
          sufficiently serious to prevent the appellant from attending  such
          an important  hearing  there  would  have  been  medical  evidence
          available to support this or at least a more detailed  explanation
          beyond being unwell and / or short of breath.   The appellant  did
          not provide the Tribunal with any such  evidence.   When  granting
          permission to appeal Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey  stated  as
          follows:

                 "At the hearing of the appeal [before the  Upper  Tribunal]
                 the Appellant will be expected to provide evidence  of  why
                 her husband's health had deteriorated between  her  leaving
                 home for the hearing and her  return.   Similarly,  medical
                 evidence of why her presence was required so that she could
                 not attend the hearing later that day."

       8. At the hearing before me the appellant attended together with  her
          husband.  I asked her if she had  brought  with  her  any  medical
          evidence to support her claim regarding her husband's  illness  on
          the day of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  following
          the above direction.  She  said  that  apart  from  obtaining  new
          inhalers for him that day she had not sought or brought  with  her
          any such evidence.  The appellant has failed to evidence the  mere
          assertion that her husband was so ill that she could not attend  a
          hearing for any part of 1 April 2015.  Absent  such  evidence  the
          judge was entitled to consider that there was no good  reason  for
          the appellant's absence.  The judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
          account the needs of other court users and the  delay  that  would
          be caused if an adjournment was granted.

       9. This is a case in which the  appellant  relied  upon  there  being
          insurmountable obstacles to her husband returning  to  Jamaica  to
          live with her.  There was very limited evidence available  to  the
          judge as to the extent of the husband's incapacity  and  his  need
          to be in the UK as a result of his illnesses [14].  The  appellant
          confirmed that the only evidence available was and  remains  a  GP
          letter from 2014.  This states that the  husband  suffers  from  a
          number of medical conditions and sets out his medication.   It  is
          then said that he is looked after by his wife and she "has  raised
          concerns regarding his welfare as she  says  he  has  become  very
          forgetful and doesn't remember that he has had his meals when  she
          asks him". No further details are provided.    The  appellant  did
          not provide any clear and cogent evidence that her  husband  could
          not be cared for in Jamaica, a country in which he had  spent  his
          formative years.  In these circumstances, the submission that  the
          appeal could not be justly disposed  of  in  the  absence  of  the
          appellant is difficult to follow.  When  she  appeared  before  me
          the appellant confirmed that the only medical  evidence  regarding
          her husband remained in the form of the 2014 GP letter.


      10. I am satisfied that the judge was entitled  to  proceed  with  the
          hearing  in  the  absence  of  the  appellant,  in  light  of  the
          information available and the issues in  for  determination.   The
          relevant facts were already before the  Tribunal,  and  there  was
          very little to add beyond this evidence.

      11. The grounds of appeal also submit that the judge  failed  to  take
          into account section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
          Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).  As  pointed  out  in  AM  (S  117B)
          Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) an applicant can obtain no  positive
          right to remain from  sections  117B  (2)  or  (3),  whatever  the
          degree of her fluency in English or the strength of her  financial
          resources, particularly where  as  in  this  case  the  judge  was
          obliged to place  limited  weight  on  the  relationship  and  the
          appellant's private life, which were established when she  was  in
          the UK as an overstayer.  Any error in failing to address  section
          117B is not material because the Tribunal would have come  to  the
          same decision under Article 8 of the ECHR.


      12. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
          making of a material error of law and is not set aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
15 October 2015

