

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/01100/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Sent                   |
|On January 29, 2015                  |On February 3, 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS MOHINDER KAUR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shiliday (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India. The appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor on August  8,  2012.  Her  visa  was  valid  until
    January 27, 2013. On December 28, 2012 she applied for leave to  remain
    due to private life with her daughter and grandchildren along with  her
    medical conditions. The respondent refused to vary her leave to  remain
    on December 12, 2013 and at the same time took a decision to remove her
    by way of directions under section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2002.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on December 12,  2013  and  the  matter
    came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Raymond  (hereinafter
    referred to as the "FtTJ") on September 15,  2014  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on October 24, 2014 he allowed the appeal  under  both  the
    Immigration Rules (paragraph 276ADE(vi)) and article 8 ECHR.

 4. The respondent lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  October  29,  2014.  She
    submitted the FtTJ erred by allowing the appellant's appeal under  both
    heads.

 5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever granted permission to appeal  on
    December 17, 2014 stating there was an arguable error in law  based  on
    the fact the FtTJ failed to resolve differences between the evidence on
    the VAF forms and the evidence given at the hearing. He also  found  it
    arguable the FtTJ failed  to  give  any  consideration  to  the  public
    interest as required by Section 117B of the 2002 Act  (as  inserted  by
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014).

 6. The appellant was in attendance in court and was represented as set out
    above.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Shiliday adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted there  were  in
    fact five grounds of appeal and  he  then  set  out  those  grounds  as
    follows:

      a. Ground One.   The FtTJ erred in his approach to paragraph 276ADE HC
         395. The appellant was not covered by subsections (iii) to  (v)  of
         paragraph 276ADE and therefore had to come within subsection  (vi).
         This meant she had to demonstrate she had no ties including social,
         cultural or family. Bearing in mind the appellant had lived all her
         life in India save when she visited  the  United  Kingdom  she  was
         unable to meet this requirement. The Tribunal in  Ogundimu (article
         8-new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 defined ties as meaning

              "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' imports,
             we think, a  concept  involving  something  more  than  merely
             remote  and  abstract  links  to  the  country   of   proposed
             deportation or removal. It involves there  being  a  continued
             connection to life in that  country;  something  that  ties  a
             claimant to his or her country of origin."

         The evidence before the Tribunal was she had worked in India  until
         she retired in 1998 and had lived there  with  her  husband  albeit
         they were now estranged. The facts of Ogundimu, relied  on  by  the
         FtTJ in paragraph [34] were wholly distinguishable from  the  facts
         of this appeal. The FtTJ erred in allowing  the  appeal  under  the
         Immigration Rules.

      b. Ground two is paragraphs [2] and [3] of the grounds of appeal.  The
         decisions of Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
         [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and R  (on  the  application  of  Nagre)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)
         make it clear that any application must  be  considered  under  the
         rules. The FtTJ failed to consider the position under the  relevant
         Rule and decided the appeal on article 8 grounds and with no regard
         to whether the Immigration Rules could be met.  In  paragraph  [34]
         the FtTJ allowed the appeal  having  regard  to  the  principle  in
         Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. The facts of that case are  wholly
         distinguishable from the facts of this appeal. Whilst there was  no
         Rule that covered applications by dependant  relatives  in  country
         there were entry  clearance  provisions  and  the  FtTJ  failed  to
         consider this Rule. The grounds of appeal do not spell this out but
         Gulshan and Nagre say go to  the  Rules  and  if  don't  meet  then
         consider whether there are any exceptional circumstances that would
         make removal unjustifiably harsh.

      c. Ground Three.  The FtTJ erred because he  failed  to  consider  the
         appeal under the Rules and consequently his finding that there were
         exceptional circumstances that  would  make  removal  unjustifiably
         harsh cannot stand.

      d. Ground Four.  The appellant is an adult dependant and following the
         decision of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 something more  than
         normal emotional ties is necessary. In this  appeal  the  appellant
         had until recently been living on her own in India. Although  there
         was evidence before the FtTJ this did  not  go  beyond  the  normal
         emotional ties.

      e. Ground Five.  There was a woeful consideration of Section  117B  of
         the 2002 Act in paragraph [35] of the determination. There  was  no
         account taken of the fact the appellant would  be  reliant  on  the
         public purse because she had already needed medical  attention  and
         would continue to do so in the future. There was  no  evidence  the
         appellant could speak English and it followed she would  be  unable
         to integrate into society. It was in the public interest to  remove
         her.

    Mr Shiliday concluded by submitting the FtTJ erred.

 8. Mr Balroop opposed the grounds of appeal and responded as follows:

      a. Ground One- When considering ties the FtTJ was not merely concerned
         with  social  ties.  The  Tribunal  made  clear  in  Ogundimu  that
         "consideration of whether a person has 'no ties'  to  such  country
         must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances
         and  is  not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'
         circumstances". The Court made clear in Nagre that paragraph 276ADE
         does not cover every possible case. The  FtTJ  properly  considered
         the application under the Rules and reached a conclusion  that  was
         open to him in paragraph [34] of his determination. His finding  is
         not manifestly perverse. The respondent's submissions  are  a  mere
         disagreement.

      b. Ground Two. The respondent was arguing Chikwamba but this  was  not
         raised in  grounds.  The  FtTJ  found  at  paragraph  [34]  of  his
         determination that there was no "in country" facility to make entry
         clearance from within  the  United  Kingdom.  The  FtTJ  cannot  be
         faulted for considering outside the Rules.

      c. Ground Three. The FtTJ made assessment in paragraph [34]  that  her
         health circumstances amount to compelling circumstances.  The  FtTJ
         was entitled to find that removal would be unjustifiably harsh.

      d. Ground Four.  The decision of Kugathas  is  about  dependency.  The
         FtTJ found the appellant to be a particularly vulnerable woman  who
         suffered from serious  diabetes  and  was  now  supervised  by  her
         daughter. That is dependency. In Ghising (family life-adults-Ghurka
         policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 the Tribunal stated at paragraph [56] and
         [62]-

               "56.  We  accepted  the  Appellant's  submission  that   the
             judgments in Kugathas had been interpreted too  restrictively
             in the past and ought to be read in the  light  of  subsequent
             decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg courts.

             62. The different outcomes in cases with superficially similar
             features emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1) is
             highly fact-sensitive...."

      e. The court in Gurung and  Ors  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8  preserved  this
         finding stating at paragraph [46]-

              "We think that the cases are of some assistance to  decision-
             makers and tribunals who have to decide these issues. Paras 50
             to 62 of the determination of the UT  in  Ghising  contains  a
             useful review of some of the  jurisprudence  and  the  correct
             approach to be adopted. It concludes  at  para  62  that  "the
             different  outcomes  in  cases  with   superficially   similar
             features emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1) is
             highly fact-sensitive". The correctness of the UT's review has
             not been doubted before us. We endorse it.  We  doubt  whether
             any useful purpose is served by further general elaboration".

      f. Ground Five-Appellant is over 65 so does not need to speak English.
         The respondent says look at sponsors but that cannot  be  right  as
         sponsors are going to care for her. With the exception of potential
         recourse to public funds it is submitted  the  public  interest  in
         removal is outweighed by the above factors.

 9. Mr Shiliday maintained that ground 2 of his appeal did not stray beyond
    what was argued in the grounds of appeal but even if it did  permission
    should be given to amend the ground, as there was no prejudice  to  the
    appellant who had ably addressed  the  issue.  Although  there  was  no
    direct in-country route for settlement as a dependant relative  it  was
    arguable that the FtTJ should  have  considered  the  equivalent  entry
    clearance requirements and failed to do so. If he  had  he  would  have
    noted that the appellant could not satisfy E-ECDR 3.2 as  there  was  a
    reliance on public funds.

10. I reserved my decision having indicated that if there was  an  error  I
    would be able to remake the decision or decisions without  recourse  to
    further evidence or submissions.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The appeal that came before the  FtTJ  involved  an  application  by  a
    seventy-five year mother. She had a history of  visiting  her  daughter
    and her family British family in 2005, 2006, 2009 and  2012.  Her  last
    entrance was on August 8, 2012 when she came on a  family  visit  visa.
    Whilst in the United Kingdom she submitted an application to remain  on
    the basis of family life on December 28, 2012. The  respondent  refused
    her application but her appeal was  allowed  on  private  life  grounds
    under the Immigration Rules and family life  grounds  under  article  8
    ECHR.

12. The respondent appealed that decision and as can be seen from the court
    documents permission to appeal was given. A  variety  of  grounds  have
    been raised before me and in  considering  those  grounds  I  have  had
    regard to the FtTJ's determination,  the  representatives'  submissions
    and the evidence submitted.

13. The FtTJ allowed the appeal under paragraph 276ADE finding in paragraph
    [34] that her appeal succeeded because:

      a. The appellant's only daughter is settled in the United Kingdom.

      b. Her daughter is the sole resource for a dignified end to  her  life
         as an increasingly physically restricted elderly person without the
         lucidity that she would have had  before  she  retired  as  a  head
         teacher.

      c. Her diabetes needs to be carefully and conscientiously monitored.

      d. The constant requirement of quality care  and  attention  from  her
         daughter and extended family makes "remote and abstract her ties to
         India"

14. Mr Shiliday submitted that the FtTJ erred in his approach to this issue
    whereas Mr Balroop reminded me that a "rounded assessment" was required
    and the FtTJ's finding was not manifestly perverse.

15. Both parties referred me to the decision  of  Ogundimu  (Article  8-new
    Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) in which the Tribunal said -

         "123. The natural and ordinary meaning of the words 'ties' imports,
         we think, a concept involving something more than merely remote and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation and  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless.

         ... Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties' to such country
         must involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances
         and  is  not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and  family'
         circumstances."

16. In the recent decision of Bossadi (paragraph 276ADE; suitability; ties)
    [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC) the Tribunal emphasised what a Tribunal  should
    consider when considering "ties" and stated as follows:

          "15. ... the FtT was required to consider in the form of a rounded
         assessment whether the claimant's familial  ties  could  result  in
         support to him in the event of his return to the DRC. In  our  view
         the Strasbourg jurisprudence understands assessment of this  matter
         to require the decision-maker to take into account both  subjective
         and objective considerations and also to consider what lies  within
         the choice of a claimant to achieve.

         16. In this case the FtT appears to have approached the  matter  of
         family ties, as a purely subjective one, reasoning that because the
         two witnesses said there would be no effective family ties  in  the
         DRC that must be the  case  objectively.  That  was  at  odds  with
         Strasbourg jurisprudence, which requires not only  that  assessment
         of ties has an objective as well as a subjective dimension but also
         that such assessment must consider, as  a  relevant  consideration,
         whether ties that are dormant can be revived. Thus, in Balogun v UK
         app. no. 60266/09 [2012] ECHR 614 at  [51]  the  Court  noted  that
         whilst it accepted that the tie between a  Nigerian  applicant  and
         his mother in Nigeria was "not a strong familial tie", nevertheless
         "it is one that could be pursued and strengthened by the  applicant
         if he chose". That assessment was not undertaken by the FtT."

17. The issue for me is to consider whether the FtTJ erred in his approach.
    The FtTJ accepted after hearing oral evidence:

      a. The appellant's husband lived in India  but  they  were  no  longer
         living together and had not been for  perhaps  fifteen  or  sixteen
         years.

      b. The FtTJ was satisfied that she had no other family  in  India  and
         her daughter and son-in-law  supported  her  financially  from  the
         United Kingdom. Her siblings have all died except for one who lives
         in Canada.

      c. The appellant had become reliant in India on a man who had a car to
         help her but she was required to pay him  to  take  her  where  she
         needed to go.

      d. She lived in a private property consisting of two to three rooms.

      e. She received a pension in her bank account.

      f. Her health was deteriorating.

18. The FtTJ considered the application under paragraph 276ADE HC 395.   In
    order to succeed the FtTJ had to be satisfied the  appellant  satisfied
    sub-sections (i), (ii) and (vi). There was no suggestion the  appellant
    did not meet subsections (i) or (ii) and the only issue was whether the
    appellant satisfied subsection (vi). In order to meet this section  the
    appellant had to demonstrate "subject to sub- paragraph (2)  (she  was)
    aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than
    20 years (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)  but  has  no  ties
    (including social, cultural or family)".

19. The FtTJ considered all of the evidence and concluded she satisfied the
    requirement  of  subsection  (vi).  Applying  both  a  subjective   and
    objective test I am satisfied the FtTJ was entitled to make the finding
    he did. He carefully considered the  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
    relating to whether she was with her husband and whether she  had  more
    than one  child.  Having  found  in  the  appellant's  favour  he  then
    considered whether the appellant had any ties to India apart  from  the
    obvious fact that she had lived there all her life and had a  place  to
    stay.

20. It may well be that a different judge could have  reached  a  different
    conclusion but it would be perverse to suggest that the  conclusion  he
    reached was not open to him.

21. In the circumstances I find the FtTJ was entitled to allow  the  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE HC 395 and I therefore dismiss the  respondent's
    appeal.

22. I briefly turn to the other ground of  appeals.  These  relate  to  the
    FtTJ's approach on article 8 ECHR. I reject  Mr  Shiliday's  submission
    that the FtTJ should not have considered the case outside of the Rules.
    The FtTJ acknowledged that the FtTJ could not  consider  an  in-country
    application for settlement as an adult dependant  as  that  application
    must be made out of country. He had regard to the  appellant's  medical
    condition and in paragraph [34]  found  her  health  was  a  compelling
    circumstance.

23. In paragraph [34] of his determination the FtTJ considered  the  issues
    and had regard to article 8 principles and case law. Mr Balroop's legal
    arguments on adult dependency carry weight. Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act  was  considered  by  the  FtTJ  and  contrary  to  Mr   Shiliday's
    submissions I find the FtTJ reached conclusions open to him.

24. I therefore also dismiss the respondent's appeal under article 8 ECHR.

Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law.

26. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier and I see  no  reason  to  amend  that
    order.



Signed:     Dated: February 3, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I uphold the original fee award.



Signed:     Dated: February 3, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
