

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01741/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 12th August 2013                         |On : 19th August 2013        |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ATIF RIAZ

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Julie Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   On 24th December 2012 the application made  by  Mr  Riaz  the  previous
    January, for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant, was
    refused, and a decision  was  also  taken  to  remove  him  by  way  of
    directions under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  Mr Riaz had been awarded a qualification  by  Anglia  Ruskin
    University on 6th July 2012, but according to the UKBA it  should  have
    been awarded by the time he  applied  for  further  leave  in  January.
    Therefore no points  could  be  awarded  for  the  qualification  under
    Appendix A.

2.    When an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal came before  Judge  Cary  on
    6th June 2013, however, Khatel & ors [2013] UKUT  44  (IAC)  had  shown
    that an application was to be understood as  continuing  until  it  was
    decided.  The application in the instant case  was  not  decided  until
    December,  after  the  qualification  had  been  awarded.    Therefore,
    concluded the judge, the requisite points should have been allocated to
    Mr Riaz, and his appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

3.   Shortly after Judge Cary's determination was promulgated on 18th  June,
    judgment was handed down on 25th June in Raju &  ors  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    754, overturning Khatel and  agreeing  with  the  Home  Office  on  the
    question of when an application is made.  On 8th  July  Judge  Chambers
    gave the Secretary of State permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
    on the basis that Raju had now shown what the law was all along,  which
    meant that Judge Chambers had arguably erred in following Khatel.

4.   In reality, of course, it was unarguable.  Khatel  was  wrong  in  law,
    and hence it was wrong for the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appeal
    in reliance on Khatel.  When the matter was listed  before  me,  Morgan
    Mark  Solicitors,  quite  properly  wishing  to   save   their   client
    unnecessary expense, informed the Upper Tribunal that they would not be
    attending the hearing, and asked that the appeal be determined 'on  the
    papers'.  The Secretary of State  was  entitled  to  an  oral  hearing,
    however, and  was  represented  by  a  Senior  Presenting  Officer.   I
    therefore proceeded to hear the appeal in the absence of  a  party,  in
    accordance with rule 38 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008.

5.   The First-tier determination must be set aside  as  erroneous  in  law,
    and it is obviously the best course for me to re-make the  decision  on
    the appeal myself.  While the appeal against the  refusal  to  vary  Mr
    Riaz's leave falls to be dismissed, it should not  be  overlooked  that
    there is also an appeal against another 'immigration decision',  namely
    a decision to remove Mr Riaz.  Judge Cary simply allowed "this appeal",
    without distinguishing between the  two  'immigration  decisions'.   As
    Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512 has shown, he did not err  in  allowing  the
    appeal against  removal,  and  that  part  of  his  determination  must
    therefore stand.



     DECISION

     In respect of the refusal of further leave to  remain,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an error of law, and the Secretary of State's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed.  The decision  to  remove  the
    respondent is, however, not in accordance with the  law,  and  to  that
    extent the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  allowing  the  appeal,
    shall stand.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            12th August 2013
