
IA 01380 2013
                                                               IA 01384 2013
                                                               IA 01392 2013
                                                               IA 01395 2013

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7/8/13                                     |On 8/8/13                    |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     TALUKDER MOHAMMED ZAKIR HUSSAIN + 3

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ouseley, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Ahmed (Universal Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State  but  for  convenience  I
      will refer to the original appellants, a family  from  Bangladesh,  as
      the appellants herein. A reference to the appellant is a reference  to
      the first named appellant.

   2. The appellant was born on 11 December,  1967  and  has  been  studying
      lawfully in the United Kingdom since June 2006. His wife was  born  on
      10 November, 1977. They have a son  born  on  1  August,  1998  and  a
      daughter born on 28 February, 2003.

   3. On 30 August, 2011 the appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier
      4 student. On  3  April,  2012  the  appellant  applied  to  vary  his
      application and applied for leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Post  Study
      Work) migrant under the points based system.

   4. On 28 May 2012 the University of Wales confirmed  that  the  appellant
      had been successful in obtaining an MBA degree. The Secretary of State
      refused the application on 20 December, 2012 on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant's qualification post dated the application he had made.

   5. The appellant appealed and his appeal  came  before  First-tier  Judge
      Aziz on 22 April,  2013.  The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had
      completed his course  but  had  not  received  his  qualification.  He
      observed that the Secretary of State had refused  the  application  by
      relying upon NO (Post-Study Work- award needed by date of application)
      Nigeria [2009] UKAIT 00054 and that applying this  case  the  tribunal
      would have had little scope to allow the appellant's  appeal.  However
      the judge applied Khatel and others (Nepal) [2013] UKUT 44  (IAC)  and
      allowed  the  appeal  finding  that  the   appellant   satisfied   the
      requirements of paragraph 245FD of  HC395,  the  remaining  appellants
      being treated as his dependants under the rules.

   6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal and on 2 July,
      2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer granted permission to appeal in  the
      light of the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  Raju,  Khatel  and
      others v Secretary of State [2013] EWCA Civ 754.

   7. Judge Spencer noted that it was anticipated that if the  decision  was
      set aside the decision would be remade by dismissing the appeals under
      the immigration rules. The decision on human rights aspects would need
      to be made and he directed the parties to file a properly indexed  and
      paginated bundle containing all  of  the  material  including  witness
      statements and authorities upon which they intended  to  rely  at  the
      hearing within 21 days of the date of the decision.

   8. There was no compliance by either side with these directions.

   9. At the hearing Mr Ahmed submitted that the appellant's application did
      in fact comply with the immigration rules notwithstanding the decision
      of the Court of Appeal in Raju.

  10. This was because the application form had been accompanied by a letter
      from the Birmingham Graduate School dated 28 March, 2012 stating  that
      the appellant had completed his course and was expected to  receive  a
      certificate from the University of Wales shortly.

  11. Mr Ahmed referred me to paragraph G5 of the application form where  an
      option was given. The appellant  could  either  include  the  original
      certificate of award or, if the original certificate of award had  not
      been issued, he could tick the  box  to  show  that  he  had  sent  an
      original letter from the institution giving details  of  the  awarding
      body, and confirmation that the certificate of award will  be  issued.
      He submitted that the  letter  from  the  Birmingham  Graduate  School
      complied with the requirements of the box which had been ticked.

  12. Mr Ouseley objected that the point had not been raised  below  and  no
      notice of it had been given.

  13. I put the matter back to enable Mr Ouseley to consider the position.

  14. When the hearing resumed he submitted that the letter did  not  comply
      with the material requested under paragraph G5 of the form because  it
      did not confirm that the certificate of award would be issued.

  15. In respect of Article  8  again  no  material  had  been  supplied  as
      directed.

  16. Mr Ahmed apologised and acknowledged that there had been no compliance
      with the directions. He was concerned that the family would be left in
      limbo once the appeal process had been concluded. While the  Secretary
      of State would look at any article 8 or section 55 points  the  family
      would not be lawfully resident.

  17. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.

  18. It is quite clear that the judge only allowed this appeal  because  of
      the Tribunal case of Khatel. Once that case had been overturned by the
      Court of Appeal the appellant had the opportunity  to  file  a  notice
      under paragraph 24 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules  raising  any
      grounds that he wished to rely upon. Further the  Upper  Tribunal  had
      issued directions as I have pointed out. There was not even a skeleton
      argument or bundle lodged at the hearing and no notice  was  given  of
      the point now sought to be relied  upon.  I  nevertheless  thought  it
      right to give Mr Ouseley the opportunity to consider it.

  19. In my view the point should have been raised at the proper time. I  am
      not moreover satisfied that the tick box at  paragraph  G5  authorises
      the submission and acceptance of post application material to  justify
      the award of points in circumstances such as this given the very clear
      decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in   Raju.  Subsequently  obtained
      evidence cannot cure the defect in the application: see paragraph  24.
      It may well be that the tick box on the form is intended  to  cover  a
      situation which is little more than a formality  such  as  a  document
      being in the post. For  example,  attached  to  the  letter  from  the
      solicitors dated 21 August, 2012 is the letter from the University  of
      Wales  dated  28  May  2012  stating  that  the   appellant's   degree
      certificate would be sent to Birmingham Graduate School. The appellant
      was asked to check if the spelling of his name  was  correct  in  this
      letter as this is how it would appear on any documents issued  by  the
      University. There is a  document  dated  the  30  May  2012  from  the
      Validation Unit  of  the  University  of  Wales  certifying  that  the
      appellant was registered as a student and under additional information
      it states "the above  named  candidate  is  currently  waiting  to  be
      admitted to their award and for their certificate to  be  issued."  It
      may well be that what the tick box in paragraph  G5  has  in  mind  is
      circumstances such as this  rather  than  a  document  issued  by  the
      Birmingham  Graduate  School  two  months  previously.  I  prefer  the
      submissions of Mr Ouseley on this issue and do not accept the material
      supplied with the application complies with the relevant  requirements
      of the points based system. Had the point been properly raised  before
      me I would have rejected it.


  20. In relation to Article 8 as I have  said  nothing  has  been  done  to
      furnish the Tribunal with any evidence in relation to the  private  of
      family life of the appellants or in relation to the best interests  of
      the children.

  21. The family will have developed links with  the  United  Kingdom  since
      2006 and I will assume that Article 8 is engaged. Mr Ouseley  referred
      me to E-A (Nigeria) [2011]  UKUT  00315  (IAC)  and  paragraph  43  in
      particular:

           "It is important to recall that although the appellants may  all
           have been here lawfully, they came to the  UK  for  a  temporary
           purpose with no expectation of being able to remain in  the  UK.
           The third appellant happened to be born in  the  UK  whilst  her
           parents were here for a temporary purpose. The  expectation  was
           that they would all return to Nigeria once the first appellant's
           studies were completed. Those who have their families with  them
           during a period of study in the UK must do so in  the  light  of
           that expectation of return."

  22. I have been given no evidence about the  education,  health  or  other
      relevant material concerning the children or indeed the adult  members
      of the family.

  23. I have no basis for finding that it would not be in the best interests
      of the children to be with their parents and to return  with  them  to
      Bangladesh to further their education there. I have not been  provided
      with any information that their well being would be prejudiced by such
      a course. I  am  not  persuaded  on  the  limited  material  that  the
      representatives have seen fit to put before me that  the  respondent's
      decision is not lawful and proportionate.

  24. Mr Ahmed was anxious that the position of the appellants should not be
      prejudiced notwithstanding the deficiencies of the preparation for the
      hearing by the representatives. It is of course open to the solicitors
      to make representations to the Secretary  of  State  bringing  to  the
      Secretary of State's attention all  relevant  matters  concerning  the
      welfare of the children and the family. The representatives were given
      the opportunity to bring such matters to the attention of the Tribunal
      and indeed were directed to do so. Nothing was  done.  Nevertheless  I
      have  no  doubt  that  the  Secretary  of  State  will  give   careful
      consideration to any  material  submitted  provided  it  is  submitted
      promptly and will have in mind her duties under section 55.

      The determination of the First-tier Judge was  flawed  by  a  material
      error of law. I remake it. I allow the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
      State. I reverse the decision of the First-tier Judge.


      The appeals of the appellants  are  dismissed  under  the  immigration
      rules and Article 8.


      Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
      7 August 2013
