
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01846/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 August 2014                             |On 20 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                             MR Adnan Kadir KHAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Mustakim, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born on 24 February 1983, is a citizen of Bangladesh.

 2. He entered the United Kingdom on 21 May 2011 with leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student from 13 April 2011 until  30  October  2012.   On  30
    October 2012 he applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the  points-based  system.   The
    application was refused by the respondent on  19  December  2013.   The
    appellant appealed and following a hearing at Hatton Cross Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Prior, in a determination  promulgated  on  5  June
    2014, dismissed the appellant's appeal.   He  did  so  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. On 27 June 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  P  J  M  Hollingworth
    gave  his  reasons  for  allowing  the  appellant's   application   for
    permission to appeal.  They state:

         "1.  An arguable error of  law  has  arisen.   The  judge  was  not
             satisfied that Article 8  was  engaged.   Some  confusion  has
             arisen as to the  opportunity  for  the  appellant  to  pursue
             further studies either in the United Kingdom or in Bangladesh.
              In these circumstances it is unclear whether  the  judge  has
             considered the relevant factors in relation to whether Article
             8 was engaged."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. The respondent's refusal letter had made reference to Section 50 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  prohibiting  a  student
    from studying other than at the institution that  the  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies Checking Service records showed as the student's
    sponsor.  The letter explained the refusal of the application under the
    general grounds set out in paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration Rules HC
    395 as follows:

         "You were last granted leave based on  the  successful  application
         made on 15 March 2011 for entry clearance as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Student Migrant to study with Briton  Universal  College.   However
         you have provided evidence of having completed a  full-time  course
         at Primrose College throughout your time of leave.  In view of  the
         fact that you did not make a fresh application in order to study at
         Primrose College and the certificate confirms  that  you  completed
         study at an institution you  were  not  granted  leave  for  on  15
         October 2002.  The Secretary of State is  not  satisfied  that  you
         have complied with the conditions attached to your leave to enter."

 6. At the First-tier hearing there was  no  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    attendance at Briton College and as the appellant had only been in  the
    United Kingdom studying since 2011 the respondent urged  the  judge  to
    accept that he had not established such an extensive  private  life  as
    one that would be disproportionately interfered with upon his removal.

 7. The  judge  found  that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence  of  the
    appellant's pursuit of his diploma course in  hospitality  and  tourism
    management at Briton Universal College and that the only evidence of  a
    documentary kind was in relation to the  course  at  Primrose  College.
    This confirmed it to be a full-time one.  The judge attached no  weight
    to the appellant's evidence that he had attended that course as he  did
    not find him a credible witness.  The appellant further submitted  that
    the Primrose College course was a part-time  one  in  contrast  to  the
    documentary evidence that was before the judge.

 8. It is recorded at paragraph 15 of the judge's  determination  that  the
    appellant did not challenge the respondent's position that  if  he  had
    substituted one full-time course at Briton College  for  another  full-
    time course at Primrose College he would be in breach  of  a  condition
    attached to his grant of leave to enter the United Kingdom in the terms
    of sub-paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

 9. The judge went on to find that the appellant's  own  conduct  therefore
    breached a condition attached to his grant of leave to be in the United
    Kingdom and to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

10. Today Mr Mustakim submitted that there was no basis for concluding that
    the appellant did not go to Briton College.  Ultimately it closed  down
    and the appellant was  unable  to  obtain  information  from  it.   The
    finding of the judge as to his non-attendance is not  accepted  and  in
    any event the appellant would  be  allowed  under  policy  guidance  to
    attend simultaneously extra  studies.   Mr  Mustakim  argued  that  the
    course at Primrose College  was  a  part-time  one  and  therefore  the
    appellant had not fallen foul of any Rules.  However, Mr Tufan referred
    me to the documentary evidence which clearly showed that it was a full-
    time course.  It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that  despite
    the documentary evidence the course was a part time one.

11. It was also argued that the respondent's decision was generally  unfair
    and that the appellant's circumstances had to be looked at in  context.
    Those circumstances should have caused  the  judge  to  find  that  the
    respondent's decision was a disproportionate one within Article 8.

12. Mr Tufan emphasised the narrow grounds upon which permission  had  been
    granted.  He  highlighted  the  documentary  evidence  that  the  judge
    considered showing the Primrose College course to be  a  full-time  one
    and asserted that the nub of the appeal was not in relation  to  Briton
    College but the fact that the appellant chose to attend another  course
    for which he did not have permission.

13. Quite fairly  Mr  Tufan,  on  considering  the  respondent's  decision,
    acknowledged the absence of any exercise of the respondent's discretion
    in relation to paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended).  He referred me to the authority of Patel and Others  v  SSHD
    [2013] UKSC 72 and contended that the appellant only ever  entered  the
    United  Kingdom  for  temporary  purposes  and  that   there   was   no
    disproportionality in the respondent's decision in under Article 8.

14. It appears from the application  for  permission  to  appeal  that  the
    grounds  were  drafted  by  the  appellant  himself  and  I  find  that
    permission was granted with an abundance of caution to what appeared to
    Judge Hollingworth to be, at that time, an unrepresented litigant.

15. On my analysis there was ample justification for  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility findings and he has given cogent  and  sustainable  reasons
    for coming to the conclusions that he did including that  the  Primrose
    College course was a full-time one.  This is  germane  to  the  finding
    that the appellant's  conduct  represented  a  breach  of  a  condition
    attached to the grant of his  leave  and  that  his  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules must be dismissed.

16. Whilst Mr Tufan quite fairly highlights the absence of the exercise  of
    the respondent's discretion within the decision  there  was  before  me
    this afternoon no application to amend the grounds  of  appeal.   Those
    grounds caused Judge Hollingworth to  grant  permission  on  a  limited
    basis.  I find that there is no confusion whatsoever  within  paragraph
    17 of the judge's determination in  relation  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant can pursue his studies either in the  United  Kingdom  or  in
    Bangladesh.  The judge was simply making the point that  the  appellant
    was open to follow a course similar to  the  one  he  proposed  in  the
    United Kingdom were he to be returned to Bangladesh.

17. Whilst the judge may have erred in concluding that  the  removal  would
    not cause the appellant's Article 8 rights to be engaged I do not  find
    this to be a material error.  As the judge finds in  the  determination
    the appellant could not have  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  any
    expectation that leave would inevitably be granted to him to remain  to
    undertake studies beyond those for which he was granted leave to enter.
     Any decision that causes him to be  removed  and  infringes  upon  his
    right to private life in the United Kingdom is, in the context  of  the
    factual matrix here, a proportionate one.

18. The Immigration Judge has  properly  considered  the  totality  of  the
    evidence that was  before  him  in  relation  to  all  aspects  of  the
    appellant's appeal under both the Immigration Rules and on human rights
    grounds.

19. The conclusions of the judge were open to him to be  made  in  all  the
    circumstances.

20. The making of the previous decision involved the making of no  material
    error on a point of law and I do not set the decision aside  but  order
    that it shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction made.






Signed                                  Date 19 August 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

