

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
IA/01892/2014

                                                 IA/14525/2014

                                                 IA/03589/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 January 2016                       |On 20 May 2016                    |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                               MARYANN ABEHKE
                              MARY-ANNE ABEKHE
                                ZANETA ABEKHE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim, instructed by A & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Nigeria,  mother,  adult  daughter  and
    minor daughter.  They  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    decisions of the respondent refusing them leave to remain.  Judge Bruce
    dismissed their appeals.  They now appeal,  with  permission,  to  this
    Tribunal.  Although they are members of one family, the  issues  raised
    are not identical, because the second appellant is not  dependent  upon
    her mother, whereas the third is.  Like the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
    we shall deal with the second appellant first; we shall then return  to
    her position at the end of this determination.

 2. The second appellant came to the United Kingdom in August 2006; she was
    then aged 16.  She had leave to enter as a visitor.  She was brought by
    her family and left in the care of a paternal uncle.  Her leave expired
    and was not renewed.  She appears, however, to have attended  a  course
    at the University of Sheffield, graduating in  2011.   In  December  of
    that of year she applied for indefinite leave to remain on human rights
    grounds.  The application was refused, but limited leave to remain  was
    granted until 9 November 2013, apparently simply on  the  grounds  that
    she had family here.  On 1 October 2013 she applied for  further  leave
    to remain on human rights grounds.  That application was refused and on
    9 March 2014 she was served with notice  of  that  decision  and  of  a
    decision to remove her.

 3. On appeal against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Bruce
    heard oral evidence from her, and regarded her as credible.  The  judge
    accepted that she was not responsible for the arrangements made for her
    arrival in the United Kingdom or  for  her  overstaying.   Judge  Bruce
    found that she did not meet the requirements of  the  rules,  and  that
    although her removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would  amount  to  an
    interference with her private and family life, the  interference  would
    not be disproportionate.  Thus she  dismissed  the  second  appellant's
    appeal.

 4. The first appellant came to the United Kingdom  in  October  2009  with
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.   The  leave  was
    subsequently varied  to  leave  under  the  Tier  1  (Post-study  Work)
    Category.  The first appellant's evidence was that during  that  period
    she was looking for a new course, with a view to  undertaking  a  Ph.D.
    She had not, however, identified any course or obtained a CAS  in  time
    to make a new application before her leave expired on 9 November  2013.
    On 7 November 2013 she made an  application  for  further  leave  as  a
    "prospective student visitor", saying that she wanted  some  additional
    time in order to find a course and get  a  CAS.   Her  application  was
    refused on the mandatory ground that the application was for a  purpose
    not covered by the Immigration Rules.  That decision, and the  decision
    to give directions for her removal, was notified on 21  December  2013.
    The  notice  of  decision  included  a  notice  under  s.  120  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, requiring  the  applicant
    to give any reasons why she thought she should be allowed  to  stay  in
    the country, despite the present decision.

 5. On 29 December 2013 she raised human  rights  arguments  based  on  the
    continuity of the third appellant's education and private life in  this
    country, and on the basis that the first appellant needed further  time
    in the United Kingdom in order to  settle  the  second  appellant  down
    here.

 6. The appeals were listed for hearing on 1 August  2014.   By  then,  the
    first appellant  had  obtained  a  CAS  from  Heriot  Watt  University,
    offering her a place to undertake an MSC.  Judge  Howard,  before  whom
    the matter was listed, was asked to allow the appeal on the basis  that
    the first appellant now had a further reason for being allowed to  stay
    in the  United  Kingdom,  which  was  said  to  be  that  she  met  the
    requirements for a grant of leave as a student.   It  was  pointed  out
    that she had made no application for leave to remain as a student,  but
    in response it was  argued  on  her  behalf  that  she  could  make  no
    application whilst her existing leave under s. 3C  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971, continuing during  the  appeal,  remained  current.   If  she
    withdrew the appeal  she  would  have  no  leave,  and  the  CAS  would
    automatically become invalid.  This argument  caused  Judge  Howard  to
    decide that he could not determine the appeal.  He adjourned  it,  with
    directions requiring the first appellant to service on  the  respondent
    "all prescribed material she  relies  on  to  establish  properly  made
    application as Tier 4 (General) Student within 4 weeks".  By  the  time
    the matter came before Judge Bruce, she was able to be  satisfied  that
    the materials submitted to the Secretary of State included a valid  CAS
    and appropriate evidence  of  financial  standing.   But,  despite  the
    reference to a "properly  made  application"  in  the  directions,  the
    applicant had not completed an application form or submitted a fee.  It
    appears that the Home Office had specifically indicated  to  the  first
    appellant that if she wanted leave as a Tier 4 Migrant she had to  make
    an application on that basis, by filling in the  form  and  paying  the
    fee.

 7. At the date of the hearing before Judge Bruce, the CAS had expired, but
    the appellant had been able to obtain a new one.  The  argument  before
    Judge Bruce was that the first appellant is a genuine student who is in
    funds, but cannot make a  Tier  4  application  whilst  the  appeal  is
    outstanding, whereas if she withdraws  it  her  CAS  will  lapse.   The
    remedy of departure to Nigeria to make a  new  application  was  unduly
    harsh because of the impact on the third appellant's education.

 8. The third appellant is now aged 15.  She is at  school.   She  has  had
    leave in line  with  that  granted  to  her  mother,  and  the  present
    application accompanied her mother's.  It was  refused  on  the  ground
    that her mother's leave had been refused and she too was  given  notice
    of that decision, and a decision to remove her, on  21  December  2013.
    Although her position as a minor currently in education in  the  United
    Kingdom has clear and independent  relevance  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal, it is convenient to look at her appeal  with  her  mother's  as
    Judge Bruce did.

 9. Judge Bruce heard oral evidence from  the  first  appellant,  whom  she
    regarded as credible.  She noted the difficulty arising out of s. 3C of
    the 1971 Act, but observed as follows:

          "She must take some responsibility for the fact that she  did  not
          manage to identify a course and obtain a CAS  before  her  Tier  1
          (PSW) leave expired in November 2013.  Plainly speaking,  had  she
          got her act together she would not now be in this predicament."

10. Judge Bruce considered the issues raised by the s. 120 Notice  and  the
    subsequent assertion that the first appellant was entitled to remain in
    the United Kingdom as a student.  She decided that  that  was  not  so.
    The applicant did not meet the requirements imposed by  the  rules  for
    leave to remain  as  a  student,  because  she  had  not  completed  an
    application form  and  paid  the  fee.   No  other  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules were relied upon; and Judge Bruce went on to consider
    the matter outside the rules, taking into account the position of  both
    the first and the third appellants, their  history  and  circumstances,
    and the provisions of s. 117B of the 2002 Act.  She  noted  that  there
    were very many positive features in their case, but the essence of  her
    conclusion is as follows:

          "In weighing proportionality I must also consider  the  extent  of
          the  interference.   That  is  the  rub.   Mr  Yerukum  [for   the
          appellants] submits that failure in this appeal will result in the
          life that these  appellants  have  established  in  the  UK  being
          irreparably disrupted.  That is simply not so.  There is an option
          available that would limit the interference considerably.  That is
          that the appellants return to Nigeria for a short period in  order
          to make an application for entry clearance.  If for instance  this
          was done at the beginning of Zaneta's summer holidays she could be
          back in time to start the new school year."

11. She thus dismissed the appeals.

12. The grounds supporting the application for permission to appeal to this
    Tribunal are combined grounds relating to all three  appellants.   They
    assert that the First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding that  a  formal
    application had to be made.  When there is a response to a Section  120
    Notice,  the  Tribunal  acts  as   the   primary   decision-maker   (AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1076), and there is no  particular
    form for a statement under s. 120 (Jaff v SSHD [2012] UKUT 396  (IAC)).
    Secondly, Judge Bruce's decision that a form, and an  application  fee,
    were required, ignored the fact that whilst leave  continues  under  s.
    3C, no application could be made.  Thirdly,  in  assessing  the  matter
    under article 8 the judge should have taken into account that the first
    appellant met the substantive requirements for leave  to  remain  as  a
    student, even if the form had not been completed and the  fee  had  not
    been paid.  The final  substantive  paragraph  of  the  grounds  is  as
    follows:

          "As such the second appellant's appeal would be materially altered
          if the first and third appellant's appeals were allowed under  the
          rules or article 8.  Therefore if the  FtT  [sic]  considers  that
          there is a material error as highlighted above, there  must  be  a
          reconsideration of the second appellant's appeal as well."

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Ransley  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the following grounds:

          "It is arguable that the Judge may have erred in  concluding  that
          A1's appeal under the Tier 4 Student Rules could not be allowed on
          the basis that A1 had not submitted a formal  application  to  the
          respondent in accordance with para A34 of  the  Immigration  Rules
          rather than simply  adducing  the  evidence  in  response  to  the
          Section 120 Notice.


          It is arguable that the Judge's Article 8  assessment  was  flawed
          due to failure to take into account that the respondent's decision
          cannot be said to be in accordance with the law when A1  satisfied
          the Tier 4 Rules but had not made a formal application."

14. The arguments raised before us were the same as  those  that  had  been
    raised  previously.   The  applicant  met  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules with the exception of  the  requirements  to  make  a
    formal application and pay a fee, and so was entitled  to  leave  as  a
    student.  That argument we  regard  as  without  merit.   There  is  no
    freestanding entitlement to grant of leave in a particular category  on
    the basis of meeting some, but not all,  of  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  Where no particular form or fee is required (for example in  an
    asylum claim) the s. 120 procedure enables the Tribunal to foster a one-
    stop culture by determining the issues raised in the Notice.   Further,
    as para GEN.1.9 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules provides, there
    are circumstances in which when matters are  raised  on  an  appeal  an
    application form is not required.  That is a specific provision of  the
    Rules, which does not apply in the case of student applications.  There
    is simply no basis for saying that a person can meet  the  requirements
    of the student rules, and be entitled to leave as a student, simply  on
    the  basis  of  meeting  the  requirements  provided  specifically  for
    students, without meeting the general  requirements  for  applications.
    To decide that a person was entitled to leave in a particular  category
    merely by providing themselves with the documentation which would  have
    established an entitlement to leave if an application  had  been  made,
    without actually making the application,  would  lead  to  obvious  and
    immediate chaos.

15. In deciding whether, in the context of the s. 3C leave, the requirement
    to make an application was disproportionate in the case  of  the  first
    and third appellants, the judge clearly took into account all  relevant
    factors.  She noted that the situation the first appellant was  in  was
    of her own making.  We would add that the application made by the first
    appellant was one which was bound to fail, and so cannot readily  carry
    any credit for having been made, other than the formal  consequence  of
    the extension of leave.  The position was that the first appellant  had
    allowed her existing leave to run almost to its end without making  the
    arrangements that she needed to make if she wanted it to  be  continued
    on any proper basis.  The judge  took  into  account  all  the  factual
    matters  that  were  argued,  and,  as  is  perfectly  clear  from  her
    determination, looked at the question of interference from the point of
    view of what was realistically practicable, not from the point of  view
    of the worst case scenario argued by  the  appellant's  representative.
    We cannot see that her determination discloses  any  error  of  law  as
    argued in the grounds.

16. We have indicated what the grounds of appeal are  in  relation  to  the
    second appellant.  It seems to us that they do not advance  the  second
    appellant's case at all.  She is not dependant upon  her  mother.   Her
    case was properly dealt with and determined by Judge Bruce.   There  is
    no proper ground for interfering with her decision.

17. For the foregoing reasons all three appeals are dismissed.







                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                            Date: 9 May 2016
