
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01164/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 July 2013                               |On 8 August 2013             |
|Prepared 31 July 2013                         |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S V PITT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                               Mr Abdul Basit
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Saifolahi, Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  25  February  1983,
    appealed against a decision of the  Respondent  of  20  December  2012,
    explained in a Reasons for Refusal Letter of 18 December 2012, itself a
    sequel to the earlier refusal of  20  September  2011,  to  refuse  his
    application for leave to remain in the UK under Article 8 of  the  1950
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms,
    which is the qualified right of himself and his  wife  to  respect  for
    their private and family life.

2.   The Appellant's ensuing appeal was heard by Judge Napthine  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 3 May 2013, before whom both parties were  represented,
    and dismissed in a determination of 26 May which  was  promulgated  the
    following day.  On 25 June Judge Renton granted permission  to  appeal,
    which was later supplemented by standard procedural directions, in  the
    following terms:

         "The Appellant applied in time for leave to appeal.   There  is  an
         arguable error of law.


         The Appellant appealed on human rights grounds a decision to remove
         him.


         First-tier Tribunal Judge Napthine (the Judge) dismissed the appeal
         because he was not satisfied that the Appellant had a  family  life
         with Nasrin Begum Latif, nor that he had a private life in the  UK.
         The Judge's reasons for these decisions are insufficient and amount
         to an arguable error of law.  In particular  the  Judge  failed  to
         deal with the evidence that the Appellant had married Nasrin  Begum
         Latif in both religious and civil ceremonies; and  failed  to  deal
         with the evidence of Abdul Quddus  Latif,  the  Sponsor's  brother.
         The other grounds are arguable."

3.   The Appellant attended the error of law hearing, which was  interpreted
    to him by an interpreter in the Sylheti language.  It took the form  of
    submissions in which the Respondent relied upon the Rule 24 notice of 4
    July rejecting any error of law and the  Appellant  upon  the  detailed
    grounds of appeal.

4.    We  retired  for,  in  the  event,  25  minutes  to   consider   these
    submissions.  On return we stated that we had found a material error of
    law.  The challenge to the determination comprised numerous  individual
    challenges to the findings of fact and the inferences drawn from  them.
    Individually none of them might  be  determinative;  cumulatively  they
    were.  They included the  fact  that  the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor's
    brother, who had within the determination been described  as  for  that
    reason not an independent witness, had not been taken into  account  on
    the issue of the relationship  and  the  subsistence  of  the  marriage
    between the Appellant and the  Sponsor;  numerous  letters,  bills  and
    documents addressed to the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  at  the  same
    address had not in the same context of their relationship been referred
    to;  the  very  recent  evidence  from  a  pharmacy  of  the  Sponsor's
    pregnancy, itself narrated in her  supplementary  statement,  had  been
    incorrectly understood and in  consequence  not  accorded  weight;  and
    evidence from the Sponsor's  brother  corroborating  the  role  of  the
    Sponsor as the main carer for their sick mother had not been taken into
    account.  Whilst the Tribunal is not required to discuss every item  of
    evidence, it is required to assess the  evidence  holistically  and  to
    reach reasoned conclusions from it.  We concluded that cumulatively the
    determination did not evidence this  degree  of  consideration  of  the
    evidence.  In consequence  the  judicial  findings  of  fact,  and  the
    inferences drawn from them, were not safe and could not stand.  None of
    them was safe and severable so that the appeal had to be reheard in its
    entirety.

The Resumed Hearing

5.    In  readiness  for  the  resumed  hearing,   Miss   Saifolahi   tabled
    contemporary medical evidence, which for that reason we received  under
    Rule 15(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   In
    that  light  Miss  Isherwood  requested   the   opportunity   to   take
    instructions which we  granted,  in  the  event  for  25  minutes.   On
    resumption Miss Isherwood said that it might  be  appropriate  for  the
    Respondent  to  look  at  the  decision  again  and  so  requested   an
    adjournment, as well as a remittal of  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Miss Saifolahi opposed the adjournment  application  because
    the Sponsor was at a late  stage  in  her  pregnancy  and  the  medical
    condition of her mother was chronic and uncertain.  In the exercise  of
    our discretion we declined to grant the adjournment  and  decided  that
    the appeal could and should proceed that day in the Upper Tribunal.

6.   In the light of  Miss  Isherwood's  candid  initial  appraisal  of  the
    issues we afforded her further time, in the event another  25  minutes,
    to decide how she wished  to  present  the  appeal,  to  enable  us  to
    identify which matters  remained  in  issue  and  which  did  not.   On
    resumption we clarified with Miss Isherwood that the pregnancy  of  the
    Sponsor and the Appellant's paternity of the Sponsor's  expected  child
    were accepted,  whilst  the  Sponsor's  care  of  her  mother  and  the
    Sponsor's connections to Bangladesh  were  not.   In  that  light  Miss
    Saifolahi said that she would be calling the Appellant, the Sponsor and
    the Sponsor's brother.  It being then 12.55pm, we rose.  Throughout the
    morning the proceedings were interpreted to the Appellant by the  court
    interpreter in the Sylheti dialect of the Bengali language.

7.   The substantive  hearing  commenced  at  2.00pm.   The  Appellant  gave
    evidence on oath through the interpreter in chief, in which he  adopted
    his statement, and cross-examination.  After  a  short  break  for  the
    benefit of the interpreter the Sponsor, Mrs Nasrin Begum Latif, who  is
    the Appellant's wife and who had been outside the hearing  room  during
    his evidence, gave evidence on oath in English in chief, in  which  she
    adopted her statement, in response to one question  from  the  Tribunal
    and in cross-examination.  Her brother, Mr Abdul Latif,  who  had  been
    outside the hearing room until this point, then gave evidence  on  oath
    in English  in  chief,  in  which  he  adopted  his  statement,  cross-
    examination  and  response  to  questions  from  the   Tribunal.    The
    interpreter was present throughout the evidence of Mrs  Latif  and  her
    brother in case of any difficulty, but was not required.

8.   Submissions followed, by Miss Isherwood and  then  by  Miss  Saifolahi,
    which were interpreted to the Appellant.  At  4.45pm  we  reserved  our
    determination.  We have taken  those  oral  submissions  into  account,
    together with the skeleton argument of the Appellant  and  the  Refusal
    Letters of 20 September 2011 and 18 December 2012.

The Evidence

9.   As stated, Miss  Isherwood  accepted  the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor's
    pregnancy and of the Appellant's paternity of the  child  whom  she  is
    expecting.  She did  not  challenge  the  credibility  of  any  of  the
    witnesses,  although  she  did  challenge  the  interpretation  of  the
    evidence about the extent of  the  care  which  the  Sponsor  has  been
    providing for her mother.  The  Appellant  was  at  points  a  confused
    witness, and doubtless  with  a  feeling  of  vulnerability  about  his
    immigration history he attempted to sanitise it  and  to  minimise  the
    potential support of his family in Bangladesh whilst maximising that of
    his family in the UK.  His evidence is not  entirely  consistent  about
    matters of chronology which we have concluded are  of  limited  import.
    The evidence of the Appellant, his  wife  and  his  wife's  brother  is
    broadly consistent, internally and with that of each other and,  as  to
    the matters upon which it is accepted by Miss Isherwood,  supported  by
    documentary evidence.  We find that the Appellant (with this degree  of
    qualification), his wife and his wife's brother were witnesses of truth
    who were doing their best  to  narrate  events  as  they  recalled  and
    understood them.  The Appellant's wife was an impressive  witness,  who
    answered challenges to her evidence in a  rational  and  measured  way.
    With the same  degree  of  qualification  about  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant we accept the evidence of all of them.  This  enables  us  to
    summarise the evidence compendiously, which we now do.

10.  The Appellant, who was born on 25 February 1983, came  from  Bangladesh
    to the UK on 1 November 2000 when  he  was  aged  17.   He  said  (oral
    evidence, questions 50 to 54 of Mr Lewis's record (oral 50-54)) that he
    came through a middleman to visit his relatives, saw that the UK was  a
    nice place, liked it and stayed, not realising until he was  here  that
    he was here unlawfully.  Thinking whether or not to stay, he decided by
    2007 to do so and on 3 July 2007 submitted an application for leave  to
    remain on the basis of his length of residence and private life.

11.  The application was refused.  Thenceforth the  Appellant's  immigration
    history became complex, with him  being  listed  as  an  absconder,  in
    September 2011 being detained as an illegal immigrant  and  in  October
    2011 being granted bail.  Judicial review proceedings were  instituted,
    with permission being granted, and later withdrawn.

12.  In March 2011 the Appellant met Nasrin Begum Latif.  They entered  into
    an Islamic marriage on 23 October 2011  and  a  civil  marriage  on  22
    December 2011, the certificates being in evidence together with  family
    photographs and anniversary cards.

13.  Mrs Nasrin Begum Latif was brought as a baby  from  Bangladesh  to  the
    UK, where she has spent her whole life.  She is a British citizen.  She
    works for Training 4 U Services (UK) Limited teaching basic English  to
    people from Jobcentres who are unable to speak English to help them  to
    find work.  There is  documentary  evidence  of  her  employment.   She
    became aware of the Appellant's lack of immigration status when he  was
    detained for the first time; as to this we interpose that according  to
    the chronology this was on 8 September 2011.  This was not  the  reason
    why she married him which, as stated, she did on 23 October 2011.

14.  The Sponsor is pregnant, and her due date is  4  September  2013.   She
    has had medical  problems  with  her  pregnancy  and  there  have  been
    problems with the movement of the baby, for which she has spent periods
    in hospital.  She attributes these problems to the stress which she  is
    under with her mother.  We note that when the baby is born  he  or  she
    will be a British citizen.

15.  In 2001 the Sponsor's younger sister  died.   Following  this,  and  in
    2001, her mother had a stroke, and  her  health  began  to  deteriorate
    significantly.  She cannot now speak.  She has renal cancer,  which  is
    also in her brain.  She has been in and out of hospital, where she  now
    is, having been admitted most recently on 18 July 2013.   In  a  letter
    written by a doctor at the hospital on 20  July  2013  to  support  the
    mother's hope that a brother in Bangladesh will be able to  visit  her,
    the doctor wrote that she has renal cancer and brain metastases and  is
    critically unwell.  The hospital have told the family  that  she  could
    pass away at any time.

16.  Over the years the mother's children in the  UK  have  participated  in
    her care.  They are the Sponsor; another  daughter,  who  has  her  own
    husband and children; a single brother; and a brother Abdul, who  lived
    with his mother for a period and has his own wife and two children.

17.  Whilst the Sponsor's mother was at home,  carers  came  in  on  a  rota
    basis every day.  The Sponsor said that this started three years  after
    her mother had her stroke in 2001, and thus in  2004  (oral  88).   The
    Appellant recalls this being the arrangement from when he  married  the
    Sponsor in 2011 (oral 18).  The carers are there for fixed periods, not
    around the clock.  They help the Sponsor's mother to get  out  of  bed,
    put her in a wheelchair, wash her, clean her and change her nappies  if
    needs be and come back if there is anything else to be done.

18.  The Sponsor whilst she was working would go to see her  mother  in  the
    morning before starting work at 9.00am.  She would often go back  after
    work.  Sometimes she had to go during the day  if  the  carers  phoned,
    which her employers understood and  accepted.   She  did  her  mother's
    cooking, dressed her, arranged her medication, maintained  the  contact
    with the hospital and attended to her mother if she had dirtied herself
    after the carers had gone.  When her mother was most recently  admitted
    to hospital the Sponsor gave up her employment, a few days  before  she
    had been due to start her maternity leave.  Now she spends the day with
    her mother in the hospital, from around 10.00am,  sometimes  until  her
    mother goes to sleep at around 9.00 or 10.00pm and sometimes until  her
    brother comes on from work.  She sits with her mother, speaks  to  her,
    reads to her and tries to make her happy.  The siblings take  turns  to
    sit with her.  A letter of 21 March 2013 from, it seems,  the  mother's
    general practitioner says that the Sponsor states that she  deals  with
    all of her mother's medical problems and liaises with all  health  care
    professionals; she is her mother's main carer, is the  first  point  of
    contact in regards to her mother's care and the health centre have  her
    number on their records.

19.  The Appellant said  that  his  mother-in-law  was  very  close  to  the
    Sponsor and did not  want  to  deal  with  anybody  else;  the  Sponsor
    understood her mother, who cannot speak and can only use sign  language
    like pointing her fingers and making noises (oral 24).   The  Sponsor's
    brother Abdul said that their mother is very fussy; the Sponsor was the
    closest to her of the siblings due to her circumstances;  their  mother
    would not want the Sponsor to leave her sight; the Sponsor did all  the
    cooking and was the  only  person  who  made  her  happy  and  got  her
    medication; the mother would not let anybody do  that  apart  from  the
    Sponsor; and the majority of the time the Sponsor  did  everything  for
    her (oral 108-110).

20.  Asked about her husband's support, the Sponsor  said  that  emotionally
    and physically he was there for her.  He was  a  shoulder  to  cry  on,
    which kept her going.  She and her brothers and sisters were  all  very
    emotional.  At home the Sponsor is so knackered that her  husband  does
    everything for her (oral 72).  In evidence are letters of corroboration
    of the Sponsor's relationship with  the  Appellant  and  care  for  her
    mother from various people including the Sponsor's other brother in the
    UK (Appellant's bundle page 46).

21.  A significant issue for Miss Isherwood, in her questions to  the  three
    witnesses and in her submissions, was the extent of the Sponsor's  care
    for her mother.  From the totality of the evidence  we  find  that  the
    Sponsor is and has been for  many  years  the  primary  carer  for  her
    mother, and has assumed overall responsibility for her medical care.

22.  The Appellant has his parents in Bangladesh, together with two  sisters
    and three brothers, and is in contact with them.   He  said  that  they
    were living there on their own and so would not help him and  his  wife
    if they had to return.  We note that this is an aspect of his  evidence
    which, whilst not tested, we treat with caution.   In  the  UK  he  has
    numerous aunts, uncles and cousins and their children; he is very close
    to all of his relatives in the UK and knows that he can  rely  on  them
    for support when needs be.  We note that this too we treat with caution
    for the corresponding reason.

23.  The Sponsor's immediate family are all in the UK.   In  Bangladesh  she
    has uncles and aunts whom she has never met and with whom  she  is  not
    close.  She believes that her father had a house in Bangladesh but does
    not know what happened to it.  Asked if she was  in  contact  with  her
    family in Bangladesh she replied "not really" (oral 80).   She  regards
    the UK as her home.  She speaks Bengali, with which she has problems on
    the odd occasion, as well as English, and understands Urdu,  and  would
    have language problems  in  Bangladesh  because  she  has  spoken  only
    English since she was very young (oral 75-77).

24.  We summarise.  The Sponsor has lived her whole life in the UK.  All  of
    her immediate family are in the UK, which she regards as her home.  She
    is a British citizen, as will be her child.  She has  been  since  2001
    and remains the primary carer for her mother, who is now terminally ill
    and could pass away at any time.  She is in a subsisting and meaningful
    marriage with her husband, whom she married not because of his lack  of
    immigration status and who is at present an invaluable support to her.

25.  The Appellant entered the UK at the  age  of  17  and  remained  there,
    knowing that he was not entitled to do so, for six  and  a  half  years
    before reaching the decision that he would like to stay and  submitting
    an application.  Subsequently he was treated as an absconder,  detained
    as an illegal immigrant and brought judicial review  proceedings  which
    were ultimately withdrawn on the basis of  the  Respondent  considering
    his further representations and granting him an  in  country  right  of
    appeal.  He married the  Sponsor  in  2011,  and  they  are  imminently
    expecting their first child.

Determination: the Immigration Rules

26.  The application was determined under Appendix FM, dealing  with  family
    life,  and  paragraph  276ADE,  dealing  with  private  life,  of   the
    Immigration Rules.

27.  The  Appellant  meets  most  of  the  requirements  of  Section  S-LTR,
    suitability - leave to remain - and E-LTRP -  eligibility  for  limited
    leave to remain as a partner - of Appendix FM.   He  does  not  however
    satisfy paragraph E-LTRP2.2, which requires that  "The  applicant  must
    not be in the UK in breach of immigration  laws  (disregarding  of  any
    period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less) unless paragraph
    EX.1 applies."  Paragraph EX.1 provides so far as  applicable  that  it
    applies if:

         "(b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled  in
             the UK or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
             protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

28.  On the evidence then available to the Respondent, it is  understandable
    that the Refusal Letter at paragraphs 20 to 22 concluded  that  Section
    EX.1 did not  apply.   The  evidence  before  us  is  fuller  and  more
    contemporary.

29.  We find that the Appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with the Sponsor.  She is a British citizen settled  in  the  UK  whose
    family, career and whole life are and have always  been  there.   There
    are various obstacles to family life between  them  continuing  outside
    the UK.  The Sponsor is pregnant, and due to  deliver  on  4  September
    2013, just  over  five  weeks  hence.   So  she  could  not  travel  to
    Bangladesh now.  Her child will be a British citizen at  birth.   As  a
    matter of EU law, where a  remaining  spouse  or  child  is  a  British
    citizen and so a citizen of the European Union, it is not  possible  to
    require the family as a unit to relocate outside the European Union  or
    for the Respondent to submit that it would be reasonable for them to do
    so: Sanade and others (British children -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2011]
    UKUT 00048, applying Ruiz Zambrano [2011] ECR 1- 0000 8 March 2011.

30.  Even if none of those considerations applied, the Sponsor  remains  the
    primary carer among her siblings for her  terminally  ill  mother,  who
    could pass away at any time.  She  cannot  reasonably  be  required  to
    leave the UK at this time.

31.  The Appellant has family in Bangladesh who, whatever he says,  will  on
    the balance of probabilities help him and his wife and child.  His wife
    speaks Bengali, even  with  occasional  difficulties,  and  understands
    Urdu.  So at that stage there might not be insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life continuing in Bangladesh.  But, given the making of removal
    directions, the position is to be assessed at the date of the  hearing.
     At that date we find that there are insurmountable obstacles to family
    life between the Appellant and the Sponsor continuing outside the UK.

32.  We accordingly allow the appeal under Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules.   We  need  not  therefore  consider  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which addresses private life.

Determination: Article 8 of the 1950 Convention

33.  That would be the end of the matter, but for this  issue.   As  stated,
    the decision was  made  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  skeleton
    argument of the Appellant and the submissions of both  parties  proceed
    primarily on that basis, with Article 8 as the alternative  submission.
    However disproportionate post-hearing judicial attention to the text of
    the Immigration Rules  has  caused  us  to  question  whether  this  is
    correct.

34.  Appendix FM begins thus:

         "This Appendix applies to applications under this route made on  or
         after 9 July 2012 and to applications under Part 8 as  set  out  in
         the Statement of Changes laid on 13 June 2012 (HC 194),  except  as
         otherwise set out in paragraphs A277-A280."

35.  HC 194 states at the foot of page 1:

         "However, if an application for entry clearance, leave to remain or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the
         application has not been decided, it will be decided in  accordance
         with the rules in force on 8 July 2012."

36.   On  the  complex  chronology  of  this  matter,  there  are  a  number
    candidates for the role of the date of the application.  The latest  is
    8 March 2012, which is referred to in paragraph 1 of the Refusal Letter
    of 18 December 2012  as  the  correspondence  in  which  the  Appellant
    provided additional evidence in support of his Article 8 claim.   These
    two dates span the commencement date of Appendix FM which  was  9  July
    2012, at which date the application had not  been  decided.   So  prima
    facie it fell to be decided in accordance with the immigration rules in
    force before that date.  Since there was no rule specifically in point,
    this means under Article 8, which was the basis of the application.

37.  There is however an exception "as otherwise set out in paragraphs A277-
    A280".  This invokes the transitional  and  interaction  provisions  of
    Part 8 of the Immigration Rules.  To us, these are at first  impression
    impenetrable.  We would not have thought it right to reach  a  decision
    on their application without affording the parties the  opportunity  to
    make representations.

38.  If our analysis is correct, and if  paragraphs  A277-A280  are  not  in
    point, the appeal is to be decided not under the Immigration Rules  but
    under Article 8, involving consideration of the Razgar paradigm  and  a
    proportionality assessment.  We would not otherwise have embarked  upon
    this course, which was not raised at the hearing, without affording the
    parties the opportunity to make written submissions and  to  request  a
    reconvening of the hearing for oral submissions, which  we  would  have
    contemplated.  That would inevitably have protracted an appeal with  an
    already lengthy history.  However we have ultimately concluded that any
    legal error, if such it is, is not material because we would reach  the
    same conclusion on an Article 8 proportionality assessment.  So neither
    party would be either advantaged or disadvantaged, except in  terms  of
    time and cost, by our taking this course of action.  We have  therefore
    decided to determine the appeal on the basis upon which the  Respondent
    decided it and  the  parties  primarily  addressed  it,  which  is  the
    Immigration Rules.

39.  Without the benefit of argument on the issue, we recognise that we  may
    be wrong.  In the normal way we would not be required to proceed  to  a
    freestanding Article 8 proportionality assessment: Green (Article  8  -
    new Rules) [2013] UKUT 00254 (IAC).  On this occasion, however,  we  do
    so,  taking  into  account  the   alternative   submissions   of   both
    representatives and  the  skeleton  argument  of  the  Appellant  about
    Article 8.

40.  We find, as a mixed question of fact and law, the existence  of  family
    life between the Appellant, his wife and their unborn child.  Answering
    the other Razgar questions  affirmatively,  we  address  the  issue  of
    proportionality.

41.  Significant weight is to be attached to the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control, and it is difficult for  an  appellant  without  a
    claim to remain under the Immigration Rules to outweigh its  impact  by
    establishing an entitlement to remain  under  Article  8:  LK  (Serbia)
    [2007]  EWCA   Civ   1554.    An   even-handed   application   of   the
    proportionality test is likely in most cases to  result  in  a  finding
    that removal is proportionate:  KR  (Iraq)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  514;  WB
    (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 215.

42.  A balanced judgement is required in the light of all  of  the  material
    facts whether a family member can reasonably be expected to  follow  an
    appellant to the country of  removal:  Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40;  EB
    (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.  As stated, this is  not  arguable  where,  as
    here, the Sponsor and her awaited child are British  citizens:  Sanade.
    Whether interference with family rights is justified in  the  interests
    of controlling immigration will depend on the facts of  the  particular
    case: Mahmood [2001] IAR 229, CA.

43.  The Appellant has  an  extremely  poor  and  opportunistic  immigration
    history.  Arriving at the age of 17, he discovered soon enough,  if  he
    did not already know, that he had no lawful basis to enter or remain in
    the UK.  It took him six and a half years  to  reach  the  decision  to
    apply for leave to remain.  Thereafter his application took on  a  life
    of its own.  He writes at paragraphs 6 and 7 of his statement that  his
    attraction to the Sponsor was genuine, as was hers  for  him;  she  too
    said that she did not marry him to assist his immigration status.   His
    marriage, the awaited child and his  mother-in-law's  health  situation
    has transformed what would otherwise have been a forlorn claim.

44.  At the same time the Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    EX.1 of the Immigration Rules.  As the Refusal Letter says at paragraph
    13, this was agreed in Parliament, and represents the level at which as
    a matter of public policy the Respondent  sets  the  bar.   Ironically,
    perhaps, from the point of view  of  the  Respondent,  the  Appellant's
    negative immigration history is thereby neutralised under Appendix FM.

45.  We have discussed the personal circumstances of the Appellant  and  his
    wife and the reasons for finding  that  they  represent  insurmountable
    obstacles to their continuing their family life outside the  UK.   They
    are  correspondingly  applicable  in  an  Article   8   proportionality
    assessment.

46.  If it is in law correct to determine the appeal under Article 8 of  the
    1950 Convention, we conclude that the public interest is satisfied,  in
    the Appellant's favour, if it is confined to  the  ambit  of  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules and is significant, in the
    Respondent's favour, if  it  extends  to  the  Appellant's  immigration
    history.  Even if it does, however, we conclude that it  is  outweighed
    by the circumstances at the date of the hearing of  the  Appellant  and
    his wife, whose interests fall for consideration along  with  his.   In
    that event we allow the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.

Determination

47.  The original determination contained a material error of  law,  and  is
    set aside.

48.  We allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

49.  In the legal alternative, we  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8  human
    rights grounds.

50.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                                                Dated:
                             2013




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
