
[pic]
IAC-fH-ar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01822/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 16 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARK HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 AHSAN KHAN
                          (No AnONymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Khan, Britain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought on behalf of Ahsan  Khan  in  relation  to  a
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  10
    December 2014.  This matter has been before the Upper  Tribunal  on  an
    earlier occasion.  It was heard by Lord Mathews  sitting  as  an  Upper
    Tribunal Judge and Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G MacDonald  on  13  May
    2015 and adjourned it, giving permission  to  the  appellant  to  lodge
    further grounds of appeal within fourteen days,  which  has  been  done
    together with a bundle of supporting documentation.

2.   Paragraph 3 of the Upper  Tribunal's  Decision  and  Reasons  reads  as
    follows:

         "Before us Mr Khan moved to amend the grounds  to  include  in  the
         grounds that there was a material error in  fact  amounting  to  an
         error in law based on a misconception or misrepresentation  of  the
         evidence.  We have looked at the note of proceedings and it may  be
         there is some room for that suggestion but we are unable to see  at
         the moment whether there is an error or not.  If Mr Khan's position
         is correct then it would appear that the appellant was not involved
         in the withdrawal of the CAS.  If the position was that he did  not
         pay the fees demanded by  the  college  then  he  would  have  been
         involved in the withdrawal of the CAS and the guidance on which  Mr
         Khan relies would not avail him."

3.   The amended grounds of appeal were served under cover of a letter  from
    Britain Solicitors dated 9 June 2015 and they set out a history dealing
    with a number of CAS letters issued by several institutions.  The  only
    one which is material for today is that  issued  by  Bradford  Regional
    College in support of an application to the  Home  Office  for  Tier  4
    leave to remain.  The grounds of appeal seek to set  out  a  chronology
    suggesting that a dispute in relation to  the  charging  of  additional
    fees arose only after the CAS had been withdrawn and  it  was  on  that
    basis that Mr Khan was to advance the appeal before  me  today.  But  I
    must bear fully in mind that grounds of appeal like skeleton  arguments
    do not contain evidence but merely comment on evidence by lawyers.

4.   The question for me is whether there is evidence  that  this  appellant
    was involved in the withdrawal of the CAS.  Mr Clark has  taken  me  to
    the Determination and Reasons of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  note
    that Mr Khan represented the appellant on that occasion as well. He has
    very fairly and very properly made forceful representations but has not
    crossed the line of giving evidence himself as to what may or  may  not
    have been said on that occasion.

5.   The salient part of that earlier determination appears at paragraph  12
    which reads as follows:

         "The appellant said in response to supplementary questions that  he
         had originally entered the country on 16 January.  He  referred  to
         the CAS issued by  Bradford  Regional  College.   Subsequently  the
         institution demanded extra fees which he did not pay. The  CAS  was
         then withdrawn."

6.   It is clear to me that that is a recital  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge of the oral testimony given  by  the  appellant  in  response  to
    supplementary questions.  That response makes it abundantly plain  that
    the appellant was indeed involved, on his own admission,  in  an  issue
    concerning fees which led to the withdrawal of the CAS.  That being so,
    the observations made in relation to the policy guidance, which is  the
    only substantive error of law advanced by the appellant,  can  have  no
    application.

7.   Mr Khan with great politeness and  great  perseverance  has  sought  to
    inform me that those four lines do  not  accurately  reflect  what  was
    said.  It is in contradistinction  with  paragraph  5  of  the  witness
    statement dated 20 February signed by the Appellant with a statement of
    truth and placed before the First-tier Tribunal on that  occasion.   It
    is far from unusual for witnesses to give oral testimony which diverges
    from and contradicts what is in a witness  statement.   Often  what  is
    said orally is more persuasive because it is focused on  responding  to
    particular questions raised either by legal representatives or  by  the
    Tribunal of its own motion.

8.   When this matter was last before the Upper Tribunal it  is  clear  that
    Mr Khan sought to maintain this challenge on  the  Appellant's  behalf.
    That is why he was granted the indulgence of an adjournment to  put  in
    revised grounds of appeal and any evidence which would be sufficient to
    make good the assertions he was going to make.

9.   Regrettably, and it would appear by oversight rather  than  by  design,
    Mr Khan has not provided his own note of the  earlier  proceedings  nor
    has the conventional step been taken to obtain a transcript of what was
    heard by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In the absence  of  either  an
    authenticated note or ideally a transcript I have to take at face value
    what is recorded in that determination. The manuscript  record  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was examined by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  last
    occasion and was found to be equivocal  hence  the  adjournment  for  a
    definitive answer.

10.  Mr Khan invited me to adjourn the matter once again which was  objected
    to by Mr  Clark  and  rightly  so.   There  needs  to  be  finality  in
    litigation. Mr Khan was afforded the opportunity by the previous  Upper
    Tribunal panel which heard the matter on 13 May and  has  not  provided
    the material by which I can explore whether there was an error of  fact
    leading to an error of law  sufficient  to  found  an  appeal  in  this
    instance.

11.  That being so, the appeal even as  reconstituted  by  Mr  Khan  in  his
    amended grounds must fail in limine.  It does  not  even  get  off  the
    ground because of the clear evidence derived from the appellant himself
    that he was indeed  involved  in  the  withdrawal  of  the  CAS,  which
    completely undermines the amended grounds.

12.  I bear fully in mind the need to  do  fairness  to  the  parties:  that
    means fairness to the Home Secretary as much as to the  appellant.  One
    adjournment has already been granted to enable a putative appeal to  be
    made good and the appellant through his representative  his  not  taken
    advantage of that.  The interests of justice militate against a further
    adjournment.

13.  Having dismissed the appeal on this preliminary and  fundamental  point
    I am not required to examine the policy guidance and other guidance  in
    relation to Tier 4 claimants which may or may not have been  applicable
    at the time and I make no determination in relation to thereto.

14.  This appeal is therefore dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   N Mark Hill   Date 15 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
