
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA012562015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th February 2016                |On 8th June 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                JUNG OK YOON
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid (for Kothala and Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of Jung Ok Yoon, a citizen of Korea born 27 February
    1977, against the Respondent's decision of 17 December 2014  to  refuse
    her application for further leave to remain as a  student  and  to  set
    removal directions against her under  section  47  of  the  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The appeal having  been  dismissed  by
    the First-tier Tribunal she now appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
    permission.

 2. She was interviewed in the course of her  application's  consideration.
    There she is recorded as having said that she had originally worked  as
    an accounts assistant and book keeper, but then hoped to combine beauty
    therapy  with  health  and  social  care,  before  realising  that  her
    inclination was more towards a genuine office job. There had been legal
    and management elements in her health and social studies as well as  in
    her ACCA course, so there was a close link between them. She  would  be
    able to work in any of these fields if necessary. She hoped  eventually
    to open her salon. If her parents were unwell she would return home  to
    look after them; otherwise she hoped to be a success in finance.

 3. The refusal letter sets  out  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that she genuinely intended to follow her proposed course  of
    studies,  because  her  proposed  course,  to   study   for   an   ACCA
    qualification at Greenwich London  College,  was  thought  inconsistent
    with her previous studies in Facial Massage Skincare and  Body  Therapy
    at the London School of Beauty and Make Up, and Health and Social  Care
    Management and Health, Community and Social Care at  Williams  College.
    Her answers at interview suggested that she lacked any  defined  career
    path and her answers and her application fell to be refused under  Rule
    245ZX(O) because her interview responses and path of studies undermined
    her claim to be a genuine student.

 4. In her witness statement Ms Yoon stated that  she  felt  that  was  not
    permitted  to  fully  answer  the  questions  put  at  interview:   the
    interviewer had repeatedly told her that she had  said  enough  and  at
    once moved onto the next subject. Because English  was  not  her  first
    language, her normal conversational style was  to  slowly  explain  her
    point, but the style of questioning had prevented her  from  so  doing.
    When she first came to the United Kingdom she felt  that  she  had  had
    enough of office work and sought a change of direction,  and  undertook
    studies in different areas. However in time she came to appreciate that
    these courses would not give her any real opportunity to work in Korea,
    particularly given her age which would limit her opportunities in a new
    career. She therefore decided to start her own beauty salon upon return
    to Korea. She believed that learning accountancy would be  very  useful
    to run a successful business, particularly given that she had seen that
    it was those with professional skills who had  survived  the  country's
    recent recessions whilst others failed, and additionally it would  give
    her a fall-back position if her salon plans did not help.

 5. A reference from Heather Jung, Director of JP Lagoon Ltd of  Wimbledon,
    set out that she had employed the Appellant as  an  Accounts  Assistant
    since early April 2015, and she  had  been  a  great  help  with  their
    accounts functions, and they were happy with ACCA study and progression
    which she was keen to complete.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal assessed her evidence and accepted that she had
    worked for an insurance company, dealing with cash  flow,  finance  and
    taxation, in South Korea for 11 years before entering this country. She
    arrived here in June 2006 and had been consistently lawfully present as
    a student. She had additionally worked, for Wasabi Take  Away  for  two
    years, Pret a Manger for a year, Radisson Hotel/Spa for 18  months,  at
    Selfridges in Groom for 18 months, and at  a  beauty  salon,  Wimbledon
    Lagoon for 8 months. She had undertaken various courses  of  study:  in
    English in 2006, Beauty and Makeup in 2008, and subsequently Health and
    Social Care for two and a half years; since then she had begun her ACCA
    studies. She admitted that she had no intention to study when she first
    came here: her objective was to find a safe country in which to reside,
    and she only started to study English with  a  view  to  extending  her
    visa.

 7. Dismissing her appeal on 27 June 2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that, noting that the sole issue pressed before it was whether she  was
    a  genuine  student,  though  accepting  that  in  any  event  she  had
    established some private life here. The  Judge  found  her  explanation
    that the experiences of other students in Health and  Social  Care  put
    her off such a career "unconvincing", and that her reasons for pursuing
    studies for an ACCA qualification  were  not  credible,  that  being  a
    specialised professional  qualification,  were  incompatible  with  any
    "reasonable and sensible view" that her work experience in South  Korea
    adequately equipped her to undertake the  level  of  financial  control
    necessary for a modest economic concern to thrive.

 8. Grounds of appeal alleged that the decision was  inadequately  reasoned
    having regard to MK Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC) as the  reasons  she
    had given for not wishing to  work  in  healthcare  (that  it  was  too
    "emotional" an area for her, and there was a lack of demand  in  Korea)
    had not been addressed. Additionally her evidence given at the  hearing
    that there were many aspects of  managing  a  company  with  which  she
    lacked experience, such as working with suppliers and taking loans, had
    not been challenged.

 9. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to  appeal  on  9  December  2015
    because it was arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  over-
    generalised comments and overlooked  the  Appellant's  bundle,  witness
    statement and her reference from Heather Jung.

Findings and reasons

10. The challenge to the decision below turns squarely on the reasoning  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. As was stated by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MK
    Pakistan:

         "If a tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
         unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,  it  is
         necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to
         be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a  witness  was  not
         believed or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely  to
         satisfy the requirement to give reasons."

11. The relevant Immigration Rule is this:

         "245ZX. Requirements for leave to remain

         To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  under
         this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements listed below. If
         the applicant meets these requirements, leave  to  remain  will  be
         granted. If the applicant does not  meet  these  requirements,  the
         applicant will be refused. ...

         Requirements:

         (o) the Secretary of State must be satisfied that the applicant  is
         a genuine student."

12. This was not a case where the claims made were inherently  implausible.
    It is perfectly possible that a person would wish to pursue studies  in
    accountancy in  order  to  better  equip  themselves  to  run  a  small
    business. That was the Appellant's case as put in her detailed  witness
    statement. It was consistent with the  brief  letter  from  her  beauty
    salon employer. True it may be that the  Appellant  may  have  admitted
    that she was not originally disposed to study when  she  first  arrived
    here, but she has nevertheless pursued a multiple  courses  of  studies
    since then successfully, and been granted leave to remain to do so.

13. It seems to me that the reasoning below is inadequate  to  sustain  the
    ultimate decision to dismiss the appeal. It is not  explained  why  the
    contention that the adverse experiences of other students in the health
    and social care business as recounted to the Appellant discouraged  her
    pursuit of that career path is "unconvincing". I cannot accept that  no
    reasonable Tribunal could conclude that an ACCA qualification would  be
    thought useful by a person wishing to set up a small  business:  it  is
    not  a  lengthy  course,  and  having  basic  accounting  skills  would
    undoubtedly mean  that  she  would  be  able  to  move  between  roles,
    industries and sectors.

14. This is not an appeal where there are meaningful  findings  upon  which
    the Upper Tribunal can build, and thus it is allowed to the extent that
    it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

    Decision:

    Remitted to First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

Signed:     Date: 17 February 2016
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
