
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01170/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 March 2015                     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                              Mr Naheed Kamran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Malik of M Q Hassan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  9
    October  1982,  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kimnell, who sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  13  August  2014  and  in  a
    determination subsequently promulgated on 20 August 2014 dismissed  the
    appeal of the Appellant against the decision of the Respondent dated 19
    November 2013 refusing the grant of  leave  to  enter  under  paragraph
    276CE  with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(iii)  and  (iv)  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had applied for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK on compassionate grounds and under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.
     The grounds contend that the Judge was simply wrong to  consider  that
    the Appellant's removal to Bangladesh was proportionate bearing in mind
    his family relationships in the United Kingdom and that it was wrong to
    find that there were no exceptional circumstances under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR  and  that  the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  exercised
    "appropriate discretion on compassionate grounds".

2.   I pause there because, as properly drawn to my attention by  Mr  Avery,
    this was a case where at the time of the application for permission  to
    appeal, the application itself was lodged some four months out of time,
    yet the First-tier Judge who granted permission to appeal, appeared  to
    have failed to consider  whether  or  not  in  such  circumstances  the
    application should be admitted.  In that regard  I  gave  Mr  Malik  an
    opportunity to explain why the application was lodged so  late  and  he
    referred me to the explanation provided in  the  grounds  and  repeated
    that the  Appellant  had  been  suffering  from  depression  and  grief
    following the death of his mother.  I do not intend to express any view
    on whether in  such  circumstances  there  was  sufficient  information
    provided that would necessarily have persuaded a  First-tier  Judge  to
    extend time, but upon a careful consideration of the First-tier Judge's
    reasoning for granting permission, it is right to say that were  he  to
    have considered whether or not to extend time, he would also  have  had
    to take into account whether or not  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application were arguable.  Clearly he did consider them  arguable  for
    the reasons he gave in the grant of permission.  I have therefore  been
    just persuaded, that although the First-tier  Judge  made  no  specific
    reference to the lateness of the application, that it was  implicit  by
    virtue of his grant of permission that he had decided to  extend  time.
    However, for the avoidance of any doubt, I now extend time.

3.   The submissions raised in support of those  grounds  in  substance  and
    upon analysis, amounted to no more than a repeat of the  evidence  that
    was in my view carefully considered by the First-tier  Judge  and  that
    failed before him.

4.   Whilst it is submitted in substance, that the First-tier  Judge  failed
    to adequately consider the present circumstances, I  find  contrary  to
    that assertion that this is not  borne  out  upon  my  reading  of  the
    determination as a whole.  The Judge records that the Appellant was  at
    the time of his application 29 years old.  He had  spent  26  years  in
    Bangladesh,  his  country  of  origin.   It  was  noted  that,  as  the
    Respondent had pointed out in her refusal letter,  in  the  absence  of
    evidence to the contrary there  was  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
    Appellant had in the five years that he had since been  in  the  United
    Kingdom as opposed to the 26 preceding years  which  he  had  spent  in
    Bangladesh lost ties to his home country.  Indeed the Judge noted  that
    this was particularly borne out by the fact that in the course  of  the
    Appellant's oral evidence before him and in  particular  during  cross-
    examination the Appellant

         "... acknowledged that he has  parents,  a  brother  and  a  sister
         living in Bangladesh to whom he speaks by  telephone  approximately
         monthly.  His sister is married and  lives  separately  from  other
         family members  who  continue  to  reside  in  the  same  home  the
         Appellant occupied when he was  residing  in  Bangladesh  prior  to
         coming to the UK as a student."

5.   It was also noted  that  the  Appellant's  leave  to  remain  had  been
    curtailed on 26 March 2012 and thus when he made his  application  some
    six months later on 28 September 2012, he was without  leave.   It  was
    because the Appellant had made an Article 8 ECHR application  prior  to
    the serving upon him of form IS.151A that he was thus afforded  an  in-
    country right of appeal.

6.    It  was  apparent  to  the  Judge,  having  heard  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's younger sister and his brother-in-law, that  there  was  no
    evidence before him to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  had  established
    elements of dependency  going  beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties  as
    between adults.  As was pointed  out  in  JB  (India)  &  Ors  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer Bombay [2009] EWCA Civ 234, if  such  dependency  was
    not  found  then  an  interference  with  family  life  could  not   be
    established.  In that regard and in the present case,  the  Appellant's
    younger sister in evidence indeed confirmed the Appellant's account  on
    his family situation in Bangladesh.  The Judge  accepted  the  evidence
    that the Appellant saw his sister and  her  husband  and  her  children
    weekly and that they maintained contact by telephone and  that  he  had
    lived with an aunt and subsequently with an uncle, but found that  such
    evidence did not suggest the existence of a relationship  going  beyond
    the normal emotional ties as between adults.

7.   I  pause  there,  because  Mr  Malik  in  his  submissions  before  me,
    maintained that the Judge in his determination had failed  to  consider
    the best interests  of  his  sister's  children.   They  were  not  the
    Appellant's children, they were his nephews and  it  had  already  been
    determined that the Appellant had failed to  establish  ties  with  his
    adult siblings above and beyond the norm such as  to  establish  family
    life and that the Appellant's nephews lived in the family home  of  his
    sister and her husband as a family unit.

8.   As Mr Avery rightly submitted, the Article 8  argument  was  "hopeless"
    and the sum total of the case based on weekly visits by  the  Appellant
    to his nephews in seeking to establish  a  "strong"  Article  8  claim,
    reinforced his view.

9.   In any event it is right to say (and  in  fairness  Mr  Malik  accepted
    that to be so) that in the drafting of the grounds in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal, there was no  specific  challenge
    based on the premise that the Judge had failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the children other than at paragraph 7 in which there  was
    reference to the fact that the Appellant had treated his nephews as his
    own children since their birth.  To that I would observe that no  doubt
    the Appellant's parents treated  their  children  as  their  own.   The
    relationship of the Appellant with the children was that of  uncle  and
    nephews, not father and sons.  In addition it was said at  paragraph  7
    of the grounds that the children  had  been  greatly  attached  to  the
    Appellant.  Whilst that is perfectly understandable it is hard  to  see
    how it can be maintained that the removal of the  Appellant  would,  as
    was put in the grounds, "interfere with the status quo of the  children
    and would not be in the best interests of the children".

10.  The Judge proceeded to acknowledge that the Immigration Rules

         "... now  specifically  cater  for  Article  8  and  following  the
         decision in Gulshan, which drew on other authorities, it  is  clear
         that it is only if  there  is  some  compelling  reason  justifying
         consideration of Article 8 outside  the  Rules  that  the  Tribunal
         should go on to do so.  I find nothing compelling about  this  case
         even on the basis of the facts that I have accepted."

11.  The Judge continued over paragraphs 31 to 34 of his  determination,  to
    set out his reasoning as to why he had concluded that Article 8 was not
    engaged at all, and it would be as  well  to  set  out  that  reasoning
    below:

         "31. The Immigration Rules now specifically  cater  for  Article  8
             ECHR and following the decision  in  Gulshan,  which  drew  on
             other authorities, it is clear that it is  only  if  there  is
             some compelling reason justifying consideration of  Article  8
             outside the Rules that the Tribunal should go on to do so.   I
             find nothing compelling about this case even on the  basis  of
             the facts I have accepted.  The Appellant's parents  may  have
             had high aspirations for him but he is not  going  to  achieve
             those aspirations even if he remains in  the  United  Kingdom.
             The Appellant says in his witness statement he has been in the
             UK for five years now and established a  life  in  the  UK  to
             which  he  has  become  accustomed  and  that  he  has  formed
             relationships here which are closer than he  could  expect  in
             Bangladesh.  I do not accept that because  the  Appellant  has
             siblings  and  his  parents  residing  in   Bangladesh.    The
             Appellant came to the United Kingdom as a student and  he  has
             had the opportunity to study.  The fact that he was unable  to
             complete his studies is frustrating for him and  disappointing
             but Article 8 ECHR is not going to change that position.

         32.  The Appellant has close family in Bangladesh  and  speaks  the
             language prevailing in that country.  He gave his evidence  in
             Bengali Sylheti at the hearing.  The Appellant spent the major
             part of his life in Bangladesh before  coming  to  the  United
             Kingdom, has been in the UK  for  a  specific  purpose  for  a
             relatively short time and whilst that may  form  part  of  his
             private life it does not amount to family life given  that  he
             is himself over the age of 18 and there is no  special  degree
             of dependency.

         33.  My primary conclusion therefore  is  that  Article  8  is  not
             engaged outside the Immigration  Rules  but,  if  it  is,  the
             interference caused by the decision to remove him is  minimal.
             There is no employment or education that would be interrupted,
             the Appellant owns no  property  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
             whilst he has ties developed with adult relatives and with his
             sister's children whilst he has been in the United Kingdom, he
             has other close family members to  return  to  in  Bangladesh.
             Assuming that removal amounts to interference the decision  is
             undoubtedly in accordance with the law and  in  pursuit  of  a
             legitimate aim and considerable weight is to  be  attached  to
             public interest in maintaining immigration controls.  That  is
             now a matter of primary  legislation  in  Section  19  of  the
             Immigration Act 2014 but it was always  so  even  before  that
             legislation was enacted.

         34.  If it were to come to a Razgar  balancing  exercise,  weighing
             the Appellant's  private  life  rights  and  those  of  others
             affected, his uncle (who did not give evidence),  his  sister,
             his  brother-in-law  and  his  sister's  children   and   even
             acknowledging that his parents in Bangladesh may be shocked to
             find that their aspirations for their son have not  been  met,
             weighing those considerations against the national interest in
             maintaining immigration controls the balance falls very firmly
             on the public interest side.

         35.  My conclusion therefore is that Article 8 ECHR is not  engaged
             at all, but that even if it is, the  decision  to  remove  the
             Appellant is not disproportionate." (Emphasis added).

12.  One can see from the above reasoning that at all  times  the  situation
    as it related to the Appellant's nephews was fully taken  into  account
    by the First-tier Judge.

13.  Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 I find that it cannot be  said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings were irrational and/or Wednesbury unreasonable such as
    to amount to perversity.  It cannot be said that they were  inadequate.
    This is not a case where the First-tier Judge's reasoning was such that
    the Tribunal was unable to understand the  thought  processes  that  he
    employed in reaching his decision.

14.  In making that observation and finding, I bear in mind that  it  was  a
    submission of Mr Malik that he appeared to derive from the reasoning of
    the First-tier Judge who granted permission, that the reasoning of  the
    First-tier Judge was somehow or other out  of  chronology.   It  is  of
    course, as I am reminded, a case of looking at  the  reasoning  of  the
    Judge as a whole within his determination, and whilst it may not be  to
    the liking of the losing party, so long as it adequately tells him  why
    the appeal has been lost then it cannot be criticised.

15.  I find that the Judge properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters
    that he considered to be critical  to  his  decision  on  the  material
    issues raised before him in this appeal.  The  findings  that  he  made
    were clearly open to him on the evidence and thus sustainable  in  law.
    I find that the Appellant's challenge to  his  decision  is  both  upon
    analysis and substance no more than an attempt to re-open  the  Judge's
    sustainable findings of fact in an attempt to reargue them  before  the
    Tribunal, and as such they fail to disclose even an arguable  error  of
    law.

Decision

16.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 9 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

