
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01256/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19 August 2013                               |On 27 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Mr SHAIKH MAJID RASHID
                            (no anonymity order)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss L Baines, Counsel, instructed by Jacobs
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1.  The  Secretary  of  State  appeals   with   permission   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles who on  26  June  2013
    allowed the claimant's appeal against the  her  decision  taken  on  24
    September 2012 to refuse him further leave to remain under the  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) provisions of paragraph 245Z and Appendix  A  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  For clarity,  I  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State, who is the appellant in this application,  as  'the
    Secretary of State' and the appellant below as 'the claimant'.

 2. The Secretary of State refused to award the claimant the points claimed
    for his qualification,  which  was  not  issued  by  the  date  of  his
    application in April 2012 and indeed, not  until  6  July  2012.    The
    requirement in Appendix A of the Rules as they stood before  July  2012
    was  that  the  claimant  had  to  have  been  awarded   the   eligible
    qualification "no more than twelve  months  before  the  date  of  your
    application". Miss Baines told me that, like many of her  clients,  the
    claimant made his application before the qualification  was  available,
    because  the  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  category  was  about  to  be
    abolished, and was in fact abolished, on 6 April  2012.   There  is  no
    issue about maintenance or any  of  the  other  requirements,  but  the
    absence of his qualification left the claimant 15 points short  of  the
    points required by paragraph 245Z and Appendix A and was the basis  for
    the refusal of his application.

 3. The Secretary of  State  also  made  a  removal  direction  under  s.47
    Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.   That  direction  was
    withdrawn at the hearing, in the light of the Upper Tribunal's decision
    in  Adamally  and  Jaferi  (section  47  removal  decisions:   Tribunal
    Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC).

First-tier Tribunal determination

 4. The appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on  17  June  2013  and
    promulgated on 26 June 2013.   Following  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Khatel and others (s85A; effect of continuing  application)
    Nepal [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC) and  the  Secretary  of  State's  evidential
    flexibility policy, the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  that  the
    effective date of the application could be extended to include the date
    of the issue of that qualification and allowed the appeal.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal determination made no reference to the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Raju
    and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 754, published on 25 June  2013,  which  had
    overturned  Patel,  and  which  was  published  the  day   before   the
    determination was promulgated.

Permission to appeal

 5. The Secretary of  State  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  Raju
    grounds.  She argued that the Tribunal had misdirected  itself  in  its
    approach to the Tier 1 assessment in the light of the decision in  Raju
    and that had the Immigration Rules been applied as set out in the Court
    of Appeal's decision in Raju the appeal would have been dismissed. That
    being  so  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   misdirection   was   material.
    Permission to appeal was granted on that basis.









Upper Tribunal hearing

 6. For the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Tufan  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination was wrong, following the  observations  by  Lord
    Justice Moses in Raju,  at paragraph [24]:

         "24. An application is made when paragraph 34G says it is made. The
         Secretary of State  at  the  date  of  her  decision  assesses  the
         evidence which determines whether the appellant's leave  to  remain
         as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant has  accumulated  75  points.
         Whether that evidence was assessed by the  Secretary  of  State  or
         even later by a Tribunal,  these  applicants  could  not  score  75
         points  because  they  had  made  their  applications  before  they
         obtained their qualifications.   On  a  true  construction  of  the
         relevant Rule ... they could not score the 15 points  they  needed.
         No subsequently obtained evidence could cure that defect.  AQ  does
         not assist these respondents."

 7. He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal determination  was  wrong  in
    law and that I should substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.

 8. For the claimant, I received a  skeleton  argument  from  Miss  Baines,
    served on the morning of  the  hearing.   I  have  had  regard  to  its
    contents and to her oral submissions.  The  claimant  relied  upon  the
    decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department v S&K (Croatia) CG [2002] UKIAT  05613*,  paragraph
    [20], which says, in connection with an asylum claim, that the decision
    under appeal is to be regarded as being maintained at the date  of  the
    hearing.  However asylum applications are always assessed at  the  date
    of hearing, whereas immigration applications are assessed at  the  date
    of application.  S&K's case does  not  assist  the  claimant  in  these
    proceedings.

 9. Miss Baines argued that following the Court of Appeal decision in  2009
    in JH (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 78, paragraph [20], it was  necessary  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to  notify  the  claimant  of  her  failure  to  submit  required
    documents under 12(1B) of  the  2003  Regulations  before  treating  an
    application as invalid.  The difficulty  with  that  case  is  that  it
    significantly predates the present version of the Rules  and  also  the
    version of  the  Rules  considered  when  this  application  was  made.
    Furthermore this is not a situation where the claimant failed to supply
    to the Secretary of State relevant documents which were in existence.

10. Miss Baines asked me to uphold the positive decision made by the First-
    tier Tribunal and dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

Discussion

11. This  is  a  case  where  on  the  date  when  the  claimant  made  his
    application, the documents evidencing a required qualification did  not
    exist and could not have been produced, because he  had  not  yet  been
    awarded that qualification. By the time they did exist and  could  have
    been produced, the Tier 1 (Post-study) Migrant category  for  which  he
    wished to apply was no longer in existence.

12. The primary point therefore is that on the date of his application,  30
    March 2012, although he was entitled to 60 of the required  75  points,
    the claimant lacked the qualification which would have  given  him  the
    additional 15 points.  Following Raju, that is the only  relevant  date
    for the purpose of calculating the required 75 points for the  category
    of Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant.

13. By the date to which the First-tier Tribunal erroneously  extended  his
    application, a date on or after 6 July 2012, or possibly  the  date  of
    decision, 24 September 2012, although the  claimant  had  the  required
    qualification, the category for which he  wished  to  apply  no  longer
    existed.   He had not  met  the  points  requirement  at  the  date  of
    application and that was an end of the matter.

14. There is therefore a material error in the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge which I hereby set aside.  I substitute a  decision
    dismissing the appeal.

Conclusion

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  There  is
nothing in the material before me to suggest that anonymity is  required  in
these proceedings.


Date                   Signed


                                                 Judith Gleeson
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



