
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01009/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 May 2019                       |On 20 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum
                     Upper Tribunal judge sTEPHEN smith


                                   Between

                                     NM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adewoye of Prime Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is  a  remade  decision  following  the  identification  of  a
        material error on a point of law in the decision of  Judge  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal A.M.S. Green (the  judge),  promulgated  on  21
        June  2017,  dismissing  the   appellant's   appeal   against   the
        respondent's decision dated 5 February 2016 refusing her Article  8
        human rights claim.




   Background

     2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born in 1982. She  entered
        the UK as a student on 6 June 2012 with leave valid  to  15  August
        2013, although her leave was subsequently curtailed to  end  on  29
        July 2013. In 2012 she  formed  a  relationship  with  QI,  also  a
        citizen of Pakistan, and they had a child, AK, born in  July  2013.
        There is no clear evidence as to how long QI has resided in the UK.
        A decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing an appeal  brought
        by QI against a refusal to grant him leave to  remain,  promulgated
        on 30 November 2018, referred to his residence in the UK since  May
        2000, but in his statement dated 15 March  2019  he  said  he  last
        arrived  in  the  UK  in  2006.  He  was  sentenced  to  15  months
        imprisonment on 6 August 2006, but had been  granted  Discretionary
        Leave to Remain between 2011 and  2014,  although  he  was  refused
        leave to remain on 19 February 2018.  At  the  time  the  appellant
        formed a relationship with QI he was  residing  with  Discretionary
        leave.

     3.  Following  the  expiry  of  her  leave  the  appellant  made   two
        applications for leave to remain based on her  private  and  family
        life, but these were refused. A further application was made on  17
        July 2014 under the 10-year route contained in Appendix FM  of  the
        immigration rules.

     4. The respondent refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
        appellant failed to meet the Suitability requirements  because  she
        used a proxy tester in respect of an English-language test overseen
        by Educational Testing Services (ETS). Nor did the  appellant  meet
        the Eligibility  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  because
        neither she nor QI, nor her  daughter  were  British  citizens,  or
        settled in the UK, or in the UK with refugee leave or  Humanitarian
        Protection. Nor was the respondent satisfied there  would  be  very
        significant obstacles to the appellant's return to  Pakistan  under
        paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

     5. In considering whether there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances
        such as to entitle the appellant to a  grant  of  leave  to  remain
        outside the immigration rules on Article 8 grounds, the  respondent
        noted that the appellant's relationship with QI  commenced  in  the
        knowledge that her immigration status was precarious  and  that  it
        was open to her to return to Pakistan and  apply  for  the  correct
        entry clearance if she chose to do so.  The  respondent  noted  the
        appellant's claim that QI had contact with  H,  his  child  from  a
        previous relationship born in 2004, but concluded that the  refusal
        of the application did not oblige QI "and children"  to  leave  the
        UK. The respondent noted the appellant's claim to fear  her  family
        in  Pakistan  because  of  her  relationship  with   QI   and   the
        circumstances of the birth of their child but  indicated  that,  if
        the appellant was in fear of her life,  this  would  constitute  an
        asylum or Article 3 application and had to be made in person at  an
        Asylum Screening Unit. The appellant exercised her right of  appeal
        pursuant to s.82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002 (the 2002 Act).





The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     6. The appellant produced a bundle of documents for her appeal  before
        the First-tier Tribunal included statements from her and QI, a copy
        of H's birth certificate, and a copy of the  Contact  Order  issued
        under Section 8 of the Children Act  1989  by  the  Romford  County
        Court relating to QI's  contact  with  H.  The  statement  from  QI
        confirmed that H was his British citizen child, born  in  2004.  No
        issue arose at the remade hearing as to H's nationality. H  resided
        with her biological mother (QI's ex-wife, SP) but  he  had  regular
        contact with H pursuant to the Contact  Order.  There  was  also  a
        statement from SP signed and dated 29 July 2017, and a copy of  her
        British passport.

     7. In their oral evidence  before  the  judge  the  appellant  and  QI
        claimed that he had a very  close  relationship  with  H,  that  he
        financially supported her by way of child support, and that he  was
        currently awaiting a decision in respect  of  his  application  for
        further leave to remain, which was based on his  relationship  with
        H. This evidence was supported by a statement from QI's ex-wife. QI
        said that he could not relocate to  Pakistan  as  we  saw  H  every
        weekend.

     8. The judge was not satisfied that the respondent had discharged  the
        burden of proof in demonstrating that the appellant  used  a  proxy
        tester for her English language  certificate.  There  has  been  no
        challenge to this finding and this was confirmed by the  Presenting
        Officer at the 'error of law' hearing. Mr Whitwell did not seek  to
        reopen this aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's findings.

     9. The judge accepted that the appellant had family life with  QI  and
        AK, and that there was "some family life" between the appellant and
        H. The judge noted that H lived with her mother, and reference  was
        made to the Contact Order regulating QI's contact with H. The judge
        found that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  EX.1
        because of QI's immigration status (he only had  limited  leave  to
        remain), and that, pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), there  were
        no 'very significant obstacles' to her integration in Pakistan. The
        judge was not satisfied  there  were  compelling  circumstances  to
        allow the appeal outside the immigration rules  and  dismissed  the
        appeal on human rights grounds.



The making of an error on a point of law

    10. The grounds upon which the appellant sought permission to appeal to
        the Upper Tribunal lacked adequate focus  and  variously  contended
        that the judge erred in his assessment of the  appellant's  private
        life, that the judge  failed  to  exercise  anxious  scrutiny  when
        assessing, inter alia, QI's relationship with his  British  citizen
        daughter, that the  judge's  decision  was  based  on  "conjecture,
        biasedness, and unfairness", that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
        that, if returned to Pakistan, the appellant's parents  would  kill
        her, and that the judge failed to consider the  best  interests  of
        the children.

    11. The grant of permission to appeal by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal was equally lacking in focus. The First-tier Tribunal  was
        however clearly  concerned  by  the  judge's  failure  to  consider
        article 8 outside of the immigration rules. The First-tier Tribunal
        also granted permission in respect of the failure by the  judge  to
        'factor in' the appellant's claimed fear of return to Pakistan.  We
        pause at this point to observe that  no  protection  or  Article  3
        claim has ever been made by the appellant  and  that  it  would  be
        entirely inappropriate for an appeal on protection  grounds  to  be
        entertained by the backdoor.

    12. At the outset of the 'error of  law'  hearing  the  Upper  Tribunal
        indicated to both parties its concern that there  was  no  adequate
        assessment of the  impact  of  the  decision  on  the  relationship
        between QI and his daughter H, or between AK and H, and that  there
        was no assessment of H's  best  interests.  If  the  appellant  was
        required to return to Pakistan with her daughter, QI  would  either
        have to remain in the UK in order to maintain his relationship with
        H, or he would have to relocate to Pakistan with the appellant  and
        AK in order to maintain the integrity of his immediate family unit,
        which was likely to have a profound impact on his relationship with
        H (and her relationship with her biological father). Mr Avery,  the
        Presenting Officer at the 'error of  law'  hearing,  indicated  his
        broad agreement, as did Mr Adewoye. The Upper Tribunal indicated to
        both representatives that it was satisfied the  decision  contained
        an error on point of law requiring it to be set aside, and that the
        Upper Tribunal would remake it at a further hearing to  enable  the
        parties to provide further evidence of QI's relationship with H and
        the consequences for that relationship and QI's  relationship  with
        the appellant if she had to return to Pakistan without  him.  In  a
        decision promulgated and sent to the parties on  20  November  2018
        the Upper Tribunal gave detailed findings for its decision.



Further evidence served for the hearing to remake the decision

    13. The appellant provided a further bundle of documents running to 140
        pages. This included, inter  alia,  a  skeleton  argument,  further
        statements from the appellant and QI, a Child Support Agency letter
        dated 26 May 2017 addressed to QI relating  to  child  maintenance,
        some medical documents relating  to  both  the  appellant  and  QI,
        letters from  H's  school  confirming  that  QI  was  an  emergency
        contact, and photographs of  QI,  H  and  AK.  The  further  bundle
        additionally contained an Independent Social  Worker  (ISW)  report
        prepared by Cynthia Kelchure-Cole and date 15 March 2019.

    14. The ISW observed AK and  H  interacting  with  each  other  at  the
        appellant's family home, and the interaction between QI and H.  The
        ISW did not formally interview H "... due to the fact that  she  is
        unaware her father, stepmother and sister's risk  of  deportation."
        The appellant and QI  expressed  concerns  to  the  ISW  about  H's
        emotional well-being as they felt she had experienced trauma during
        her parents' divorce and had been emotionally  upset  when  contact
        was lost with her father until the  conclusion  of  the  Section  8
        Family Court Proceedings.

    15. The social worker wrongly stated, at 6.1, that H was 16 years  old.
        She also wrongly stated, at 4.2, that H was 15 years old. H was  in
        fact 14 years and 5 months old at the date of the ISW's report. The
        ISW stated that H has regular contact with  her  father  and  half-
        sister, although the source for this assertion is  not  identified.
        QI told the ISW that his contact with H was more flexible than that
        noted in the Family Court Order and that if  H's  mother  was,  for
        example, unable to take  her  to  an  activity  either  he  or  the
        appellant would do so. The ISW observed H approaching the appellant
        and giving her a hug and kissing each other. This suggested that  H
        was familiar with the appellant and AK.

    16. H informed the ISW that she had a good  relationship  with  AK  and
        that H enjoyed spending time with everyone at her father's home.  H
        told the ISW that she got on well  with  the  appellant,  whom  she
        called "auntie". The ISW observed H and AK to  have  an  "affective
        attachment" (an emotional connectedness). According to the  ISW,  H
        and AK  had  an  "exceptional  sister  to  sister  bond,  and  that
        separation would cause them more  than  the  expected  distress  of
        separation, the separation could  lead  to  challenges  with  their
        mental well-being for each child." The  ISW  found  that  H  had  a
        secure  relationship  with  QI.  The  ISW  referred   to   research
        indicating that separation of a  child  from  one  of  his  or  her
        parents can lead to feelings  of  abandonment  and  generate  trust
        issues, and that  parental  accessibility  was  important  for  the
        development of social, emotional  and  behavioural  functioning  of
        children. In her professional opinion the ISW found that separation
        of the family  may  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  social  and
        emotional well-being of both H and AK.

    17. In her statement dated 15 March 2019 the appellant said that QI had
        Discretionary Leave to Remain in the UK and  was  hopeful  that  he
        would  soon  be  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  (this  was
        inaccurate as QI had not applied  for  ILR  but  only  a  grant  of
        further leave to remain, but the inaccuracy has no material bearing
        on our decision). An application lodged by QI for leave  to  remain
        was refused on 19 February 2018 and an  appeal  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal was dismissed on 30 November 2018.  QI  had  been  granted
        permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and an  'error  of  law'
        hearing took place on 12 March 2019.

    18. In a decision promulgated on 25 March 2019 Dr H H Storey, Judge  of
        the Upper Tribunal,  allowed  QI's  appeal.  Dr  Storey  noted  the
        acceptance by the Secretary of State that  QI  had  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship with H. Having found an error on a point of
        law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision, Dr  Storey  re-made  the
        decision concluding that QI satisfied the requirements of s.117B(6)
        of the 2002 Act. Dr Storey found it was not reasonable to expect  H
        to  leave  the  UK,  and  as  QI  had  a  genuine  and   subsisting
        relationship with  H,  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  human  rights
        grounds. Dr Storey did however state,

             "I would point out that, had I not felt bound  by  the  proper
             statutory construction of Section 117B(6) to apply it  and  so
             then be engaged in an unvarnished  proportionality  assessment
             outside  the  Rules,  I  would  have   reached   a   different
             conclusion. The  proportionality  assessment  outside  Section
             117B(6) pointed strongly against [QI]. His immigration  status
             was precarious. He had a criminal conviction  and  a  fifteen-
             month custodial  sentence  imposed  in  September  2006  which
             although now over 13 years ago  is  a  factor  pointing  to  a
             public interest in  his  departure.  Although  the  respondent
             accepted that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with the  child,  on  the  judge's  findings  the
             contents of this relationship was thin. There was a dearth  of
             evidence  relating  to   the   appellant's   personal   family
             circumstances with his present wife NM. But  for  the  Section
             117B(6) issue therefore I would have concluded that the  judge
             had sound reasons for concluding that the appellant could  not
             succeed on the basis of Article 8 outside the Rules."

    19. At the hearing further letters from AK's school (a  Jewish  Primary
        School) were provided, as well as  a  further  statement  from  SP,
        dated 20 March 2019 in  which  she  outlined  the  regular  contact
        between QI and H, and confirmed the relationship between H and  AK.
        SP additionally confirmed that she received �120 every  month  from
        QI as child maintenance. Several certificates relating to  AK  were
        provided, as was an  article  relating  to  a  Jewish  resident  of
        Pakistan and another article on  Pakistan's  blasphemy  laws.  Also
        provided were extracts from a Country Report on Pakistan issued  by
        the Asylum Research Centre in June 2018.  Mr  Whitwell  provided  a
        police printout of a PNC record relating to QI  indicating  that  a
        Domestic Violence Protection Notice (DVPN) was  served  on  him  at
        Romford Police Station on  1  July  2018.  It  prohibited  QI  from
        molesting the appellant or entering the address  provided  by  both
        him and the appellant, and it prohibited  him  from  requiring  the
        appellant to leave that address. The start date of  the  order  was
        '20/07/18', and the end date was '20/07/21'.



The hearing

    20. We summarise the salient features of the statements upon which  the
        appellant and QI relied, and their oral evidence. In her  statement
        the appellant described H being like her "1st child" and  confirmed
        that QI had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  H.  She
        described her estrangement from her family in Pakistan  because  of
        her relationship with QI and claimed to fear them  on  return.  She
        described H and AK as having a "special bond" and that she  and  AK
        would see H regularly and frequently. The appellant feared that her
        removal would be very upsetting for H and that it  would  break  up
        the established relationship between H and AK. She described how QI
        financially supported H and how they loved each  other.  He  had  a
        shop in Ilford selling and fitting tyres. The appellant believed it
        would be difficult for AK to enrolled in a school  in  Pakistan  as
        she was attending a Jewish school in the UK. There was no guarantee
        that H would be allowed to visit QI and  AK  in  Pakistan  and  the
        fares would be unaffordable. The appellant maintained that she  had
        committed no crime in the UK.

    21. In her oral evidence the appellant confirmed that the  police  were
        called to an incident at the family home on 1 July 2018, and  that,
        as a consequence, QI was banned from the family home for  4  weeks.
        She did not believe she was at any risk of harm from  QI  now.  The
        appellant confirmed the strong relationships between  her  and  QI,
        between QI and  H,  and  between  H  and  AK.  The  appellant  also
        confirmed that she had a strong relationship with H. The  appellant
        further described her concern for AK's safety if  it  became  known
        that she attended a Jewish school in the UK. The appellant believed
        that, in order to enrol AK in a Pakistani school she would need  to
        disclose AK's previous school records. The appellant confirmed that
        she was not legally married to QI.

    22. In cross-examination, and with reference to a letter dated  17  May
        2017 issued by the  Homerton  University  Hospital,  the  appellant
        explained that a reference to her having  a  "previous  history  of
        domestic violence" related to an incident where QI tightly held her
        jaw during an argument when she was pregnant.  It  was  because  of
        this previous incident that the  DVPN  was  issued.  The  appellant
        described receiving a phone call from the police or a court shortly
        before the DVPN expired enquiring whether she wanted to pursue  the
        DVPN, and she answered in the negative.  The  appellant  could  not
        remember what the argument on 1 July 2018 was about.  Having  given
        several reasons why AK had enrolled in a Jewish primary school  the
        appellant claimed to see H every weekend as well as  the  holidays.
        She also sometimes saw H during the week, and  H  sometimes  stayed
        overnight. H's mother was trusting, and  H  would  come  on  family
        outings whenever she wanted to.

    23. In his statement  QI  confirmed  that  he  was  in  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship with the appellant  and  that  they  had  a
        child, AK, born in July 2013. He confirmed that he loved  both  his
        children and that he was "very instrumental to  their  well-being."
        If the appellant's application was refused this  would  affect  the
        welfare of his children. He claimed to have been away from Pakistan
        for close to 13 years, had no support structure  in  that  country,
        and he had a brother in the UK. In oral evidence he confirmed  that
        he was not allowed to enter the family home or weeks in  accordance
        with the DVPN. He could not remember what the argument in 2018  was
        about. There had been no further arguments since the imposition  of
        the DVPN. QI denied threatening the appellant in order for  her  to
        write her statement, and he denied her to come to the Tribunal.  He
        confirmed that he had never been charged with an  offence  relating
        to domestic violence. If the  appellant  was  unsuccessful  in  her
        appeal he would not relocate with her to Pakistan  as  he  had  his
        daughter, H, in the UK, whom he saw every week, and sometimes twice
        a week. He and  H  had  a  strong  attachment  to  each  other.  QI
        described the relationship between the appellant and H, and AK  and
        H as being very strong. QI expressed concerns for AK if she  really
        relocated to Pakistan because of the security risks and because she
        attends a Jewish school.

    24. In cross-examination QI also expressed concern for AK's  safety  as
        she was born out of wedlock. QI confirmed that he was  still  in  a
        relationship with the appellant. Prior to 2013  he  was  unable  to
        have unsupervised contact with H because her mother thought that he
        would try and take her to Pakistan.

    25. Before he commenced his submissions, we informed Mr  Whitwell  that
        we had considered the relevant legislation relating to the issuance
        of DVPNs. A DVPN can be issued under section 24 of  the  Crime  and
        Security Act 2010. Following the service of a DVPN, the must  be  a
        police application to a magistrate's court for a Domestic  Violence
        Protection Order. Should a Magistrates Court grant  the  Order,  it
        will run for no less than 14 days and no more than 28 days. We  put
        our concerns regarding the  asserted  end  date  of  the  DVPN,  as
        referred to in the  PNC  printout,  to  Mr  Whitwell.  We  gave  Mr
        Whitwell an opportunity to respond to our  concerns.  He  indicated
        that he had sufficient opportunity to respond to our  concerns  and
        had nothing further to add. There was no application to adjourn the
        hearing by Mr Whitwell.

    26. Both representatives made submissions which are a matter of  record
        and which we have carefully considered. We reserved our decision.



Findings of fact and conclusions

    27. We remind ourselves that, in an appeal revolving around private and
        family life relationships, the burden rests  on  the  appellant  to
        demonstrate, on the balance of probabilities, that the  refusal  of
        her human rights claim would breach rights protected under  Article
        8 ECHR.

    28. We find the appellant does have a  genuine  and  subsisting  family
        life relationship with QI and their daughter, AK. We  reached  this
        conclusion primarily  based  on  the  assertions  relating  to  the
        relationships contained in the statements from  the  appellant  and
        QI, their oral evidence, and the ISW's report. The  appellant  gave
        her evidence in  a  forthright  manner,  and  her  account  of  her
        relationship with QI was consistent with his evidence and with  the
        ISW's report, and internally consistent. The fact that she  and  QI
        remain living together and have a  5-year-old  daughter  is  itself
        strong evidence that the relationship is  genuine  and  subsisting.
        The observations of the ISW relating to QI's interaction  with  the
        appellant and AK have not been challenged, and the  subsistence  of
        the relationships  are  further  reinforced  by  reference  to  the
        unchallenged documentary evidence of cohabitation and  the  letters
        from AK's school.

    29. We have very carefully considered the evidence relating to domestic
        abuse. We  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  subjected  to
        domestic abuse from QI and that he was required to leave the family
        home for 4 weeks.  We reach this conclusion by reference to the PNC
        printout, an NHS letter dated 17 May 2017 relating to the appellant
        and referring to a previous history of domestic violence, and  from
        the oral evidence of both the appellant and QI. We do not find  the
        reference to "end date" of the DVPN in the PNC is accurate.  Having
        regard to the legislative framework governing the issuance of DVPNs
        (and DVPOs), considered at paragraph 25 of this  decision,  we  are
        satisfied there is no  statutory  basis  allowing  the  police,  or
        indeed a magistrate's court, to impose a Notice of Order of 3 years
        duration. The infliction of domestic abuse is an abhorrent act, and
        a factor that we strongly take  into  account  when  assessing  the
        public  interest  factors  in   our   Article   8   proportionality
        assessment. We do not however find  that  the  past  infliction  of
        domestic violence means that the appellant and QI are not now in  a
        genuine and subsisting  relationship.  There  was  nothing  in  the
        evidence before us to suggest that the appellant was  currently  in
        an abusive relationship or that she was being coerced  into  giving
        her evidence. There has been no expressed concern that QI poses any
        danger to AK or H.  On  the  contrary,  the  overwhelming  evidence
        suggests that QI has a strong parental relationship with  both  his
        children.

    30. We are in no doubt that QI has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with H. In his  decision  under  appeal  before  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Storey, the Secretary of State himself accepted that
        QI had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  H.  This  was
        confirmed by the First-tier Tribunal  judge.  We  note  that  Judge
        Storey, in the extract set out in paragraph 18  of  this  decision,
        referred to the First-tier Tribunal judge finding  the  content  of
        QI's relationship with H to be "thin." We have had the  benefit  of
        the IWS's  report,  which  was  not  available  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal, and  we  have  considered  further  statements  from  H's
        mother, as well as  the  statements  and  oral  evidence  from  the
        appellant and QI. The descriptions given by both the appellant  and
        QI of his  relationship  with  H  was  consistent  with  the  ISW's
        observations  and  with  the  statement  from  H's  mother.  Having
        considered this evidence 'in the round', together with  the  letter
        from H's school and the evidence of child support payments, we find
        that QI does see H on a regular basis, at least once a week, that H
        sometimes stays with QI during the holidays, and that they  have  a
        close familial bond.  Although  Mr  Whitwell  asked  the  witnesses
        several questions concerning point 1 of the Contact Order issued in
        April 2013, which allowed QI unsupervised  contact  with  H  for  3
        hours on alternative Sundays, we drew his  attention  to  point  4,
        which allowed for "further and  other  contact  as  can  be  agreed
        between the parties."

    31. We additionally find, by reference to the same evidence, that H and
        AK have a strong half-sibling relationship.  They  see  each  other
        frequently, and, according to the unchallenged  evidence  from  the
        ISW, they have an "affective attachment" and an "exceptional sister
        to sister bond."

    32. We do not find that the appellant has a parental relationship  with
        H. H has her two biological parents who care for her and ensure her
        safety and welfare. We do however  find  that  there  is  a  strong
        private life relationship between the  appellant  and  H.  This  is
        apparent from the evidence from the appellant, who described  H  as
        being like her "first child", and from the  observations  from  the
        ISW, who recalled H saying that she got on "really well"  with  the
        appellant and that she could  talk  to  the  appellant  about  most
        things without judgment.

    33. In determining the best interests of both AK  and  H,  pursuant  to
        s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, we  have
        applied the guidance given in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874  (at  [35]),  and
        Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
        appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197. We are grateful to Mr Whitwell for  his
        acceptance in his submissions  that  the  best  interests  of  both
        children are for the appellant and AK, together with QI, to  remain
        in the UK. This is a  conclusion  we  would,  in  any  event,  have
        reached. H and AK have a strong half-sibling relationship, and  the
        removal  or  the  appellant  and  AK,  whilst  not   severing   the
        relationship (they could  communicate  remotely  or  by  periodical
        visits), would clearly have a significant adverse impact  on  their
        close emotional bond. If QI chose to remain in the UK, AK would  be
        deprived of the presence of one  of  her  parents,  who  has  joint
        parental responsibility for her. As noted in the ISW's report, this
        would have a profound  impact  on  her  emotional  and  behavioural
        development, a point we consider to be self-evident. If QI chose to
        relocate to Pakistan, H would, similarly, be deprived of her  close
        relationship with her father. This would also  likely  lead  to  an
        adverse  impact  on   her   social,   behavioural   and   emotional
        development. In making our findings relating to the best  interests
        of both children we take account of their  ages,  their  length  of
        residence in the UK, the fact that H resides with her  mother,  and
        their state of health and the stage of their education.

    34. We can deal with this appeal, so far as the immigration  rules  are
        concerned, relatively briefly. The only private  life  basis  under
        paragraph 276ADE conceivably open to  the  appellant  is  paragraph
        276ADE(1)(vi). We find there are no very significant  obstacles  to
        the appellant's relocation, with AK, to Pakistan. The appellant has
        lived in Pakistan for most of her life and would be  familiar  with
        the culture, the language and the way of life. AK is only  5  years
        old and is still at primary school. The appellant would be able  to
        support AK through any initial difficulties on relocation.  Despite
        fearing her family because she entered into a relationship  against
        their wishes, the appellant has not made a protection claim. In any
        event, and taking her claim at the highest and having regard to  SM
        (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC), she is a
        highly educated  woman  who  could  relocate  to  another  part  of
        Pakistan where she could find employment or be supported by QI, who
        works in the UK. AK has not lived in the UK for a continuous period
        of  at  least  7  years  and   cannot   succeed   under   paragraph
        276ADE(1)(iv).  Nor  are  we  persuaded  that  AK  would  face  any
        significant difficulties because she has attended a Jewish  primary
        school in the UK. The limited background evidence provided  by  the
        appellant did not support her claim that she would need to disclose
        AK's educational background, or that, even if she did,  this  would
        expose AK to  any  risk  of  harm  or  ill-treatment.  Nor  are  we
        satisfied that the appellant or AK can meet any of the requirements
        of Appendix FM given QI's immigration status and AK's residence for
        less than 7 years.

    35. In determining the appeal outside paragraph 276ADE and Appendix  FM
        we must  consider  whether  there  are  compelling  or  exceptional
        circumstances in accordance with Article 8 principles  (SSHD  v  SS
        (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387).

    36. We have considered the public interest factors in s.117B.  We  note
        that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the  immigration
        rules. This is relevant to the public interest in  the  maintenance
        of effective immigration controls  (s.117B(1)).  Having  heard  the
        appellant give evidence,  we  are  satisfied  she  is  sufficiently
        proficient in English, and that she is financially  independent  by
        reference to QI's employment and income (Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC  58).
        These are however neutral  factors.  The  appellant's  relationship
        with QI, who does not meet the definition of qualifying partner  in
        s.117D, was commenced when her immigration status  was  precarious,
        and her private life was established when  her  immigration  status
        was precarious. We therefore attach little weight  to  her  private
        life, and we also reduce the weight we attach  to  the  appellant's
        relationship with QI and H because both were entered into when  the
        appellant's immigration status was precarious. The appellant cannot
        avail herself of s.117B(6) because AK is not  a  qualifying  child,
        and because the appellant  does  not  have  a  subsisting  parental
        relationship with H.

    37. We additionally  take  account  of  QI's  conduct  and  immigration
        history when assessing the public interest. We note that QI  had  a
        criminal conviction and a 15-month custodial  sentence  imposed  in
        September 2006, and that he  previously  inflicted  domestic  abuse
        against the appellant. Both factors point to the public interest in
        his separation from the appellant  and  AK,  should  he  choose  to
        remain in the UK. We note however that the conviction is now almost
        13 years old, that  he  has  not  been  convicted  of  any  further
        offence,  and  that  he  and  the  appellant  have  salvaged  their
        relationship since the infliction  of  domestic  abuse.  Given  the
        unchallenged findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  are  no
        Suitability requirement factors relevant to the appellant.

    38. In undertaking the proportionality assessment, we  treat  the  best
        interests of both H and AK as a  primary  consideration.  The  best
        interests are not however a  paramount  consideration  and  can  be
        outweighed by a combination of other public interest factors.

    39. Following the decision in QI's appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  there
        would be a disproportionate  interference  with  Article  8  if  he
        leaves the UK because he has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with H, and because it is  not  reasonable  for  H  to
        leave the UK. This follows from the decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018]
        UKSC 53. We note what was said by Upper Tribunal Judge  Storey  had
        he  not  been  bound  by  the  Supreme  Court's  interpretation  of
        s.117B(6). We have however found, based on our  own  assessment  of
        the evidence from the appellant and  the  ISW's  report,  that  the
        content of the relationship between QI and H  is  not  "thin",  and
        that there is strong  evidence  of  the  relationship  between  the
        appellant and QI.

    40. It is a trite proposition of human rights law  that  this  Tribunal
        must consider the impact on the Article 8 rights  of  other  family
        members affected by the respondent's decision under appeal  (Beoku-
        Betts [2008] UKHL 37). If QI left the UK in order to  maintain  his
        relationship with the appellant and AK, this would  have  a  marked
        impact on his secure parental relationship with H which  is  likely
        to result in emotional harm and distress, and which would undermine
        the "blended family" relationships (as described by the  ISW)  that
        now exist. It would also undermine  and  effectively  stultify  the
        judicial finding that requiring QI to leave the UK would constitute
        a disproportionate interference with Article  8.  Further,  if  the
        appellant was required to leave the UK, AK's good relationship with
        H would be severely undermined as H resides  with  her  mother  and
        could not, on any reasonable view, be expected to leave the UK.

    41. If, on the other hand, QI chose to remain in the UK,  he  would  be
        separated from his partner and their 5-year-old child.  This  would
        clearly have a serious negative  impact  on  AK,  as  well  as  the
        appellant.  Family   relationships   between   partners   and,   in
        particular, between a parent and minor child cannot be  effectively
        conducted across large  distances.  We  note  and  agree  with  the
        observation by the ISW that parenting  accessibility  is  important
        for  the  social,  emotional  and   behavioural   development   and
        functioning of children, and that contact through remote  forms  of
        communication would not compensate for the loss of  close  physical
        contact between a parent and minor child.

    42. We have taken into account all material  considerations,  including
        the  identified  public  interest  factors  weighing  against   the
        appellant and QI. Zoumbas [2013] 1 WLR 3690 makes it clear  however
        that a child must not be blamed for matters for which  she  is  not
        responsible, such as a parent's conduct.  Having  fully  considered
        the competing factors, we find that either choice by QI would  lead
        to a disproportionate interference with the Article 8 rights of the
        children. The appellant consequently falls to be allowed.



Notice of Decision

The human rights appeal is allowed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               17 June 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
