
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01076/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 July 2014                               |On 12 August 2014            |
|Prepared 31 July 2014                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                 liaqat ali

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Chopra, Counsel instructed by Messrs PGA
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 21 February 1989  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Khan who in a determination promulgated on 19 May  2014  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse to grant him leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant.

2.   The  decision  which  is  dated  10  September  2014  stated  that  the
    appellant had been refused under the section relating to "Attributes  -
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies".  It was stated that the CAS on
    which the appellant wished to rely had been issued by the  sponsor  who
    held a legacy sponsor or B rated licence which was  only  valid  if  it
    were assigned to a student who was re-sitting or repeating a module  in
    order to complete a course of study that  they  had  already  commenced
    whilst at the sponsor.  The CAS which the appellant had  submitted  had
    been issued to study a Diploma in Management commencing on 16  December
    2013 which was a new course  of  study  at  the  institution  but  that
    institution, St. Alban's College, was listed as a  legacy  sponsor  and
    therefore the appellant was not in possession of a valid CAS.

3.   The appellant's grounds of appeal, in general  form,  stated  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the Immigration  Rules,  discretion
    under  the  Rules  should  have  been  exercised  differently  by   the
    respondent  and  that  the  decision  was  unlawful  because   it   was
    incompatible with the appellant's rights under the ECHR.

4.   At the hearing of the  appeal  before  the  judge  the  appellant  gave
    evidence submitting that when he had been issued with  the  CAS  letter
    the college was a Tier 4 sponsor and not a legacy sponsor as alleged by
    the respondent.

5.   The judge set  out  his  conclusions  in  paragraphs  22  onwards.   He
    pointed out that when the appellant made his application as  a  Tier  4
    Student Migrant he was a new student whereas  the  CAS  clearly  stated
    that it was a general legacy CAS.  The  appellant  was  however  a  new
    student and legacy sponsors CAS could  only  be  assigned  to  existing
    students or those who were to take re-takes.  That  was  not  the  case
    here and therefore the appellant had not provided a valid CAS  for  the
    course he intended to study.  The appellant therefore did not meet  the
    requirements of the Rules.

6.   In paragraphs 26 and 27 of the determination the judge went on to say:-



         "26.  With  respect  I  do   not   agree   with   the   appellant's
             representative's submission  that  the  appellant  is  in  the
             middle of his studies and  the  respondent's  decision  is  in
             breach of his private life being half way through his studies.
              The appellant's sponsor does not have the  licence  to  teach
             the course the appellant is claiming to be studying, therefore
             he cannot be studying the claimed course.


         27.  The appellant does not meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM
             and paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.   He  has  not
             raised compelling exceptional circumstances for the matter  to
             be considered outside the Immigration Rules.  The decision  in
             the case of  Gulshan  sets  the  principle  that  one  has  to
             consider the case within  the  rule  and  only  if  there  are
             exceptional circumstances  for  consideration  to  take  place
             outside the rules."

     The appeal was therefore dismissed.

7.   The grounds of appeal, on which Ms Chopra relied argued that the  judge
    should have applied a common law duty of fairness  as  he  should  have
    taken into account the fact that the college was a  legacy  sponsor  at
    the date of the CAS and that it should therefore not  have  issued  the
    CAS to a new student from whom it had taken fees.  It was alleged  that
    the appellant was unaware of the college's true  status  and  that  the
    appellant should have  been  given  time  to  find  a  new  sponsor  in
    circumstances "where he had plainly been exploited by the sponsor".  It
    was alleged that the appellant's situation was manifestly unfair.

8.   The grounds went on to say that as the appellant was in the  middle  of
    his studies the decision was in breach of his private life and that the
    judge had misdirected himself by failing to consider that the appellant
    had  been  placed  in  a  very  difficult  position,  paying  fees  and
    commencing a course in the belief that  his  sponsor  was  entitled  to
    teach him when that was not the case.  This was a matter not within the
    contemplation of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  and  the  judge  should
    therefore have gone on to consider whether or not there was a breach of
    Article 8.

9.   At the beginning of the hearing I  endeavoured  to  ascertain  from  Ms
    Chopra the exact course of the appellant's studies since he had arrived
    in  Britain  on  12  June  2011.   There  was  scant  evidence  of  the
    appellant's studies but I have set out the chronology below.

10.  Ms Chopra confirmed that the appellant was only arguing that he  should
    have been granted  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   The
    decision, she argued,  was not in accordance with the law as common law
    fairness had not been applied.  She stated that the judge  should  have
    dealt with this argument (although it was not evident that it had  been
    raised before  the  judge)  and  that  he  should  have  made  findings
    regarding the appellant's knowledge of the true status of the  college.
    She accepted there had been no evidence that the appellant had attended
    any lectures for the course but stated it had been  due  to  start  six
    days after the refusal letter and he had therefore been  unable  to  do
    so.

11.  She stated that the appellant's evidence had  not  been  challenged  at
    the hearing and there was evidence that he had completed  some  modules
    for the ACCA course and that this had not been challenged.  She alleged
    that  the  judge  should  have  made  clear  findings   regarding   the
    circumstances surrounding the issue of the CAS.

12.  Having referred to the judgment of Sales J in  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin) she referred to the determination in  Thakur  (PBS  decision  -
    common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151  (IAC).   She  stated
    that the appellant's circumstance is one which is not recognised  under
    the Rules but that there should been flexibility  in  consideration  of
    his circumstances and it was only fair that he should have been granted
    an opportunity to find an alternative sponsor.

13.  In reply Mr Jarvis pointed out there was nothing in  the  determination
    to indicate that there had been any argument advanced  that  the  judge
    should have applied a common law duty of fairness and that the  reality
    was that the appellant's circumstances were very different from that of
    the appellant in Thakur who had started studying at a college which had
    the appropriate licence but that that appellant had been  unaware  that
    the licence had been withdrawn.  The reality was  that  this  appellant
    had obtained a CAS from a college which was not entitled to  issue  the
    CAS which it had issued.  This was not a case where the relevant 60 day
    period was one to which the appellant would be entitled or which  would
    have been appropriate.

14.  He referred to the judgment of the House of Lords in Doody [1993]  UKHL
    8 and to the judgment in Nasim & Others  (Article  8)  Pakistan  [2014]
    UKUT 25 (IAC) which dealt  with,  inter  alia,  the  judgment  of  Lord
    Carnwath in Patel [2013] UKSC 72 where he had stated at paragraph 57:-
         "It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for 'common sense' in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been  studying  in  the  UK  for  some  years...
         However, such considerations do not by themselves  provide  grounds
         of appeal under article 8,  which  is  concerned  with  private  or
         family life, not education as such. The opportunity for a promising
         student to complete his course in this country,  however  desirable
         in general terms, is not in itself a right protected under  article
         8."
15.  In Nasim the Tribunal had stated that  the  chances  of  an  Article  8
    right being argued by someone who had come  to  Britain  for  temporary
    purposes successfully was further diminished but it had been  wrong  to
    state that an immigration decision in the case of a person who was here
    for study or other temporary  purposes  could  never  be  found  to  be
    disproportionate.
16.  The Tribunal had gone on to say at paragraph 42:-
         "We conclude our general Article  8  findings  with  the  following
         observation.  Each  of  the  appellants'  representatives  on  19th
         December confirmed to us that the extent of their clients'  Article
         8 ambitions was to be granted two  years'  leave  to  remain,  with
         permission to work..... Their cases are, accordingly,  not  put  on
         the basis that the Article  8  rights  upon  which  they  rely  are
         necessarily such as to facilitate their indefinite presence in  the
         United Kingdom.  Whilst not resiling from what we have  said  about
         the case of CDS, this confirmation serves to underline the  general
         problems facing the appellants in seeking to use human  rights  law
         to give effect to their short term socio-economic aspirations."
     It  is  of  note  that  each  of  the  appellants  in  that  case  were
    unsuccessful in their appeals.
17.  Mr Jarvis went on to state that the whole  ethos  of  the  points-based
    system was that there should be certainty and that  this  is  what  had
    been incorporated under the Rules.  The  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and it could not be said  that  the  lack  of
    flexibility in the system was a  breach  of  the  common  law  duty  of
    fairness.
18.  Ms Chopra stated that it would only be fair for the appellant  to  have
    been  granted  permission  to  remain  to  complete  his  studies   and
    emphasised that the appellant had not been a party to the revocation of
    the licence of St Alban's College and therefore it should  not  be  the
    case that he should have suffered because of the fact that the  college
    issued the CAS when it should not have done so.
Discussion
19.  I consider that in any case where reference is made to  the  Article  8
    rights of an appellant it is relevant to know all relevant facts.   The
    appellant's statement, on which he relied at  the  hearing  was  silent
    regarding exactly where he had studied and what qualifications  he  had
    gained.  It appears that he arrived in  Britain  on  12  June  2011  in
    possession of a student visa valid until 13 October 2013.   It  appears
    moreover that that was to study at  Brentford  College.   There  is  no
    evidence that the appellant ever studied there but the reality is  that
    on 10 August 2012 it appears that that college  lost  its  licence  and
    that the appellant's leave was curtailed with an amended expiry date of
    9 June 2012.  However, as it was not possible to  serve  the  appellant
    with notice that his leave  had  been  curtailed  the  curtailment  was
    ignored.
20.  In the appellant's bundle were three  provisional  result  notification
    for various ACCA courses - F1, F2 and F3 dated  14  November  2013  and
    referring to results of exams held at  Sanjari  International  College.
    The provisional certificates, which were only copies  stated  that  the
    exams were taken on 11 November 2013 and that  these  were  provisional
    results that "will be verified and confirmed in your exam status within
    your ACCA account".  There is no other evidence of the appellant having
    passed any exams and indeed there is  no  evidence  whatsoever  of  his
    connection to Sanjari College.
21.  The next relevant fact is that St. Albans College  sponsorship  licence
    was revoked on 17 July 2013.  Thereafter it could  only  operate  as  a
    legacy sponsor for those who were already studying there or taking  re-
    sits.  That is  dated  three  months  before  the  appellant  made  his
    application.  There is no evidence and it  was  not  claimed  that  the
    appellant had studied at St. Albans College.
22.  Ms Chopra  quite  correctly  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed under the Rules.
23.  The question therefore before me is  whether  or  not  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  were  not  infringed  was  not  a
    decision that was open to him or, alternatively  that  he  should  have
    considered  a  common  law  duty  of  fairness  which  meant  that  the
    appellant's appeal should have been allowed.
24.  I see no way in which it could be said that the judge  before  whom  it
    was not argued that the decision was in breach of a common law duty  of
    fairness by the respondent could have  concluded  that  that  duty  was
    breached.  The PBS Rules are clear, the CAS that was  issued  indicated
    that it was a "legacy A" CAS when the appellant would have  known  that
    he had not previously studied at the college and the PBS system,  which
    is one which has been drafted to ensure certainty was properly applied.
     The issue of "common law duty of fairness" is a principle which exists
    to remedy cases and which the state  should  be  held  to  act  fairly.
    There was nothing unfair in the decision.  Insofar as the  college,  as
    is claimed, took the appellant's money for the course when they  should
    not have done so, that is really a matter between the appellant and the
    college.  There is no indication that he sought any recompense from the
    college.  I do not consider that the "common law duty  of  fairness  is
    one which is engaged in this case.
25.  With regard to the issue of the rights of the appellant  under  Article
    8 of the ECHR I note the terms of the determination of the Tribunal  in
    Nasim".  It is extremely difficult to argue that someone who  comes  to
    Britain for a temporary purpose can claim that it is a disproportionate
    interference with their rights to study here if they do not qualify for
    leave to remain under the Rules as is clear is the case here.
26.  I have considered the appellant's  particular  circumstances  and  note
    the lack of evidence of a coherent programme of studies here let  alone
    evidence of what the appellant was doing firstly when he came to  study
    at Brentford College or indeed  his  connection  with  Sanjari  College
    where it appears  he  sat  exams  for  which  he  received  provisional
    results.  Moreover he does not appear to have  studied  thereafter.   I
    cannot see how it could be considered that the rights of the  appellant
    were engaged and although I consider that the judge only briefly  dealt
    with the issue of the rights  of  the  appellant  under  Article  8,  I
    consider that he was correct first of all to  consider  the  Rules  and
    then to consider the issue of exceptionality and reached  a  conclusion
    which was entirely open to him and was correct.
27.  I therefore find that the decision of the judge dismissing this  appeal
    shall stand as there is no material error of law therein.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


