
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01026/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 13th July 2017                             |On 9th August 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               miss Aqsa Azad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adam Pipe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Watson, promulgated on 28th March 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 16th March 2017.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Pakistan, who was born  on  1st
    July 1985.  She entered the UK on a student visa in September 2011, and
    when her visa expired on 21st January 2013, she made an application for
    further leave to remain as a Tier  4  Student,  which  was  granted  on
    appeal on 12th February 2014.  A further application to extend her visa
    was refused, whereupon she then made a human rights  application  based
    upon her family and private life rights on 16th June 2015.   Her  claim
    was rejected by a decision letter dated 10th February 2016.  It  is  at
    that stage that she appealed against the decision referring also  to  a
    protection claim that she had, namely, that there would be  a  risk  of
    forced marriage or death if she returned to Pakistan.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim essentially is that she cannot return to Pakistan
    because she has no qualifications to show for her  studies  in  the  UK
    because her college had its  licence  revoked  and  she  also  did  not
    complete her studies.  She also claims that she would be  subjected  to
    pressure from her family, and particularly her stepmother, to marry  an
    older cousin which she does not want to do.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge noted at the outset that the Grounds of Appeal do  not  raise
    an asylum claim, but insofar as there is a  claim  that  the  Appellant
    would be subjected to forced marriage, this raises  an  Article  2  and
    Article 3, ECHR claim, and at the outset, the  judge  states  that,  "I
    should consider her claims in this statement" (paragraph 8).  The judge
    held that the Appellant had not been a genuine student (paragraph  24).
    The judge also found that the  records  are  not  consistent  with  the
    longstanding fear of her family in Pakistan (paragraph  23).   Further,
    the judge found that the medical evidence was such that, the  Appellant
    only attended the GP with low mood shortly after  receiving  notice  of
    her immigration hearing (which was served on 26th September 2016) "and
    her referral to mental health is after this.  I find that  the  records
    show that her mood improves with a standard antidepressant  medication"
    (paragraph 23).  There was an expert report from Uzma Moeen, which  the
    judge found to be lacking in credibility  because  it  began  with  the
    observation that there  were  "adverse  credibility  findings"  by  the
    Secretary of State, whereas there were in fact none.  The  expert  also
    had not met and spoken with the Appellant.  Moreover, the expert refers
    to the Appellant's "estranged family" (AB58) whereas in oral  evidence,
    the Appellant did  not  indicate  any  estrangement  with  her  mother,
    brothers or other family members apart from feelings of pressure from a
    stepmother (see paragraph 26).  The  judge  went  on  to  make  express
    findings that the Appellant had made a claim only after the application
    for further leave to remain on the basis of studies  was  refused  (see
    paragraph 30) in relation to forced marriage.   In  fact,  it  was  the
    judge's clear finding that the Appellant had earlier

         "Declined the proposal and that there were no adverse  consequences
         following her refusal.  This is based upon  her  own  evidence.   I
         find that all her family agreed that she should go to  the  UK  and
         that no attempts were made to force her to marry the cousin against
         her will or to prevent her going to the UK" (paragraph 31).

    Indeed, the Appellant had "refused this proposal  without  any  adverse
    consequences"  (paragraph  35).   Furthermore,  the   Appellant   could
    relocate to another part of Pakistan if she so  wished  (see  paragraph
    36).  There were no exceptional circumstances to the appeal  (paragraph
    42).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in using  a  test
    of exceptionality for consideration of the Article 8 claim outside  the
    Immigration Rules which was contrary to Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11.   The
    judge had also failed  to  engage  properly  with  the  country  expert
    report.  More importantly,  the  judge  had  omitted  consideration  of
    suicide attempts when assessing the medical evidence.  There was also a
    failure to give adequate reasons for  rejecting  the  claim  of  forced
    marriage.   The  Appellant's  vulnerability  had  not   been   properly
    considered in terms of the availability of internal relocation.

 7. On 22nd May 2017, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. On 12th June 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent  to
    the effect that the Appellant could return to her mother, her  brother,
    and other  family  members  and  the  availability  of  family  support
    considerably reduced her vulnerability.  Moreover, the judge had regard
    specifically to the decision in SM and  MH  (lone  women -  ostracism)
    Pakistan CG [2016] UKUT 00067 so that it cannot be said that the  judge
    was not aware that vulnerability was a relevant factor.  The judge  had
    made an adequate assessment and gave proper reasons for why she did not
    accept that the Appellant was at risk of forced marriage, and this  was
    supported  by  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  herself  (see   the
    determination at paragraphs 31 to  35).   The  judge  made  significant
    observations in relation to issues arising from the expert report  (see
    the determination at paragraph 26).  In relation to the alleged suicide
    attempt, the judge's findings that the Appellant would  return  to  her
    family, demonstrated that a risk under Article 2, 3, or Article 8, ECHR
    could not be substantiated.  There was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant could not continue to receive medication if  she  so  wished.
    This was particularly in the light of the rejected claim that she would
    not be able to receive support from her  mother  and  two  brothers  on
    return.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 13th  July  2017,  Mr  Pipe,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that  this  appeal  was  essentially
    upon Article 8 and Article 3, ECHR grounds.  He submitted  that  proper
    findings needed to be made by the judge.  Where this was most  apparent
    was in relation to paragraph 23 where the judge looked at "GP  records"
    and referred to the judge's reference only to a "minor past" history of
    low mood.  However, the judge  neglects  to  make  proper  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant's suicide attempt.   The  Appellant  took  an
    overdose of ten paracetamol tablets.  This  is  not  mentioned  in  the
    determination.  There  appears  to  have  been  another  attempt  also,
    although evidence  in  relation  to  this  was  rather  fragmented  and
    rudimentary.  Nevertheless, at page  207  of  the  Appellant's  bundle,
    there is a document  dated  20th  October  2016  which  refers  to  the
    overdose of ten tablets of paracetamol four months  earlier,  and  this
    was in itself significant enough,  such  that  the  judge  should  have
    referred to it.  Furthermore, there is a letter  at  page  197  of  the
    bundle from  the  psychological  wellbeing  practitioner  referring  to
    frequent suicidal thoughts and the risk  of  the  Appellant  acting  on
    them.  The judge does not mention the two previous overdose attempts at
    all.  She refers to a "minor past" history of low mood.  When it  comes
    to making her findings (at paragraphs 32 to 33) there is no attempt  to
    factor in the suicide attempt.

10. Second, the judge had wrongly disparaged  the  expert  report  of  Uzma
    Moeen, which was a 50 page report (see page 70  of  the  bundle).   For
    example, it was not correct to say that her report  was  based  upon  a
    "couple of paragraphs of a draft statement" because she  had  the  full
    statement before her.

11. Third, the judge states (at paragraph 42) that the  Appellant  had  not
    "shown any other exceptional circumstances relevant to consideration of
    Article 8".  However, it was well established that the correct approach
    is not to go around searching for a single exceptional factor,  but  to
    take all the  factors  cumulatively  in  the  round  in  the  balancing
    exercise before deciding whether they amounted to exceptionality.   For
    all these reasons the decision should be set aside and remitted back to
    another judge.

12. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that, whereas it  was  true  that  the
    judge did not specifically  refer  to  the  suicide  attempt,  she  did
    expressly take full account of the medical evidence  under  a  separate
    large paragraph headed "GP records" (at paragraph 23).  At page 206  of
    the Appellant's bundle the Appellant went to the GP  complaining  about
    low mood, but prior to this  there  was  nothing  in  relation  to  her
    depression or to any suicidal ideation.  It is  entirely  relevant  for
    the judge to pick this up at paragraph 23 when considering the  medical
    evidence and to place reliance upon it.  Therefore,  the  question  is,
    that if the judge did not  expressly  refer  to  the  suicide  attempt,
    whether this was a "material error" in any way.  He would suggest  that
    it was not.  If the Appellant was suffering from a low  mood,  and  she
    took an overdose, this was a cry for help, but this was not an  Article
    3 claim, and the evidence did not suggest that it was, and the judge so
    held.  It would be hard to show what difference this would have made to
    the eventual outcome of the decision.  Indeed, it  is  clear  from  the
    letter of June 17th that the family was helping  to  prevent  her  from
    harming herself in the UK, and she is going to return back to family in
    Pakistan.  The judge was entirely right  to  refer  to  the  supportive
    family that the Appellant had.  There was no material error of  law  at
    all in this determination.  In fact, there is a  glaring  inconsistency
    in the  Appellant's  evidence  in  this  respect.   Under  the  heading
    "healthcare records of the Appellant" (paragraph 22)  the  judge  draws
    attention to how the Appellant was referred  to  the  community  mental
    health team.  She referred to a letter which states that,  "her  family
    do not allow her to be on her own".  However, the judge found  this  to
    be entirely inconsistent with the oral evidence given at  the  Tribunal
    before her, "where the Appellant stated that she was still collecting a
    child from school and looking after her on her own.  She  was  left  on
    her own as the two Akhtar sisters  worked  full-time"  (paragraph  22).
    This suggested that she was not at risk of harming herself.  The family
    did not think so.  The evidence given was incorrect that  she  was  not
    left alone.  It was in these circumstances that  the  judge  eventually
    reached the conclusion that,

         "I find that she suffers from low mood and does not wish to  return
         to Pakistan and would like to remain in the UK.  I  find  that  she
         does not suffer from a significant mental illness and that her  low
         mood has responded  well  to  a  standard  dose  of  antidepressant
         medication.  I find that she is in contact with her mother and  her
         older brother and that family support is available to her.  I also
         find that Miss S Akhtar would support her financially on her return
         to Pakistan" (paragraph 35).

    This conclusion was entirely sustainable and entirely  based  upon  the
    evidence before the judge.

13. Third, as far as the expert report was concerned the judge gave  proper
    reasons for making criticism of it.  What the expert has read about the
    case before is always the first and most important question.   In  this
    case, the expert refers to there being "adverse  credibility  findings"
    by the Home Secretary.  She did not even meet with the Appellant.   She
    did not interview her.  She referred to her being "estranged" from  her
    family when she was not.  She did  not  examine  the  standing  of  her
    family.  But even more importantly,

         "She has not taken into account or commented upon the fact that the
         Appellant was able to refuse the claimed proposal and come  to  the
         UK with  the  agreement  of  all  of  her  family  members  and  in
         particular with that of her brother  and  that  she  claims  to  be
         educated to B.Ed standard."  (Paragraph 26).

14. Finally, as far as Article 8 is concerned, Mr Mills submitted that this
    was a "semantic  disagreement"  because  these  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, had made it clear now that "what is required is
    a proportionality assessment to be made, and the threshold  is  a  high
    one".  If one looks at the determination of the judge, it  is  apparent
    that such a proportionality exercise is carried out  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 42.  The judge makes it clear that there  are  no  particular
    medical needs.   Antidepressants  will  be  available  in  Pakistan  if
    required.  The Appellant does not satisfy the Immigration Rules.  There
    are no exceptional reasons  for  why  her  case  should  be  considered
    outside the Rules.  As against this the Section 117  considerations  in
    favour of immigration control had to be taken into account and on  that
    basis the Appellant could not succeed either.

15. In reply, Mr Pipe made three  submissions.   First,  that  the  judge's
    engagement with Article 8 was not simply a "semantic  disagreement"  on
    the part of the Appellant because the judge overlooked the two previous
    suicide attempts, which would have made all  the  difference.   Second,
    the  expert  report  is  wrongly  disparaged  because  the  expert   is
    essentially giving country evidence and there are numerous pages in the
    report which are not undermined by the fact that the expert had not met
    with the  Appellant.   Third,  the  judge  has  wrongly  minimised  the
    ............ of the Appellant's medical difficulties by referring to  a
    "minor past" history of low mood, and overlooked  completely  the  fact
    that there had been a suicide attempt.  At page 207 of the  Appellant's
    bundle there were GP records which recorded that four  months  ago  the
    Appellant had taken ten paracetamol tablets as an overdose.   Mr  Pipe,
    nevertheless, had to accept  that  as  far  as  the  second  additional
    suicide attempt was concerned, the GP  records  did  not  provide  much
    information on this at all, and the whole question of a second  suicide
    attempt was something that was not properly documented at all.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

17. First and foremost, it is not the  case  at  all  that  the  judge  has
    overlooked  the  attempted  suicide.   In  what  is  a  meticulous  and
    comprehensive determination, the judge, under the heading  "documentary
    evidence" sets out in individual paragraphs  a  consideration  of  each
    segment of the evidence before her, drawing attention  to  the  witness
    statement of Jabeen Akhtar, the letters from  Malaika  and  from  Faiz,
    children of Miss S Akhtar, the internet search results for jobs for the
    Appellant in Pakistan, her health records, her GP records,  her  course
    letters from Bradford College, her photographs,  and  the  report  from
    Uzma Moeen.  The judge then demonstrates that  consideration  has  been
    given to the fact that there is "no suicide plan" on 13th February 2017
    in the records, and the Appellant  is  recorded  as  "feeling  okay  on
    citalopram" (see paragraph 23).  The judge refers to  there  being  "no
    thoughts of self-harm/suicide".  (Paragraph 23).

18. Second, the judge  did  not  find  the  factual  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant's case to be such as to point to a fear of her attempting  to
    commit suicide.  In fact, whilst the evidence of the Appellant's family
    was that they do not allow her to be on her own, the judge  found  that
    this was inconsistent with the oral evidence before the Tribunal  where
    the Appellant was "still collecting a child  from  school  and  looking
    after her on her own" (see paragraph 22).

19. Third, the judge did not find the Appellant to be in any  fear  of  her
    family in Pakistan.  (See paragraph 23).  In fact,  the  Appellant  had
    already had a marriage proposal from the very same  older  cousin,  had
    declined it, and had been allowed to leave Pakistan to come to  the  UK
    to study and this is well set out at paragraph 26 of the determination.
     The judge in fact criticises the expert for failing to take this  into
    account (paragraph 26).

20. Fourth, the judge did not find the Appellant to be a genuine  full-time
    student (paragraph 24).

21. Finally, and in a nutshell, this was a case where  the  judge  did  not
    accept that the Appellant was in any way "estranged" from  her  family,
    and had good relations with her mother, her brothers,  and  her  family
    (see paragraph 26).  In the same way the judge did not accept that  the
    Appellant, who had declined a marriage  proposal,  would  face  adverse
    consequences following her refusal in Pakistan and that "this was based
    upon her own evidence" (paragraph 31).

22. It was not a matter of insignificance that this  was  a  case,  as  the
    judge recognised, where the Appellant  had  made  her  application  for
    further leave to remain,  raising  a  human  rights  claim,  after  her
    initial application had been refused (see paragraph 30).

23. As far as Article 8 is concerned, this was also properly considered  by
    the judge, and if one takes into account the  latest  judgment  of  the
    Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, it  is  plain  that  what  the
    judge states at paragraph 42  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  high
    threshold set out in Agyarko with respect to "insurmountable obstacles"
    and  "exceptional  circumstances",  because  ultimately   this   is   a
    proportionality exercise, and the judge engages in  this  at  paragraph
    42.  There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

25. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th August 2017


