
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01162/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 24 October 2014                   |On 23 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                MR OMAR GAYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Duheric, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal with permission against a decision by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Blair dismissing this appeal under the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 2) The appellant is a national of the Gambia.  His wife, Kumba Jallow,  is
    a Danish national.  The appeal was brought against a decision  dated  8
    December 2013 by the respondent refusing the appellant a residence card
    as the family member of an EEA national.  This was because  the  family
    member, namely the appellant's wife, had  failed  to  provide  evidence
    that she was a qualified person in terms of regulation  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulation.  The  appellant  claimed  that  his  wife  qualified  under
    regulation 6 either as a jobseeker or as a person who had retained  the
    status of a worker in involuntary unemployment.

 3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal considered what  requirements  had
    to be  satisfied  in  order  to  retain  the  status  of  a  worker  in
    involuntary unemployment in terms of regulation 6(2)(b).  The judge was
    not satisfied that the appellant's  wife  met  these  requirements  and
    accordingly dismissed the appeal.

 4) The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  argued  that  the  judge
    misinterpreted the requirements in regulation 6(2)(b) and that  on  the
    evidence the  appellant's  wife  met  the  relevant  requirements.   In
    granting permission to appeal, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Landes
    pointed out that regulation 6 had  been  amended  with  effect  from  1
    January 2014 (subject to transitional provisions which are not relevant
    to this appeal) and the application of the amended regulation  did  not
    appear to have been considered.

 5) Although the decision  against  which  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was brought was dated 8 December 2013, the appeal was heard on
    27 February 2014.  The relevant amendments to regulation 6 were made by
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment) (No 2) Regulations
    2013/3032.  Regulation 6 now reads as follows:

        "(1)      In these Regulations, "qualified person"  means  a  person
           who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-
           (a)   a jobseeker;
           (b)   a worker;
           (c)   a self-employed person;
           (d)   a self-sufficient person; or
           (e)   a student.
       (2)  Subject to Regulations 7A(4) and  7B(4),  a  person  who  is  no
           longer working shall not cease to be treated as a worker for the
           purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-
             a) he is temporarily unable to work as a result of  an  illness
                or accident;
             b) he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having
                been employed in the United Kingdom for at least  one  year,
                provided that he -
                     i) is registered as a job  seeker  with  the  relevant
                        employment office; and
                    ii) satisfies conditions A and B;
           (ba)  he is in  duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment  after
                having been employed in the United Kingdom for less than one
                year, provided that he -
                     i) has registered as a job seeker  with  the  relevant
                        employment office;
                        and
                    (ii)     satisfies conditions A and B;
             c)  he  is  involuntarily  unemployed  and  has   embarked   on
                vocational training; or
             d) he has voluntarily ceased working and embarked on vocational
                training that is related to his previous employment.
       (2A) A person to whom  paragraph  (2)(ba)  applies  may  only  retain
           worker status for a maximum of 6 months.
       (3)  A person who is no longer in self-employment shall not cease  to
           be  treated  as  a  self-employed  person  for  the  purpose  of
           paragraph (1)(c) if he  is  temporarily  unable  to  pursue  his
           activity as a self-employed person as the result of  an  illness
           or accident.
       (4)  For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), a "jobseeker" is  a  person
           who satisfies conditions A and B.
       (5)  Condition A is that the person -
             a) entered the United Kingdom in order to seek employment; or
             b)  is  present  in  the  United  Kingdom  seeking  employment,
                immediately after enjoying the right to reside  pursuant  to
                paragraph (1)(b) to  (e)  (disregarding  any  period  during
                which worker status was retained pursuant to paragraph  2(b)
                or (ba).
        6) Condition B is that the person can provide evidence that  he  is
           seeking employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged.
        7) A person may not retain the  status  of  a  worker  pursuant  to
           paragraph (2)(b), or jobseeker pursuant to paragraph (1)(a), for
           longer than 6 months unless he can provide  compelling  evidence
           that he is continuing to  seek  employment  and  has  a  genuine
           chance of being engaged."


 6) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made the following findings.   The
    Appellant's wife, Kumba Jallow, was working in the UK between June 2003
    and August 2006.  She then claimed Jobseekers  Allowance  from  October
    2006 to around February  2008.   This  was  followed  by  a  period  of
    employment for one month from February  to  March  2008.   She  claimed
    Jobseeker's Allowance again from June 2008 to September  2008  and  was
    then employed for a further 4  months  in  the  autumn  of  2008  until
    January 2009.  The evidence showed that up until 2006 she was  employed
    for a continuous period  but  thereafter  her  employment  history  was
    patchy and she was not employed for at least  a  year  before  becoming
    unemployed again and claiming Jobseekers Allowance.

 7) At the same time the judge had before him medical evidence which showed
    that Kumba Jallow suffers from anxiety and Kumba Jallow accepted in her
    evidence that this had impacted on her ability to find work.

 8) At the hearing before us it was recognised that Kumba Jallow  has  been
    out of work for some time.  Even if she could show that she had entered
    as a jobseeker in terms of Condition A, she would also have to  satisfy
    Condition B and, moreover, in terms of  Regulation  6(7)  in  order  to
    retain the status of a worker or jobseeker for longer than 6 months she
    would have to provide compelling evidence that she  was  continuing  to
    seek employment and had a genuine chance of being engaged.  Mr  Duheric
    acknowledged that the evidence to show these conditions were  satisfied
    was not available.  Accordingly, the appeal could not succeed.

 9) In summary, our decision is that the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in  law  by  failing  to  consider  the  amendments  to  the  EEA
    Regulations in force at the date of the hearing on  27  February  2014.
    We note that on that date the judge was without a Presenting Officer to
    advise him  and  he  therefore  relied  on  the  respondent's  case  as
    presented  in  the   refusal   decision   and   accompanying   reasons.
    Nevertheless, by not recognising the changes  to  the  Regulations  the
    judge erred in such a way that his decision is set aside.

10) In re-making the decision under the Regulations (as amended), according
    to the facts as found by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  it  has
    not been shown that the appellant would satisfy the requirements either
    as a worker who has retained that status in involuntary unemployment or
    as a jobseeker.  Accordingly the appeal must be dismissed.

Conclusions

11) The making of the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12) We set aside the decision.

13) We re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

14) The First-tier Tribunal made an order  for  anonymity  to  protect  the
    privacy of the appellant's spouse because there  was  medical  evidence
    relating to her.  We continue this order (pursuant to Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.)



Signed      Date 23 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

