
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/01288/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3 October 2016                      |On 5 October 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MR MD abdul wadud
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam, counsel instructed by Linkworths
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid,  promulgated  on  24  March  2016,  in  which  he  allowed   the
    respondent's appeal against a decision to refuse to vary his  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
    on 17 August 2016

Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 4. The respondent is a national of Bangladesh, born on 1  March  1979.  He
    last entered the United Kingdom during the year  2011,  with  leave  to
    enter as a Tier 4 migrant, which was valid until 31 December  2013.  He
    was granted an extension of stay under Tier 4  until  21  August  2015,
    which was curtailed so as  to  expire  on  26  September  2014.  On  24
    September 2014, he sought leave to remain on the basis  of  his  family
    and private life in the United Kingdom. In essence, he wished to remain
    in the United Kingdom in order to continue his relationship with SA.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the application  on  16  December  2014,
    concluding that  the  respondent  failed  to  satisfy  the  suitability
    requirements of Appendix FM owing to his deception in  obtaining  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom in another identity in 2005.  It  was  also
    said that he did not meet  the  eligibility  requirements  because  the
    relationship with SA was recent, they were not married to  one  another
    and did  not  cohabit.  Furthermore,  it  was  not  accepted  that  his
    relationship  with  SA,  was  genuine  and  subsisting.  Owing  to  the
    respondent's  failure  to  meet   the   suitability   and   eligibility
    requirements, the Secretary of State  considered  that  the  respondent
    could not benefit from the criteria set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM. The
    Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that  the  respondent  met  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1),  nor  that   there   were   any
    exceptional circumstances.

 6.  The  respondent  appealed.  In  a  signed  witness   statement   which
    accompanied the grounds of appeal, the respondent admitted entering the
    United Kingdom in using his "other name" of Rayhan Hussain and that  he
    had previously claimed asylum in that identity. The respondent  further
    explained  in  the  said  statement  that  following  his  removal   to
    Bangladesh, he decided to return to the United Kingdom because his life
    was  in  danger  owing  to  political  reasons.  He  argued  that   his
    relationship with SA was akin to marriage, but that they were unable to
    cohabit because she resided in a women's hostel.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of State was not represented. The respondent and SA  gave
    evidence. The judge found that the respondent was not to blame for  the
    use of a false identity because this was the fault of an  agent  making
    an asylum application on his behalf in a false  name.  His  appeal  was
    allowed under the Immigration Rules because the respondent was required
    to give essential help to SA who is a victim of domestic violence.





The grounds of appeal

 8. In essence, the grounds argued that the judge failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for findings on material matters.  It was said to be unclear on
    what basis the appeal was allowed; the  judge  failed  to  address  the
    basis  of  the  refusal  of  the  application  under  Appendix  FM  and
    276ADE(1); if the judge allowed the appeal outside the Rules then there
    had been little in the way  of  a  proportionality  assessment  and  no
    considerations of section 117A-D of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. There was a failure to give adequate reasons  for  his
    findings, which bore little relation to  the  issues  before  him.  The
    decision was described as extremely difficult to read or understand and
    the judge's conclusion  was  irrational.  Remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was sought for full consideration of the issues.

 9. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  as  it  was  considered  that  the
    Secretary of State had identified arguable errors of law.

10. No response under Rule 24 was  received  from  those  representing  the
    respondent.

The hearing

11. Ms Ahmad relied on  an  extract  from  the  authority  of  South  Bucks
    District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKJL 33, submitting that the judge
    failed to address the main issues  in  dispute.  She  argued  that  the
    decision   under   appeal   raised   suitability,    eligibility    and
    insurmountable obstacles with reference to EX.1 of Appendix FM. It  was
    unclear on what basis the appeal had  been  allowed.  While  the  judge
    found that the respondent was not involved in deception and that he had
    a genuine relationship with his partner, there was no consideration  of
    eligibility under Gen 1.2 of Appendix FM. Thus it was difficult to  see
    how the judge found that the Rules were met.  Ms Ahmad asked me to note
    that the respondent's application confirmed his relationship  began  in
    January 2014 and that at the date of the application in September 2014,
    they were not married nor had they cohabited.  If the judge allowed the
    appeal outside the Rules, there  was  no  mention  nor  application  of
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ
    387 and no reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act.

12. Mr Aslam accepted that the judge's decision did not set out the correct
    law and while he argued that it was  comprehensive,  he  conceded  that
    there was no specific reference to  the  Rules  or  section  117B.   He
    argued that the judge's decision could only be set aside if the  errors
    were material. Mr Aslam submitted that the judge's principle focus  was
    on the consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules. He  conceded  that
    the respondent did not meet the eligibility requirements,  however  the
    judge accepted that there was a subsisting,  genuine  relationship.  In
    terms of the facts, he informed me that there were  important  features
    to this case including that the respondent  had  undergone  an  Islamic
    marriage with SA; that SA was a victim of domestic violence and  forced
    into a marriage by her family; SA was still married to that partner but
    was seeking a divorce and continued to live in  a  women's  hostel.  Mr
    Aslam submitted that  these  unique  features  amounted  to  compelling
    circumstances and it was therefore open to the judge to  make  positive
    findings as to Article 8 outside the Rules.

13. Mr Aslam argued that even had the judge identified section 117B and set
    out both sides of the argument, the result would have  been  the  same.
    The respondent's immigration history had been impugned by reference  by
    an allegation of deception, however the judge considered  that  he  had
    not used deception, albeit he was mistaken in finding that this was  in
    relation to an asylum claim. Mr Aslam told  me  that  the  respondent's
    explanation in relation to the use of another identity emerged in  oral
    evidence. At this stage I  drew  the  respondent's  admissions  in  his
    witness statement of 18 December 2014  to  Mr  Aslam's  attention.   He
    concluded by inviting me to uphold the judge's decision.

14. In reply, Ms Ahmed reiterated that there was no support in the  judge's
    decision for Mr Aslam's submission that the appeal  was  allowed  under
    Article 8 outside the Rules. She relied on SS (Congo), emphasising  the
    importance of the assessment of the Rules as part of a consideration of
    Article 8 outside the Rules. Furthermore, section 117B of the 2002  Act
    was of relevance given the respondent's precarious status in the United
    Kingdom. Without these errors, a different conclusion could  have  been
    reached.

Decision on error of law

15. After hearing submissions from both representatives, I  announced  that
    the judge's decision displayed material errors of law. My  reasons  are
    as follows.

16. The first issue to be addressed is the basis on which the judge allowed
    the appeal. At [18] the judge states as follows;  "This  Appellant  can
    benefit from the Rules..." and at [19] "in view of my deliberations  in
    the preceding paragraphs...I am persuaded that the Appellant come (sic)
    within the relevant immigration law,  as  amended."  I  consider  these
    paragraphs together with the complete absence  of  any  mention  of  SS
    Congo, compelling circumstances, Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, proportionality
    or section 117B of the 2002 Act leads me to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appeal was allowed under the Rules alone.

17. The judge failed to adequately address the first  issue  in  contention
    under  Appendix  FM,  that  of  suitability.  In  the  decision   under
    challenge, the Secretary of State refers to the respondent's successful
    application for entry clearance in 2005 in a different  identity.  Yet,
    the judge at [9(b)] refers to  the  wrong  name  being  given  for  the
    respondent by an agent in relation to an  asylum  claim.  As  Mr  Aslam
    conceded, this was a clear error of fact. While the  judge  found  that
    the respondent was not involved in deception, he makes no clear finding
    regarding whether his presence in the  United  Kingdom  is  or  is  not
    conducive to the public  good  in  relation  to  the  specific  conduct
    identified by the respondent in relation to S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM.

18. A further issue went unaddressed by the judge, that of eligibility.  At
    the time of  the  respondent's  application  for  leave  to  remain  in
    September 2014, the relationship was of 8 months' duration, the  couple
    were not married to one another and did not cohabit.  By  allowing  the
    appeal under the Rules, the  judge  was  required  to  explain  how  he
    considered that the eligibility requirement was met under  Gen  1.2  of
    Appendix FM to the Rules. He failed to do so.

19. If the judge was of the  view  that  the  suitability  and  eligibility
    requirements were met, this would mean that he was required to consider
    whether the respondent could  satisfy  EX.1  b.  While  the  judge  did
    indicate at [16] that the relationship between the  respondent  and  SA
    was genuine, he did not consider whether there were any  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

20. The judge's conclusions in relation to Article 8 within the Rules  were
    deeply flawed and his consideration of the appeal outside the Rules was
    entirely absent.

21. For the foregoing reasons, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    set aside, with no findings preserved.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Majid. A Bengali interpreter is required.


Signed                                              Date:  4  October   2016


T Kamara
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
