
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01841/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 April  2016                    |On 27 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H H STOREY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR ABEDLKRIM ZERGUI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brockelsby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer ZEB


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

             1. In a decision sent on 5  October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
                (FtT) Judge Hussain allowed the  appeal  of  the  respondent
                (hereafter the  claimant)  who  is  a  national  of  Algeria
                against a decision made  by  the  appellant  (hereafter  the
                Secretary of State for the Home Department or SSHD) dated  9
                January 2015 refusing his application  to  remain  based  on
                human rights.

             2. The claimant came to the  UK  illegally  in  June  1999  and
                unsuccessfully  claimed  asylum.  He  became  appeal  rights
                exhausted in February 2001. He continued to stay in  the  UK
                unlawfully and in March  2010  his  solicitors  submitted  a
                Legacy questionnaire. The SSHD refused to grant him leave to
                remain under the Legacy programme and rejected  his  further
                representations. He appealed a  refusal  made  on  17  March
                2011. This  resulted  in  FtT  judge  Dennis  finding  in  a
                decision  of  14  July  2014  that  his   case   should   be
                reconsidered. Placing particular reliance on R (Mohammed)  v
                SSHD [2012] EWHC 3091, Judge Dennis considered that the SSHD
                had never adequately responded  to  the  claimant's  legacy-
                related applications of 2010.  This  reconsideration  formed
                the basis of the decision under appeal in this case.

             3. Judge Hussain did not consider that the  claimant  had  made
                out a case that he could succeed under the Immigration Rules
                dealing with Article 8. Judge. He  rejected  the  claimant's
                claim that he would  be  imprisoned  on  return  to  Algeria
                because he had failed to comply with his  obligations  as  a
                reserve soldier. He was adamant that the claimant had family
                members in Algeria and that he had not lost  all  ties  with
                that country and could re-integrate there.

             4. Judge Hussain then turned to consider whether  the  claimant
                was entitled to succeed  outside  the  Rules  on  Article  8
                grounds. He concluded that the claimant  could  not  succeed
                because there was "nothing exceptional about the  claimant's
                circumstances that would merit consideration outside of  the
                ... Rules" [18].

             5. The only reason the judge allowed the appeal was because  he
                was dissatisfied with the treatment given by the SSHD in her
                refuel letters to paragraph 353B  considerations.  Paragraph
                353B came into force on 13 February 2012 following the  same
                Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules,  as  that  which
                deleted of paragraph 395C. Paragraph 353B, in Part 12 of the
                Immigration  Rules,  entitled  "Procedure  and   rights   of
                appeal", reads as follows:

    "Exceptional Circumstances

    353B. Where further submissions have been made and the  decision  maker
    has established whether or not they  amount  to  a  fresh  claim  under
    paragraph 353 of these Rules, or in cases with no  outstanding  further
    submissions whose appeal rights  have  been  exhausted  and  which  are
    subject to a review, the decision maker will also have  regard  to  the
    migrant's:

         (i)  character, conduct and  associations  including  any  criminal
         record and the nature of any offence of which the migrant concerned
         has been convicted;

         (ii) compliance with any conditions attached to any previous  grant
         of leave to enter or remain and compliance with any  conditions  of
         temporary admission or immigration bail where applicable;

         (iii)    length of time spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  spent  for
         reasons beyond the migrant's control  after  the  human  rights  or
         asylum claim has been submitted or refused;

    in deciding whether there are exceptional circumstances which mean that
    removal from the United Kingdom is no longer appropriate.

    This paragraph does not apply to submissions made overseas.

    This  paragraph  does  not  apply  where  the  person  is   liable   to
    deportation."

             6. Judge Hussain  considered  first  of  all,  in  relation  to
                paragraph 353B(i) considerations, that  its  terms  required
                the SSHD to treat the fact that the claimant did not have  a
                criminal record as being in his favour. Turning to paragraph
                353B(ii)  considerations,  which  concern  compliance   with
                conditions, the  judge  noted  that  the  SSHD  had  earlier
                alleged before Judge Dennis that the claimant had failed  to
                keep to the terms of his temporary admission and was treated
                as an as an absconder. He then noted that Judge  Dennis  had
                found that there was nothing before him  to  show  that  the
                claimant was on any reporting conditions and continued:

    "30. I find it regrettable that despite  the  clear  rejection  of  the
    claim  that  the  appellant  was  an  absconder,  in   Judge   Dennis's
    determination, the respondent  has  again  relied  on  this  allegation
    without providing any objective evidence, whatsoever. In the absence of
    any such evidence, I can only echo the words of the learned  judge  and
    conclude that the respondent has not shown that the appellant has  been
    non-compliant."

             7. The judge then went on to consider para 353B(iii) concerning
                the length of time spent in the UK for  reasons  beyond  the
                migrant's control. The judge said that he found force in the
                SSHD's submissions that since the claimant's  appeal  rights
                had been exhausted in February 2011 he had taken no steps to
                leave the UK and only surfaced in 2010  by  making  a  claim
                under  the  legacy  scheme:  "A  substantial  part  of   the
                [claimant's] residence has therefore been built  up  without
                the [SSHD] having  a  part  in  it".  However,  he  went  to
                consider that the SSHD had delayed for a period  of  some  3
                years in taking steps to remove the claimant and concluded:

    "What  is  singularly  lacking  in  the   SSHD's   assessment   is   an
    acknowledgement that although the [claimant] has been here of  his  own
    choosing, he has now been in the United Kingdom for 16 years.  He  came
    to this country at the age of 25 and is now aged 42 years. In this time
    he has clearly built  up  a  substantial  private  life  including  two
    cohabiting relationships the last of which has lasted no  less  than  5
    years. The [claimant] is also known to a great  many  people  who  have
    written in his support. "

             8. The judge then stated:

    "32. ... what is required is a "holistic" approach. In  my  view,  this
    means that the Secretary of State has to look at all  the  criteria  in
    paragraph 353B in the round in order to decide whether  the  [claimant]
    should be removed from the UK.

    33.  Since paragraph 353B is a provision of the  Immigration  Rules,  I
    find that this tribunal has the jurisdiction to make its own assessment
    as to whether the [claimant's] circumstances are such that by reference
    to the criteria in that rule, it is no  longer  appropriate  to  remove
    him. I find that it is not.

    34.  I find that the [SSHD's] decision is in accordance  with  the  law
    and does not interfere with the [claimant's] human rights. I find  that
    the decision is in accordance with paragraph 276ADE however I find that
    the  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  paragraph  353B  of   the
    Immigration Rules. Accordingly it is my view that the [SSHD] should now
    make a decision as to what leave to grant the [claimant] in  the  light
    of the finding that I make above. "

             9. The grounds  of  appeal  allege  (i)  by  reference  to  the
                Tribunal decision in Khanum & Others (para 353B) [2013] UKUT
                00311 (IAC), that in finding that  he  had  jurisdiction  to
                determine  the  appeal  under  paragraph  353B   the   judge
                misdirected himself, as a decision under 353B is entirely  a
                matter for the SSHD and  is not justiciable;  (ii)  that  in
                any event the judge did not have power to direct the SSHD to
                decide  to  grant  leave;   and   (iii)   the   judge   made
                contradictory findings in that he found on the one  hand  at
                [18] that there was nothing exceptional about the claimant's
                circumstances that would  merit  consideration  outside  the
                Immigration Rules and that there was  no  violation  of  his
                human rights ([34]) , but then at [31] found the  claimant's
                circumstances looked at holistically merited  being  allowed
                outside the Rules on a paragraph 353B basis.

            10. In submissions before me Mr Gilbert did not  seek  to  argue
                that Khanum  was  wrongly  decided  and  accepted  that  the
                determination of Judge Hussain had difficulties. He did  not
                seek to challenge the judge's conclusions that the  claimant
                could not succeed under the Immigration Rules or outside the
                Rules on an Article 8 basis. However, he submitted that  the
                judge's only error was in seeking to direct  the  respondent
                to decide what leave to grant  the  claimant.  He  contended
                that in essence the judge had construed the refusal decision
                to amount to a failure on the part of the judge to apply her
                own policy on paragraph 353B; and, that being the case,  the
                judge was entitled to  allow  the  appeal.  I  informed  the
                parties that I understood there to  be  a  Court  of  Appeal
                judgment dealing with para 353B which neither had cited  and
                that if I found I was correct in that understanding I  would
                have regard to it. As I allude  to  below,  I  did  in  fact
                locate the case I had in mind.

            11.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  Judge   Hussain
                materially erred in law.

            12. The first and fundamental error on the part of the judge was
                in considering that he had jurisdiction to allow the  appeal
                on paragraph 353B  grounds.  That  was  flatly  contrary  to
                established case law: in Khanum the head  note  states  that
                "the decision whether or not to carry out a  review  (within
                the scope  of  paragraph  353B)  is  entirely  a  matter  of
                discretion  of  the  Secretary   of   State   and   is   not
                justiciable".  As pointed out in Khanum, a decision to carry
                out a review under para 353B is not an immigration  decision
                within  the  meaning  of   s.82(2)   of   the   Nationality,
                Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and because it is predicated
                on appeal rights having been exhausted  it  is  an  entirely
                internal matter. The decision in Khanum has  been  confirmed
                by the Court of Appeal in Thandiwe Qongwane, Vilan Patel and
                Aysha Khanum and others v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  957.  In  that
                judgment Sir Stanley  Burnton  analysed  paragraph  353B  as
                follows:

Discussion

            13.  I  would  begin  by  making   what   I   would   hope   are
                uncontroversial observations. The first  is  that  paragraph
                353B is not to be construed  by  reference  to  the  deleted
                paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules. The Rules  must  be
                construed and applied in the form they take at the  date  of
                the decision in question. It would be quite wrong to require
                or to expect immigrants,  prospective  immigrants  or  their
                advisers to trawl through previous versions in order to seek
                to understand  them.  Indeed,  if  anything,  the  different
                wording and location in the Immigration Rules  of  paragraph
                353B as compared with paragraph 395C (and  the  difficulties
                to the administration of the immigration  system  caused  by
                395C) point to change rather than similarity.

            14. Secondly, on any basis the scope for  the  exercise  by  the
                Secretary of State of the discretion envisaged (to use,  for
                the present, a neutral  expression)  by  paragraph  353B  is
                narrow. Persons who seek to remain  in  this  country  under
                specific  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  such  as
                students on approved courses of further education,  will  be
                expected either to qualify under  the  Rules  or  to  leave.
                Person  who  establish  claims  for  asylum,  or  under  the
                European Convention on Human Rights, or  EU  Treaty  rights,
                are outside the scope of paragraph 353B, and  in  any  event
                have no need for the exercise of any  discretion  applicable
                in "exceptional circumstances". Paragraph  353B  can  be  of
                relevance only to those who have no right to remain in  this
                country  and  whose  claims  have  been  finally  determined
                (because their appeal rights are exhausted and there are  no
                unanswered submissions). The discretion is a  safety  valve,
                pursuant to which the Secretary of State  may  refrain  from
                removing  but  only  in  such  circumstances,   which   will
                necessarily be rare.

            15. I think that the words "the decision maker  has  established
                whether  or  not   they   (i.e.,   the   migrant's   further
                submissions) amount to a fresh claim under paragraph 353  of
                these Rules"  must  be  read  as  "the  decision  maker  has
                established that they do not amount to a fresh  claim  under
                paragraph 353 of these Rules". If  the  Secretary  of  State
                accepts that the submissions amount to a fresh  claim  under
                paragraph 353, she  will  have  to  consider  them;  if  she
                rejects them on their merits, and refuses leave to enter  or
                to remain, the migrant has a right of appeal  under  section
                82(1)(d) or (e) of the 2002 Act. Pending final determination
                of the claim, the Secretary of State  will  not  remove  the
                migrant.

            16. My last observation is that paragraph 353B does not  concern
                the decision to grant or to refuse  leave  to  enter  or  to
                remain. It is concerned only with the decision to remove  or
                not to remove. Whether a decision that removal is no  longer
                appropriate must lead to the grant of leave to  remain,  and
                if so when and in what circumstances and what should be  the
                terms of such leave, are not matters  that  arise  in  these
                appeals, and I say nothing about it.  But  it  follows  from
                this, and from the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Patel
                [2013] UKSC 72 [2013] 3 WLR 1517, that a  failure  to  apply
                paragraph 353B will not render unlawful a decision to refuse
                leave to enter, or to refuse to extend leave,  made  at  the
                same time as the decision to remove.

            17.  Turning  to  the  matters  in  controversy,  I  reject  the
                contention that paragraph 353B confers a discretion  on  the
                Secretary of State. In support of  his  argument,  Mr  Malik
                relied on the judgment of Sedley LJ in Mirza  at  paragraphs
                18 and 19,  but  that  case  concerned  the  very  different
                provisions of what was then paragraph 395C. It  is  implicit
                in section 84(1)(f) of the 2002 Act that  the  Secretary  of
                State may exercise discretions relating to  immigration  and
                asylum other than those conferred by the Immigration  Rules.
                The discretion not to remove a migrant with no rights to  be
                here is not one that is subject to any Immigration Rule;  it
                is a discretion exercised outside those  Rules.  I  entirely
                agree with the Upper Tribunal on this point.

            18. I also reject the submission that paragraph 353B  of  itself
                creates an obligation on the Secretary of State to carry out
                a review in  the  circumstances  to  which  it  refers.  The
                wording necessary to create a duty is obvious, and there  is
                no reason why paragraph 353B should not have expressly  used
                them if it was intended to create a duty.

            19. In my judgment, the basis for the creation  of  a  duty,  if
                there is one, is to be found in the Enforcement Instructions
                and Guidance issued by the  Secretary  of  State,  which  in
                section 53.1 states:

    "Exceptional circumstances should  be  considered  in  cases  where  an
    asylum or human rights claim has been refused, appeal rights have  been
    exhausted and no further submissions exist, as part of the  process  of
    asylum case owners keeping their cases under  review.  In  these  cases
    paragraph 353B is to be applied."

            20. A failure to apply the Enforcement Instructions and Guidance
                is in general a failure to apply a policy and may render the
                decision  resulting  from  that  failure  unlawful  for  the
                purposes of judicial review: see, e.g.,  The  Queen  on  the
                application of Pratima Das v Secretary of State for the Home
                Department [2014] EWCA Civ 45 and IM (Nigeria)  v  Secretary
                of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1561 [2014]
                1 WLR 1870. It is not easy to read the Guidance as  creating
                a duty to keep all cases to which paragraph 353B  may  apply
                under review, particularly since the Immigration Rule itself
                refers to "a review", which suggests that it is only when  a
                decision is made, or a duty exists, to review a case that it
                applies.

            21. Going on to cite the Upper Tribunal in Khanum,  Sir  Stanley
                Burnton observed further that:

    "31. However, whether there was  a  duty  to  carry  out  a  review  is
    irrelevant in all of the cases before us. In each  case,  the  decision
    letter of the Secretary of State referred  to  the  factors  listed  in
    paragraph 353B and stated that  they  did  not  justify  a  finding  of
    exceptional  circumstances  resulting  in  removal  no   longer   being
    appropriate. If there was a duty to  consider  those  factors,  it  was
    amply complied with.

    32.  Furthermore, if a decision is lawfully made to remove at the  same
    time as a decision to refuse leave claimed on Article 8 grounds,  there
    is likely to be no sensible reason for  a  review  to  be  carried  out
    separately from the consideration of  the  claim  for  leave.  In  such
    circumstances, paragraph 353B will not apply. In any event, the factors
    referred to in that paragraph are likely to have been considered in the
    rejection of the Article 8 claim.  It  would  be  unnecessary  for  the
    decision maker  to  refer  to  those  factors  again,  other  than  the
    statement that there are  no  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a
    decision that removal is not appropriate.

    33.  I would add that in this context, where ex hypothesi  the  migrant
    has no right to be  here,  and  faces  no  real  risk  on  return,  and
    paragraph 353B is applied, I see no  reason  why  detailed  reasons  or
    recitals of facts should be required. The reasons given in the  letters
    in the present cases were adequate. Furthermore, in  most  if  not  all
    cases, the factors will  necessarily  have  been  considered:  decision
    letters normally summarise the  immigration  history  of  the  migrant,
    which includes the length of time here, whether his or her presence has
    been lawful or not and whether  there  was  a  failure  voluntarily  to
    leave. Unless the migrant has provided information about his character,
    conduct and associations the Secretary of State  is  unlikely  to  know
    anything about them, so there may be nothing to consider.

    34.  I do not think that the word "review" in paragraph 353B and in the
    Guidance is used in any technical sense. Where  there  is  occasion  to
    consider removal outside the context of any Article 8 or other claim, I
    would expect the decision maker to consider the factors listed in  that
    paragraph when deciding whether to decide to remove. Conversely,  if  a
    claim for permission to appeal to be granted, it must be shown that the
    proposed  appeal  would  raise  an  important  point  of  principle  or
    practice, or that there is another compelling reason for an  appeal  to
    be heard. If an application for permission to apply for judicial review
    of the decision to remove is brought on the ground that  the  paragraph
    353B factors were not considered in the Secretary of  State's  decision
    letter,  but  there  is  no  sensible  case  for  finding   exceptional
    circumstances, I see no reason why permission  to  apply  for  judicial
    review should be granted.

    35.  It follows from my conclusion that paragraph 353B does not  itself
    creates a duty on the part of the Secretary of State that a migrant may
    not appeal to the First-tier Tribunal under  section  84(1)(f)  of  the
    2002 Act on the ground that "the person taking the decision should have
    exercised differently a discretion  conferred  by  Immigration  Rules".
    Section 113 of the 2002 Act defines "immigration rules" as "rules under
    section 1(4)" of the Immigration Act 1971 "general immigration  rules".
    If, as I have already stated, the only basis for a duty is to be  found
    in  the  Enforcement  Instructions  and  Guidance,  that  duty  is  not
    conferred by the Immigration  Rules  so  defined.  A  decision  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  that  there  are  no  exceptional   circumstances
    justifying a finding that removal is no longer  appropriate  cannot  be
    appealed under paragraph 84(1)(f). It also follows  that  the  Tribunal
    cannot allow an appeal under section 86(3)(b) solely on the ground that
    it  considers  that  the  discretion   should   have   been   exercised
    differently, since the discretion is not one that may be  one  "against
    which [the] appeal is brought or intended to be brought".

    36.  It follows from my conclusion that the factors listed in paragraph
    353B were in fact considered in the case of each of these appeals  that
    no question arises of the decision to remove being unlawful  by  reason
    of any failure to do so. It follows that no  question  of  unlawfulness
    arises for the purposes of Article 8.2 or section 84(1)(e)  or  section
    86(3)(a) of the 2002 Act."

            22. I consider the reasoning of the Court of Appeal to be cogent
                and in any event I am bound by it. Judge Hussain's  decision
                is directly contrary to Court of Appeal  authority.  He  was
                wrong to consider that he  had  jurisdiction  to  allow  the
                appeal on  paragraph  353B  grounds.  He  misunderstood  the
                nature of paragraph 353B.

            23. Even if I had considered Judge Hussain had  not  misdirected
                himself  as  regards  paragraph  353B  and  even  if  I  had
                entertained Mr's Gilbert's submissions that  in  effect  the
                judge was treating the SSHD as having failed  to  apply  her
                own policy, I would still have concluded  that  the  judge's
                decision was vitiated  by  legal  error.  That  is  for  the
                following reasons.  First,  it  is  clear  that  the  SSHD's
                consideration of matters under paragraph  353B  was  lawful,
                rational and reasonable. Its thrust was that the  claimant's
                character, conduct and compliance history and length of time
                in  the  UK  were  such  as  to  mean  that  there  were  no
                "Exceptional  circumstances"  justifying  the  claimant  not
                being removed. The SSHD's consideration  of  paragraph  353B
                addressed all relevant matters and gave  sound  reasons  for
                concluding  that  these  did  not  amount   to   exceptional
                circumstances

            24. Second, even if I were to have accepted that the  judge  was
                entitled to consider paragraph 353B considerations on  their
                merits (not just in terms  of  legality);  the  judge's  own
                treatment of them was seriously flawed. For  one  thing,  he
                appeared  to  deem   "exceptional"   the   very   same   (or
                substantially the same) circumstances that  he  had  earlier
                concluded were not exceptional in the context of the Article
                8  assessment.  If  there  was  some  different  basis   for
                considering exceptionality to arise in  the  paragraph  353B
                context the judge failed to identify it. His only identified
                reasons - history of compliance and length of time in the UK
                and the nature of the claimant's relationships in the  UK  -
                had necessarily to be ones that he considered when assessing
                Article 8. Mr Gilbert did not contend otherwise.

            25. Further, the judge was clearly wrong to  consider  that  the
                SSHD had no evidential foundation for her position that  the
                claimant had a history of noncompliance.  It  is  not  clear
                what evidence about the claimant's immigration  history  was
                before Judge Dennis, but  what  is  clear  is  that  in  the
                refusal decision made by the SSHD  subsequently  in  January
                2015 she identified with great specificity the basis for her
                assessment that the claimant had a history of noncompliance.
                In her decision letter she identified that the claimant  had
                been issued with IS 96 forms informing the claimant that  he
                was on temporary admission and required  to  report  to  his
                local Immigration Office on 7 dates between  June  1999  and
                August 2000 and on 19 March 2002 had  been  issued  with  an
                absconder report because he had absconded from his temporary
                address. The refusal letter further identified that  it  was
                only after the claimant sought  to  stay  under  the  Legacy
                programme by way of  letter  sent  in  June  2010  that  his
                reporting (which commenced in August  2013)  was  compliant.
                Thus  there  was  prima  face  evidence  of  a  history   of
                noncompliance from June 1999 until the  claimant  identified
                himself to the SSHD in June 2010 (it may indeed have gone on
                longer, but I shall assume for the purposes of  this  appeal
                that by contacting the SSHD in June  2010  the  claimant  at
                least sought to comply). Thus, for  Judge  Hussain  to  have
                sought to rely on the findings of fact made by Judge  Dennis
                at an earlier point in time when this  evidence  was  either
                not available or was overlooked by Judge Dennis, was  wholly
                erroneous. At the  very  least  Judge  Hussain  should  have
                engaged with the further evidence of noncompliance  outlined
                in the SSHD letter of January  2015  and  explained  why  he
                considered it was not relevant. I would add that if  similar
                evidence regarding absconding had in fact been available  to
                Judge Dennis in July 2014, then he  was  also  in  error  in
                disregarding it (he said that the reference in  Home  Office
                correspondence  about  the  claimant  having  absconded  was
                "wholly unsubstantiated").

            26. There was no proper  basis,  therefore,  for  Judge  Hussain
                considering that there was no history  of  noncompliance.  I
                would add  that  given  that  it  was  Judge  Hussain's  own
                assessment (which acknowledge that "a  substantial  part  of
                the [claimant's residence had been built up without the SSHD
                having a hand in it" since the claimant  only  "surfaced  in
                2010"), it was wholly unjustified for him to  treat  the  16
                years the claimant had  been  in  the  UK  as  amounting  to
                residence to which significant  weight  could  be  attached.
                Even  if  not   directly   applicable   to   paragraph   353
                considerations, the reasoning of the European Court of Human
                Rights (also reflected in s.117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act]
                is pertinent in this context. Family life and  private  life
                relationships established when a person's immigration status
                is  precarious,  cannot  be  accorded  the  same  weight  as
                otherwise. This consideration the judge wholly ignored.

            27. I would also point out that  both  Judge  Dennis  and  Judge
                Hussain appear to have been greatly influenced by the  views
                as regards Legacy  cases  as  set  out  in  the  High  Court
                decision in Mohamed. A long  line  of  subsequent  case  law
                pending in Court of  Appeal  decisions  have  taken  a  very
                different view from that taken  in  Mohamed.  In  particular
                delay on the part of the SSHD for  a period of  three  years
                (which was a factor  to  which  Judge  Hussain  appeared  to
                attach quite significant weight) has not been found to be  a
                significant factor: see in particular, SH (Iran)  &  Anor  v
                Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
                1469 (12 November 2014), If there  is  one  feature  of  the
                appeal before me that stands out from the others it is  that
                First tier Tribunal judges need to make sure that are  aware
                of  relevant  developments  in  the   law.   Judge   Hussain
                overlooked key cases relating to  both  paragraph  353B  and
                Legacy cases.

            28.  For  the  above  reasons  I  conclude  that  Judge  Hussain
                materially erred in law and his decision is to be set aside.

            29. Although both representatives urged me not  to  re-make  the
                decision myself without  a  father  adjournment  I  was  not
                persuaded by the reasons they gave, I have decided that I am
                in a position to re-make the decision without  further  ado.
                Mr Gilberts' submission that there were two friends who  had
                not been able to attend the claimant's appeal  because  they
                were  on  holiday,  does  not  assist  because  it   wrongly
                presupposes that there is a viable basis of  appeal  in  the
                context of paragraph 353B. Ms Brocklesby-Weller's submission
                that a further hearing would help clarify the issue  of  the
                history of absconding does not  assist  either  for  similar
                reasons. Insofar as  there  is  a  factual  issue  regarding
                whether the SSHD had an evidential basis  for  stating  that
                the claimant had a history of  noncompliance  I  have  found
                that there was. I note further that  the  claimant  has  had
                ample opportunity in seeking to reply to the SSHD's  grounds
                of  appeal  to  adduce  further  evidence   to   rebut   the
                allegations of the SSHD regarding his  immigration  history.
                He has failed to adduce anything.

            30. For the above reason:

    The FtT judge Hussain materially erred in law and his decision  is  set
    aside.

    The decision I re-make is to  dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.




                               Signed   [pic]
                                    Date 22 April 2016


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
