
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01188/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 September 2014                           |On 9 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                              ms mukta majumder

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Litchfied, Counsel instructed by A1 Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangaldesh and her date of  birth  is  18
    May 1990.  She entered the UK on 7 May 2011 having been  granted  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 26 August 2013.  She then
    made an application to extend her leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
    Migrant on 21  August  2013.   This  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 9 December 2013.   The  application
    was  refused  because  the  appellant  had  not  submitted   with   her
    application an Advanced Diploma in Business  Administration  (level  5)
    certificate.   The respondent made several requests to the appellant to
    submit the certificate but there was no response. The  application  was
    also refused under paragraph  322(9)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    appellant was granted entry clearance to study at Interlink College  of
    Technology & Business,  but  the  appellant  switched  courses  without
    making a fresh application and thus it was  the  respondent's  position
    that she has not complied with conditions of leave (Section 50  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).

2.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and her appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Kimnell in a decision of 1 May 2014 which  was  promulgated  on  2  May
    2014.  The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  by  Judge  V  A
    Osborne in a decision of 3 June 2014. Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.        Judge Kimnell heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her
    husband and  she  made  the  following  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules at paragraphs 25 to 27 as follows:

         "25.  The  submission  of  the  Diploma  with  the  application  is
             mandatory, and I do not accept  on  the  appellant's  evidence
             that the original Diplomas were submitted.  The  photocopy  of
             the Diploma on which the appellant relies does not specify the
             level at which the  qualification  certificate  certifies  the
             pass.  The CAS assigned on 22nd August 2013  states  that  the
             previous  course  level  was   QCF/NQF   level   5   but   the
             qualification certificate produced to the Tribunal simply does
             not record that the pass was at level 5 and I  do  not  accept
             that a valid Diploma would omit such an important detail.


         26.   I  did  not  find  the  appellant  or  her  husband  credible
             witnesses.  I do not, in fact, believe that either of them are
             genuine students.  Neither knew much about  the  course  their
             respective spouses were allegedly studying and I  do  find  it
             extremely significant that when the  couple  married  on  23rd
             July 2012  neither  is  described  as  a  student.   One,  the
             husband, is described  as  a  restaurant  supervisor  and  the
             appellant as a beautician.


         27.  Given that both witnesses were untruthful when they gave their
             evidence and the photocopy of the  certificate  said  to  have
             been  sent   in   original   form   to   the   respondent   is
             unsatisfactory, I do not accept that the certificate were sent
             at all.  Consequently the appeal will  be  dismissed  on  that
             point."


4.   In relation to Article 8 the Judge made findings at  paragraphs  28  to
    33 as follows:

         "28. As regards  Article  8  ECHR  there  is  no  question  of  the
             appellant meeting the requirements of the Immigration Rules as
             they regulate Article  8  but  the  decision  is  said  to  be
             disproportionate  in  classic  terms  outside  the  Rules.   I
             therefore address the give "Razgar" questions.


         29.  Is there family life between the appellant and the sponsor?  I
             find that there is.  Has  the  appellant  and/or  her  husband
             established a private life in the United  Kingdom?   I  accept
             that  they  have  having  resided  here,  married  here,  been
             studying here and been employed in the UK and that  both  have
             developed a private life to an extent.


         30.  Does the decision give rise to a consequence of  such  gravity
             as to engage Article 8 ECHR?  I find that it  does  not.   The
             appellant and her husband are both  nationals  of  Bangladesh.
             Neither has current leave to be in the United Kingdom,  though
             the appellant's husband has an application pending  which  may
             or may not be successful, but there is no  reason  why  family
             life should not take place in Bangladesh.  Nor  is  there  any
             reason why the appellant  and  her  husband  should  not  find
             employment in Bangladesh.  Both came to the  UK  in  order  to
             gain an education and both have had the opportunity to do so.


         31.  Article 8 ECHR is not engaged at all, but even if  it  is  the
             decision is in accordance with the Immigration Rules  and  the
             law generally and in pursuit of a legitimate aim,  namely  the
             maintenance of immigration  controls  in  the  wider  national
             interest.


         32.  Is the decision disproportionate?  That involves weighing  the
             appellant's private life  rights  and  those  of  her  husband
             against the undoubted  right  and  obligation  of  the  United
             Kingdom to maintain and enforce immigration  controls  in  the
             wider  national  interest,  a  factor  that  always   attracts
             considerable weight.


         33.  The private life rights of the appellant and her husband  come
             nowhere near outweighing  the  public  interest  side  of  the
             balance for reasons given above in relation to whether or  not
             Article  8  is  engaged  at  all.   Both  are   nationals   of
             Bangladesh, both can enjoy their married  life  in  Bangladesh
             and both are capable of finding work in Bangladesh.  Both have
             completed the studies for which  they  were  admitted  to  the
             United Kingdom, and, though both have  applied  for  leave  to
             remain in the United Kingdom the appellant  has  not  met  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules in that regard and it is
             yet to be seen whether the appellant's  husband  does.   There
             are no children to consider and I  have  serious  reservations
             about whether the appellant's husband is a genuine student  at
             all.  If he is a genuine student, and that is  proved  to  the
             respondent's satisfaction in his  current  application,  there
             will  be  nothing  to  prevent  the  appellant  returning   to
             Bangladesh and obtaining a visa  as  a  student  dependent  or
             making an application for further leave as a  student  herself
             and that will be dealt with on merits.  The decision  is  most
             certainly not disproportionate in Article 8 terms."


The Grounds Seeking Permission to Appeal and Oral Submissions

5.   Ms Litchfield made oral submissions  in  the  context  of  the  grounds
    seeking permission. The grounds seeking leave to appeal argue that  the
    Judge made a mistake when concluding that were  two  certificates  that
    the appellant had, according to the respondent, failed to  submit  with
    her application.  There was only one document in issue and that was the
    Advanced Diploma.  This mistake highlights a lack  of  due  care.   The
    Judge found that the  appellant  and  her  husband  were  not  credible
    witnesses because they did not know what the  other  was  studying  and
    also because their marriage certificate  described  them  as  something
    other than students.  The Judge was misconceived and  irrational.   The
    Judge's findings contradict his record of evidence which was  that  the
    appellant had previously studied an Advanced Diploma in Business  which
    is  what  the  appellant's  husband  also  confirmed  at  [14]  of  the
    determination.   The  First-tier  Judge  goes  beyond  her   remit   by
    suggesting that the appellant and her husband are not genuine  students
    because this was not a basis for refusal and amounts  to  a  procedural
    impropriety.

6.   In relation to the marriage certificate the document does  not  require
    those marrying to indicate that they are students, it simply asks for a
    rank or profession and the parties accurately responded  by  confirming
    what work they did do at the relevant time which was in accordance with
    the conditions of their leave.   The  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons why the appellant and her husband were untruthful.

7.   The Judge did not believe that the appellant had submitted the  Diploma
    certificate, but this was contrary to the  letters  and  correspondence
    between the appellant's legal representatives and the respondent  about
    which the First-tier Tribunal made no finding.  It  is  also  the  case
    that the appellant's application form stated that seven documents  were
    submitted which would tally with the  appellant  having  submitted  the
    certificate.  The Judge failed to take into account that the  CAS  that
    was issued to the appellant indicates that the sponsor  considered  the
    certificate.  The Judge erred in concluding at [25]  that  the  diploma
    could not be valid because it omits the level  of  qualification.   The
    college  that  issued  the  most  recent  CAS  had  had  sight  of  the
    certificate and therefore it was not for  the  respondent  to  question
    this  because  the  sponsor  was  satisfied  with  the  document.    Ms
    Litchfield stated that the appellant has  now  produced  a  replacement
    certificate and as such  she  now  satisfies  the  requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

8.   In relation to Article 8 the Judge failed to address whether or not  it
    would be proportionate to remove the appellant in the light of the fact
    that her spouse is here lawfully in the UK. It is argued that the First-
    tier Tribunal erroneously conflated the failure to meet the Immigration
    Rules with the proportionality assessment and  it  is  well-established
    that there is no correlation between the Rules and  Article  8  and  as
    such no near-miss argument.

9.   Mr Melvin made oral submissions in the  context  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's Rule 24 response. It is not accepted that  the  Judge  made  an
    error of law for the reasons given by the appellant but the  respondent
    cross-appeals asserting  that  the  Judge  erred  in  consideration  of
    Section 50 of the 2009 Act because the condition concerning no study is
    part of the Rules and it is clear that the  appellant  did  not  comply
    with the requirements of her previous leave with specific reference  to
    paragraph 245ZW of the Rules.

10.  Ms Litchfield argued that the First-tier Tribunal failed to attach  due
    weight to the CAS.  The appellant's husband is in the UK lawfully  with
    section 3C leave pending an application and it is not proportionate  to
    expect him to leave the UK having made a  valid  application  and  thus
    there would clearly be an interference with family life.


Conclusions

11.  It is asserted by the Secretary of State that  the  appellant  did  not
    include the  relevant  certificate  with  her  application.   From  the
    correspondence I can see that the Secretary of State,  having  received
    the application, e-mailed the appellant asking for the  certificate  to
    be submitted within seven days.  There is a letter from the appellant's
    representatives to the respondent of 17 October 2013 stating that  they
    had submitted the HSC (Higher Secondary  Certificate  Examination)  and
    Advanced Diploma certificate. There is an e-mail confirming  this  from
    those representing the appellant to UKBA dated  18  October  2013.   In
    this e-mail it  is  asserted  that  they  had  sent  all  the  original
    documents to UKBA and as such they only retained photocopies.  There is
    no specific reference to the  certificate  in  issue  in  this  e-mail.
    There is an e-mail from the Home Office of 28 October 2013 stating that
    they do not have the Advanced Diploma  certificate.   It  is  explained
    that they received a photocopy of a unit credit  certificate  but  that
    does not confirm that the appellant has been awarded a Diploma.   Again
    the Home Office asked for the certificate to be  sent  to  them  within
    seven days.  The solicitors wrote to the respondent on 6 November  2013
    stating that they have spoken to their client  and  she  has  confirmed
    that the document was with the other documents, but that she  has  been
    advised to contact the college  and  that  they  (the  solicitors)  are
    waiting to hear from her.  It is requested that the appellant be  given
    a few more days.

12.  The success of this appeal turned on the appellant's credibility.   The
    appellant's case was not that there had  been  an  error  and  she  had
    failed to submit the document unknowingly.  Her case was that  she  had
    submitted the document and the respondent was either  being  untruthful
    or had made a mistake.  In support of this she submitted the CAS  which
    indicates that the sponsor had seen the document in  issue.   This  was
    not in my view dispositive in  the  appellant's  favour  that  she  had
    submitted the certificate.  Credibility was a clear issue on which  the
    Judge had to make findings and there is no merit in the assertion  that
    the Judge exceeded her remit.  The Judge weighed up  the  evidence  and
    found in favour of the respondent.  It is correct that  at  [14]  where
    the Judge records the evidence  of  the  husband  which  was  that  the
    appellant followed an Advance Diploma in Business, but this in  no  way
    undermines her finding at [26] that "neither knew much about the course
    their respective spouses were allegedly studying". He was not aware  of
    the level of the course. I have also taken into account the  record  of
    the appellant's evidence at [9] which  supports  the  Judge's  finding.
    The grounds are an attempt to re-argue the case and a disagreement with
    the findings.  The Judge had the benefit of hearing oral evidence  from
    the appellant and her husband and she did not find them to be credible.
    She gave adequate reasons for this at [26].  The  Judge  did  not  make
    reference to the correspondence between the appellant's solicitors  and
    the respondent but this  is  not  a  material  error.   The  solicitors
    initially claimed that they had  sent  the  original  document  to  the
    respondent but then changed their position asserting that the appellant
    "claims that the document was with the others."  The  position  of  the
    solicitors is inconsistent  and  equivocal  and  does  not  assist  the
    appellant.

13.      The issue in relation to the marriage certificate is an attempt  to
    re-argue the case and disagreement with  the  findings  which  are  not
    irrational or perverse. I have considered the ground  relating  to  the
    level of the Diploma. The Judge at [35] questions  the  format  of  the
    certificate produced by the appellant for the hearing. The Judge  found
    that there was an inconsistency between what is asserted in the CAS and
    the certificate (see [25)). I do not find that this amounts to an error
    of law. It was a finding that was open to the Judge  on  the  evidence.
    In any event, if it is an error, it is not a material error.  The  only
    issue here was credibility and whether the appellant had submitted  the
    certificate or not and the Judge found against her.

14.  It is clear in my mind that the Judge was aware of the  relevant  issue
    which was whether or not  the  appellant  had  submitted  the  Advanced
    Diploma certificate.  Although paragraphs 2 and 3 of the  determination
    may not be entirely clear, I have considered the Judge's  findings  and
    the determination and it is clear that the Judge was concerned with the
    certificate in issue.

15.  In relation to Article 8 there was  no  substance  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The Judge considered  the  issue  outside  the  Rules.  It  is
    obvious that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the rules
    in relation to Tier 4 Students or under appendix FM. At [33] the  Judge
    is simply stating a fact and I do not find that she has considered this
    factor in the balancing exercise. In any event, had I found a  material
    error of law in relation to the Article 8 issue and were  I  to  remake
    the decision, I would go on to dismiss the appeal under Article  8.   I
    have regard to paragraph 57 of Patel & Others v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72.  The appellant has been in  the  UK
    for a relatively short period of time.  She has  been  found  to  be  a
    witness lacking in credibility.  Her husband has an application pending
    with the Home Office, but the evidence relating  to  his  private  life
    here is scant.  That he has a pending  application  does  not  tip  the
    balance in favour of the appellant.

16.      The decision of the Judge was lawful and the  decision  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Rules and Article 8  of  the  1950  Convention  on
    Human Rights is maintained. There is no need for me  in  this  case  to
    consider the respondent's cross appeal as  it  is  not  material.   The
    Judge did not determine the issue under paragraph 322 (9) and this  was
    an error of law. In the light of the evidence  in  this  case  and  the
    correspondence between the appellant and  the  respondent,  I  exercise
    discretion in the respondent's favour  and  thus  the  appeal  is  also
    dismissed under paragraph 322 (9) of the Rules.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 8 September  2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

