
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/01062/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2018                         |On 1st February 2018          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                      ALINA MARIANITA GORDILLO QUISHPE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P. Thoree, Thoree & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P.Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Equador,  born  on  the  30th  September
    1960. She seeks leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  human  rights
    grounds.  In substance she relies upon her  private  life  of  some  17
    years standing in this country, and her Kugathas family life  with  her
    British sisters and their descendants.




 2. In the first section of this determination I summarise the  'background
    and decision of the First-tier Tribunal'.  On the 11th December 2017  I
    set the determination of Judge Shiner aside; my reasons  for  doing  so
    are set out in section two, under  the  heading  'error  of  law'.  The
    appeal hearing was reconvened on the 16th January  2018  when  I  heard
    further evidence and  submissions  from  the  parties.  I  reserved  my
    decision which I now give under the heading 'the  remade  decision'  in
    section three.





    1. Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. It is not now in dispute that the Appellant has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since October 2000, when she entered unlawfully. She came  here
    to live with  her  sisters,  Aida  and  Isabel,  and  their  respective
    families.   Aida and Isabel were already  living  here  when  they  had
    asked her to come, as they were  worried  about  her  living  alone  in
    Equador. Over the years the Appellant, and indeed Aida and Isabel, made
    various attempts to regularise their positions with  the  Home  Office.
    The first, as far as  the  Appellant  is  concerned,  was  on  the  6th
    December  2004  when  she  was  listed  as  a  dependent  on   Isabel's
    application for indefinite  leave  to  remain.  Although  other  family
    members were granted leave to remain as a result of such  applications,
    the Appellant remained without any  status.  Subsequent  correspondence
    led to the  Respondent  agreeing  to  consider  the  Appellant's  human
    rights.  The basis of her submissions was that she has been living here
    all this time with her extended family, they are very close and she has
    nothing and no-one to return to in Equador.


 4. The Respondent's decision to refuse is dated  the  4th  December  2014.
    She considered the application under paragraph 276B of the  Immigration
    Rules. Notwithstanding that the refusal letter begins  by  noting  that
    the 'long residence' provision had been amended on the 9th July 2012 to
    remove the '14 years'  route,  it  is  this  very  provision  that  the
    Respondent went on to consider, refusing leave on the grounds that  the
    evidence was not sufficient  to  establish  14  years  residence.   The
    Respondent then considered whether there were any  exceptional  factors
    such that might justify a  grant  of  leave  'outside  of  the  rules'.
    Concluding that there were not, the application was rejected.

 5. The Appellant duly appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Tribunal
    made a finding of fact that the Appellant  has  continuously  lived  in
    this country with her sisters since October 2000.  In its assessment of
    the Immigration Rules the  Tribunal directed itself that the  rules  to
    be applied to this case were those in force at the date of the decision
    in November 2014, ie the 'new rules'.   The matter in issue was whether
    the Appellant could show that there were "very significant obstacles to
    her integration" in Equador, as  per  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules.  As to that matter the Judge made the following findings:

         . The Appellant has no family or friends in Equador


         . She is of good character, aside from her period of overstaying


         . She is an able, friendly woman who has been able to make  friends
           in this country


         . She is, and has been, supported in this country  by  her  sisters
           and brothers-in-law who give her �100 per month to spend


         . It would not be difficult for that money to be remitted to her in
           Equador


         . She left that country when she was 40 years old and is  therefore
           familiar with the language and customs (she still  speaks  fluent
           Spanish, indeed she teaches a Spanish class)


         . Whilst life in Equador might have changed in the  years  she  has
           been in the UK, it is unlikely that it would have done so to  the
           extent  that  the  Appellant  would  have   any   difficulty   in
           integrating

    Considering all of those matters the Tribunal did not accept that there
    were "very significant obstacles" to the Appellant returning to Equador
    and the appeal was dismissed with reference to paragraph 276ADE.


 6. Turning to consider Article 8  'outside  of  the  rules'  the  Tribunal
    accepted that the Appellant has  an  exceptionally  close  relationship
    with her sisters such that 'family life' would be engaged. It  found  a
    particular emotional and financial dependency between the Appellant and
    her sisters and applied Kugathas v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.  The  Tribunal  accepted  that   the
    Appellant's removal to Equador would interfere with  her  enjoyment  of
    that Article 8 right but it did not consider  the  interference  to  be
    disproportionate. In doing so the Tribunal rejected the contention that
    there had been an unacceptable delay on the part of the Home Office, or
    at least if there had been, that it  was  squarely  the  fault  of  the
    Respondent. Whilst the Appellant's solicitors had frequently written to
    the Home Office between 2010 and 2014 apparently chasing a decision  in
    respect of an application she  had  made  as  long  ago  as  2004,  the
    Tribunal accepted the contention of the Respondent that the application
    in question had in fact been 'withdrawn' in  April  2005.  Overall  the
    Tribunal was satisfied that the public interest,  in  removing  persons
    not entitled to leave  under  the  Rules,  prevailed.  The  appeal  was
    therefore dismissed.



    2. The Appellant's Appeal to the Upper Tribunal: Error of Law


 7. Before me Mr Thoree submitted  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was flawed for the following material errors in approach:


              i) The determination contains an error of fact in  respect  of
                 when the Appellant had made her application  for  leave  to
                 remain on  human  rights  grounds  and  this  infected  the
                 reasoning;


             ii) Failing to make clear findings;


            iii)  Failing  to  consider  the  circumstances  faced  by   the
                 Appellant upon return to Equador, in particular in light of
                 the long time that she has spent in this country.


 8. Although ground (iii) was not withdrawn,  the  substance  of  the  oral
    argument before me was concerned with grounds (i) and (ii). The gist of
    Mr  Thoree's  submissions  were  as  follows.  The  Appellant  made  an
    application in 2004 that was never resolved. Her sister Isabel, who was
    the primary applicant, had been granted leave along with her  daughter,
    but  the  Respondent  never  dealt  with  the  Appellant's  claim.  The
    correspondence  referred  to  by  the  Tribunal  was  all  about   that
    outstanding application.  That was relevant not just to the  matter  of
    proportionality,  EB  (Kosovo)  [2004]  UKHL  39  applied,   but   also
    substantively to the application of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  '14
    year' provision in the old version of 276B was the operative  rule:  it
    had been considered by the Respondent in the refusal letter.  The  only
    ground for refusal had been on the facts, and these  were  resolved  in
    the Appellant's favour by the Tribunal.


 9. The Respondent in reply submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had done
    "everything it was supposed to do". The Tribunal had  properly  applied
    the rule in operation at the date of the appeal, and given good reasons
    why the requirements were not met. The grounds amounted to no more than
    a disagreement with the findings.  As to the dispute  as  to  when  the
    application was made, there was no  obligation  on  the  Respondent  to
    prove that the 2004 application had been dealt with. Even if the  delay
    could be proven,  it  could  make  no  substantive  difference  to  the
    Appellant's  case,  given  the  terms  of  s117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.




    14 Years Long Residence

10. I deal first  with  Mr  Thoree's  submission  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to rely on the old version of paragraph 276B(b) of the  Rules.
    This required the Applicant to show that she  had  spent  at  least  14
    years continually residing in the UK prior to  any  enforcement  action
    being taken against her.   On the facts  as  found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,   the Appellant would win her case if  she  could  show  that
    this old policy applied to her.

11. The 14 years long residence provision was part of the Rules  until  the
    9th  July  2012  when  it  deleted  and  replaced  with  the  competing
    alternative requirements in paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)-(vi).  Mr  Thoree
    began his appeal by submitting that the Appellant's claim  should  have
    been  considered  under  the  old  framework,  because  she  made   her
    application before the provision  was  deleted,  and  the  Transitional
    Provisions stated that the operative rule should be that  in  force  at
    the date of the application. Unfortunately for Mr Thoree, the Court  of
    Appeal have decided otherwise. In Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA  Civ  74
    the Court held that a further amendment to the  rules,  effective  from
    the 6th September 2012, overruled the Transitional Provisions  that  he
    had sought to rely upon:
         (1) When HC 194 first came into force on 9 July 2012, the Secretary
         of State was not entitled to take into account the provisions of
         the new Rules (either directly or by treating them as a statement
         of her current policy) when making decisions on private or family
         life applications made prior to that date but not yet decided. That
         is because, as decided in Edgehill, "the implementation provision"
         set out at para. 7 above displaces the usual Odelola principle.
         (2) But that position was altered by HC 565 - specifically by the
         introduction of the new paragraph A277C - with effect from 6
         September 2012. As from that date the Secretary of State was
         entitled to take into account the provisions of Appendix FM and
         paragraphs 276ADE-276DH in deciding private or family life
         applications even if they were made prior to 9 July 2012. The
         result is that the law as it was held to be in Edgehill only
         obtained as regards decisions taken in the two-month window between
         9 July and 6 September 2012.
    The decision in this case was not made until  the  4th  December  2014,
    well after the Edgehill window closed. It is therefore unarguable  that
    the case  can  be  resolved  by  looking  at  the  old  rule,  ie  276B
    (unamended).  The Secretary of State should never have considered it in
    her refusal letter; the First-tier Tribunal was correct to have applied
    the new scheme, ie 276B (as amended, to remove the '14 year' route) and
    276ADE(1).  The decision in respect of the Rules is upheld.




    Delay


12. My conclusions on the '14 year' point do not, however,  mean  that  the
    case history is irrelevant. If, as a matter of fact, the Appellant  has
    been waiting for a decision on her human rights claim since 2004,  then
    this  is  a  matter  that   should   have   informed   the   Tribunal's
    proportionality balancing exercise. Such a delay might arguably  reduce
    the public interest in refusing the Appellant leave in two ways. First,
    the delay itself,  and  the  failure  to  respond  to  the  Appellant's
    repeated requests for a decision could, be said to  reduce  the  public
    interest in immigration control. Second, on  the  facts  of  this  case
    there was a fairness argument raised: why  was  the  Appellant  treated
    differently from her family members?


13. What then were the First-tier Tribunal's  conclusions  on  this  claim?
    They are set out in paragraphs 29-36 of the determination. The Tribunal
    concluded, in short, that the Respondent was right  and  Mr  Thoree  is
    wrong.  In her refusal letter the Respondent had asserted that the 2004
    application had been 'withdrawn', and that in 2006  the  Appellant  had
    been "considered not eligible  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain".  No
    notices or evidence to this effect had been produced, but this is  what
    the Respondent said in her refusal letter  and  the  Tribunal  accepted
    that assertion at face value. The Tribunal found that the 'human rights
    application' which resulted in the refusal under  appeal  was  made  in
    November 2014 when  the  Appellant  completed  an  'Immigration  Status
    Questionnaire'. I accept Mr Thoree's submission that  this  finding  is
    not clearly reasoned.  It is difficult to see why the Tribunal accepted
    the Respondent's unsupported  assertions,  or  that  it  balanced  them
    against the uncontested fact that the  Appellant  remained  in  contact
    with the Home Office throughout the period, and that at  least  between
    2010 and 2014  her  representative  sent  numerous  letters  chasing  a
    decision.  It appears from  those  letters  that  Mr  Thoree,  and  the
    Appellant, were  very  firmly  of  the  view  that  she  still  had  an
    application waiting to be determined.


14. The relevant chronology is as follows:

    1.11.04      Sister Isabel makes application for  ILR  under  the  then
                 'amnesty', naming the Appellant  and  Isabel's  9  year-old
                 daughter Lizeth as dependents


    17.12.04     Isabel completed and returned a 'family questionnaire'  in
                 which she again listed the  Appellant  and  Lizeth  as  her
                 dependents


    3.3.05 Sister Aida makes an application for ILR  naming  her  daughter,
                 son-in-law and their children as her dependents


    24.11.05           2004 application 'withdrawn' (assertion  in  refusal
    letter)


                 Isabel and Lizeth granted indefinite leave to remain


    25.4.06             Appellant  'considered  ineligible  for  indefinite
    leave to remain'
                 (assertion in refusal letter)


    28.8.07            Aida and her dependents granted indefinite leave  to
    remain


    11.2.10            Appellant's representatives write to the Home Office
    asserting
                 that she was included in Isabel's ILR application and that
    she
                 has still not had a decision


    1.4.10 Appellant's representatives  write  again  to  the  Home  Office
                 asserting that she was included in Isabel's ILR application
                 and that she has still not had a decision


    22.10.10     Appellant's representatives write again in similar  terms,
                 asserting a  legitimate  expectation  that  she  should  be
                 granted ILR


    26.10.10     Respondent acknowledges letter of 22.10.10 and says it has
                 been passed to a caseworker


    24.2.11               Appellant's    representatives    make    further
    representations


    23.8.11       Appellant's  representatives  write  again  requesting  a
                 decision and asserting  that  delay  is  unreasonable,  and
                 threatening to issue judicially review proceedings


    8.9.11 Judicial Review Unit within the Home Office write to  caseworker
                 requesting response


    18.4.12      Judicial Review Unit  within  the  Home  Office  write  to
                 caseworker requesting response


    14.5.12      Respondent requests photographs and identity documents


    6.6.12 Photographs and Equadorean passport submitted to Home Office


    28.8.12            Respondent requests further information and evidence


    13.9.12            Further information and evidence supplied


    21.11.13     Appellant's  representatives  send  letter  before  action
                 asserting unreasonable delay, and that the application  has
                 remained outstanding for over nine years

    26.2.14      Appellant's representatives  send  further  letter  before
                 action  asserting  unreasonable   delay,   and   that   the
                 application has remained outstanding for over nine years


    3.3.14       PAP acknowledged by OCLU


    6.5.14 Appellant's representatives send further  letter  before  action
                 asserting unreasonable delay, and that the application  has
                 remained outstanding for over nine years


    15.10.14     Appellant's  representatives  send  letter  before  action
                 asserting unreasonable delay, and that the application  has
                 remained outstanding for over ten years


    5.11.14            Appellant returns Immigration Status Questionnaire


    14.11.14           Appellant submits further documents


      14.   Human Rights claim rejected


15. Aside from the two matters in italics, which are based  solely  on  the
    assertion in the refusal  letter,  I  draw  that  chronology  from  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal. I find it to strongly  support
    the Appellant's claim that she was unaware that the 'decisions' in 2005
    and 2006 had been made. One date in particular  stands  out:  the  24th
    November 2005 when Isabel and her dependent daughter were granted  ILR.
    That is the  date  that  the  Respondent  records  that  the  Appellant
    "withdrew" her corresponding claim to be granted leave  under  the  ILR
    amnesty in place at that time.  As I say, the Appellant stoutly  denies
    having ever withdrawn her application,  and  the  Respondent  has  been
    unable to explain why her record reads as it does.   It appears  to  me
    that one possible explanation may be the terms in  which  that  amnesty
    was originally offered to Isabel.


16. The form that Isabel completed, and returned to the Home Office on  the
    17th December 2004, is reproduced in the Appellant's  bundle.  At  page
    142 is the final page of the application  which  at  part  3,  required
    Isabel to sign a declaration. The form explained:

         "In order for your  case  to  be  considered,  you  must  agree  to
         withdraw any other outstanding applications you may  have  made  to
         the Immigration and Nationality  Directorate  if  you  are  granted
         Indefinite Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom.


         This may include:


       . Your outstanding asylum claim
       . Any outstanding claim under the European Convention on Human Rights
         (ECHR)
       . Any other applications requesting leave to remain (for example,  as
         a student, or on the basis of marriage  to  a  person  present  and
         settled in the United Kingdom)


         Please indicate in the  box  below  whether  you  are  prepared  to
         withdraw  any  outstanding  applications  should  you  be   granted
         Indefinite Leave to Enter or Remain in the United Kingdom"

    Isabel duly ticked the  box  marked  'Yes  -  I  wish  to  withdraw  my
    outstanding applications if I am granted Indefinite Leave to Remain  in
    the United Kingdom'.


17. In the absence of any other explanation for the Appellant's case  being
    treated in the way that it apparently has, it appears to  me  that  the
    caseworker dealing with the linked ILR applications back  on  the  25th
    November 2005 granted Isabel  and  her  minor  daughter  ILR,  and  not
    knowing what to do with the case of a dependent adult,  treated  it  as
    'outstanding application'; applying the undertaking given by Isabel  at
    part 3 of her application form, he or she treated it as 'withdrawn'.  I
    am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did not  take  that  evidence
    into account when it attempted to determine when the Appellant had made
    her application, and whether the 2004 application was  outstanding.   I
    find that to be a material error, since it is at  least  arguable  that
    the Home Office caseworker erred in applying  Isabel's  undertaking  in
    that way. The form was  plainly  concerned  with  earlier,  outstanding
    applications, not the one that was currently under  consideration.    I
    therefore find Mr Thoree's grounds (i) and (ii) to  be  made  out.  The
    Tribunal did not give reasons for its finding that the 2004 application
    was withdrawn, and in making  that  finding  failed  to  take  relevant
    evidence into account.  I am satisfied that  the  issue  of  delay  was
    plainly relevant to the overall proportionality balancing exercise, and
    so the error has been shown to be material.  I set  that  part  of  the
    Article 8 decision aside to be remade.




    3. The Re-Made Decision


    Discussion and Findings


18. In remaking the Article 8 assessment I bear in mind that the First-tier
    Tribunal has dismissed the Appellant's appeal insofar as it related  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. The grounds of appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal did challenge that part of the  decision  but  in
    submissions to me Mr Thoree did not elaborate on or pursue this ground.
    The Tribunal's reasoning is summed up at paragraph 5 above and I see no
    reason to interfere with its findings that the Appellant would not face
    "very significant obstacles" reintegrating. It is a high  test  and  on
    the facts, where she speaks the language, has long-standing familiarity
    with the culture and could be supported by remittances, it would not be
    met.


19. The Respondent accepts however, that here the Rules do not represent  a
    'complete code'. Indeed they are far from doing so, since the scope  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) is by its nature limited, inviting no assessment of
    the Appellant's existing Article 8(1) rights and the interference  with
    them. Instead the rule focuses exclusively on  what  her  private  life
    might be in the future, should she end up back in Equador. Whilst  that
    it is obviously a relevant consideration, it does  not  amount  to  the
    holistic evaluation that Article 8 requires,  particularly  in  a  case
    such as this, where on the facts both private and  family  life  rights
    are engaged.  I begin then with those rights and the quality of them.

20. The First-tier Tribunal accepted on the evidence  before  it  that  the
    Appellant arrived in this country in 2000 and that she has  never  left
    since.  On arrival she moved in  to  a  house  in  Peckham  with  Aida,
    Isabel,  their  children  and  grandchildren.   Aida,  Isabel,   Aida's
    daughter Wilma and her son-in-law Cueva all worked to bring money  into
    the household. The Appellant made the home and looked  after  the  four
    children: Isabel's grandchildren Jessica, Daniel  and  Karla  who  were
    respectively eight, two and newborn at the time  of  her  arrival,  and
    Isabel's daughter Lizeth who was then about five years old.

21. Lizeth describes growing up in  this  household  headed  by  the  three
    sisters in glowing terms. Her own mother worked long hours and  it  was
    the Appellant who was there to "fill the void". She  would  be  at  the
    school gates, would prepare  "delicious"  dinner  and  look  after  the
    children with  "love  and  joy".  Lizeth  describes  the  Appellant  as
    "joyous, funny and constantly positive" who would dance  and  sing  her
    way around the house. She has no hesitation in describing the Appellant
    as her "second mother".  Cueva  describes  the  Appellant  as  a  "very
    charismatic person" who has always been an integral,  "essential"  part
    of this extended family. He explains that since she was not allowed  to
    work he and  his  wife  (Wilma)  have  always  helped  to  support  her
    financially and continue to do so today. Wilma concurs that her  auntie
    has been a massive support to her over the years, that  they  are  very
    close and that  she  and  her  husband  are  prepared  to  support  her
    financially for as long as she needs it.   Wilma's  children  have  all
    prepared written statements in support of the  Appellant.  Daniel,  who
    was just two when the Appellant started to live with the family in  the
    UK, describes growing up under her care as a "privilege"  and  sums  up
    his feelings succinctly: "there are not enough  words  in  the  English
    vocabulary to express the love I have for this woman".


22. As for the Appellant's life outside  of  the  family  home  the  bundle
    contains numerous  letters  from  friends  and  members  of  her  local
    community.  I mean no disrespect to the 11 other people who have  taken
    the trouble to write by confining my summary of that  evidence  to  the
    words of  her Priest, Andrew Montgomery, who describes the Appellant as
    a vivacious and well liked member of the congregation,  known  for  her
    honesty, integrity, hard work and unselfish voluntary contributions  to
    the community.   As to the latter, there was a number of references  in
    the evidence to the Appellant running Spanish classes  on  a  voluntary
    basis.

23. I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  established,  in  what  is
    approaching 18 years residence in Peckham, a  strong  and  deep  rooted
    private life in the community. She has continued to develop  the  close
    bonds that she  already  enjoyed  with  her  sisters  (they  had  lived
    together in Equador, too) and I am quite satisfied that the  First-tier
    Tribunal was correct to conclude that this was a family life  deserving
    of protection under Article 8. These three sisters,  who  all  attended
    the hearing before me, have an unusual degree of sibling affection  for
    each other, having together formed the leadership of an extended family
    of three generations.  There can be no doubt that the Appellant is seen
    by the second and third generation as an additional parent/grandparent.



24. Given  the  strength  of  these  bonds  I  cannot  accept  Mr  Thoree's
    submission that the decision to refuse the Appellant leave  would  have
    the effect of entirely nullifying family life for the Appellant. If she
    were to return to Equador it is inconceivable to me that all ties  with
    her family in the UK would be severed. I find  that  contact  would  be
    maintained by telephone and 'skype'-type services, and for  those  well
    enough to travel, the possibility of visits.   I do however accept that
    the removal of the Appellant would have a very  severe  impact  on  her
    natural enjoyment of family life. Keeping in touch via 'modern means of
    communication' would be a poor substitute for the comfort and  security
    of daily contact and physical presence  in  the  family  home.   It  is
    unlikely that the Appellant's current private life in the community  in
    Peckham would be maintained at all. I am therefore satisfied  that  the
    decision to refuse leave would  amount  to  an  interference  with  the
    Appellant's Article 8(1) rights.

25. There is no dispute that the decision is  one  that  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department is lawfully empowered to make.

26. I turn then to address the proportionality of the decision. I begin  by
    considering the public interest in removing the  Appellant,  delineated
    by parliament in s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002:

27. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest. The Appellant arrived in this country unlawfully in 2000  and
    has lived here without any  lawful  leave  ever  since.  She  does  not
    qualify for leave to remain under the Immigration  Rules.   That  is  a
    matter  that  must  attract  significant  weight  against  her  in  the
    balancing exercise.


28. It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the
    economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that  persons  who  seek  to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons  who  can  speak  English  are  less  of  a  burden  on
    taxpayers, and are better able  to  integrate  into  society.   In  her
    evidence to me the Appellant spoke in English to describe to me how she
    did attend classes for a period, but that they were far from her  home,
    on the other side of London in Hounslow. It was difficult and expensive
    to get there so she gave up and stopped attending before she could  get
    the certificate to show she had reached a certain level of proficiency.
     I  must  therefore  weigh  against  her  the  fact  that  she  has  no
    qualification to evidence her ability  to  speak  English,  although  I
    accept that this is somewhat mitigated by the fact that she does appear
    to have integrated to some extent and there is no evidence at all  that
    she has been a burden to taxpayers since she arrived.

29. It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the
    economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that  persons  who  seek  to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,
    because such persons are not a burden on taxpayers, and are better able
    to integrate into society.  It is quite clear that the Appellant is not
    financially independent. In the unlikely event that both  her  sisters,
    her two nieces and their family  members  should  all  disown  her  the
    Appellant would, in all likelihood, be compelled to have some  recourse
    to public funds.  Her lack of financial  independence  is  therefore  a
    matter that weighs against her.   It is however important to note  that
    the Appellant has not been an entirely unproductive member of  society.
    She has never been in formal employment since she arrived  in  the  UK,
    because she has never had permission to do so; that said  it  is  quite
    clear from the evidence before me  that  she  has  made  a  significant
    contribution in that she provided  childcare  for  four  children  that
    enabled four other adults to work long hours.


30. Section 117B at (4) and (5) reminds me that  little  weight  should  be
    given to a private life that is established by a person at a time  when
    the person is in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  or  their  status  is
    'precarious'.  I am therefore obliged to only attach a little weight to
    the evidence of Mr Montgomery and other supporters  of  the  Appellant,
    and to my finding that she has, in her long  residence,  made  numerous
    friends, has been a regular churchgoer and has contributed to her local
    community through, for instance, her voluntary work and teaching.

31. Section 117B(6) has no application in this case since all the  children
    of this family have now reached adulthood.

32. The factors set out in the statute are not, of  course,  an  exhaustive
    list. There are other matters that may be taken to weigh in the  public
    interest in removal, but in this case Mr Duffy did  not  identify  any.
    There is for instance no evidence that the Appellant has  been  engaged
    in criminality or any other anti-social behaviour, other  than,  it  is
    important to note, her illegal entry and decision  to  remain  in  this
    country without leave.

33. In his submissions Mr Thoree placed considerable emphasis  on  what  he
    submitted to be the long delay and unacceptable behaviour of  the  Home
    Office in this case. He adopted my analysis of the  evidence  from  the
    'error of law' decision and  invited  me  to  find  as  fact  that  the
    'withdrawal' of the Appellant's case in 2005 was based on nothing  more
    than Isabel's declaration in  her  legacy  application.  The  Appellant
    herself had never 'withdrawn' her application to be  granted  leave  in
    line with Isabel and Lizeth, and Mr Thoree asked me to  find  that  the
    decision-maker had wrongly interpreted the  terms  of  the  declaration
    (see my paragraphs 16-21 above).   He submitted that to  his  knowledge
    many  adult  dependents  were  granted  leave  in  line  with   primary
    applicants under the 'legacy' scheme and pointed to the case  of  Cueva
    and Wilma, both adults when they were granted leave in line  with  Aida
    in 2005.  He submitted that  there  was  no  rational  reason  why  the
    Appellant had not benefitted from such a concession and that  the  Home
    Office had acted unfairly in granting leave to everyone  else  in  this
    family except the Appellant.

34.  I am satisfied that the  declaration  signed  by  Isabel  was  wrongly
    interpreted.  It is quite plain on the face  of  the  application  form
    that the 'outstanding applications' referred to are other  previous  or
    concurrent applications made by the declarant. It cannot  be  logically
    read to exclude dependents to that application.    I  accept  that  the
    Appellant never 'withdrew' her claim. What is quite apparent,  however,
    from documents produced at the second hearing before me,  is  that  the
    Appellant, or at least her representative, must have  been  aware  that
    the Respondent was refusing to give her leave under the legacy  scheme.
    That is because, as I have now been told, the entire  matter  had  been
    settled following an application to move for  judicial  review.  Isabel
    and her two dependents had all been refused leave under the scheme.  An
    application for permission to judicially review that decision had  been
    granted and the matter was resolved on the 18th  October  2005  when  a
    Consent Order was  sealed  in  the  High  Court,  with  the  Respondent
    agreeing to grant Isabel and Lizeth  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  No
    mention is made of the Appellant. That she was expressly excluded  from
    the  settlement  is  however  confirmed  in  a  letter  from   Treasury
    Solicitors sent to the Appellant's solicitors on the  same  day,  which
    states in terms that the Respondent could not be satisfied  that  there
    were ties of emotional or financial dependency such that a family  life
    could be established,  and  that  the  Appellant  was  therefore  being
    refused under the scheme.  There can therefore have been  no  doubt  in
    the mind of the Appellant, and indeed Mr Thoree who has represented her
    throughout, that at that point she was  not  being  granted  leave  'in
    line' with Isabel.


35. How then are the 'chasing' letters to be explained?  In his submissions
    Mr Thoree said that following the Consent Order further representations
    were made, pointing out the nature of this close-knit family,  and  the
    fact that other adult  'dependents'  (ie  Cueva  and  Wilma)  had  been
    successful.  Unfortunately Mr Thoree  was  not  able  to  produce  this
    correspondence. He explained that he had worked for another solicitor's
    firm at the time, and that he had not been able to retrieve the  entire
    file. As to the gap of  some  four  years  before  he  started  sending
    chasing letters  Mr  Thoree  pointed  out  that  the  Home  Office  was
    beleaguered by severe delays during that period, the  very  reason  why
    the legacy scheme had  been  introduced.  The  apparently  inconsistent
    application of the concession had  spawned  a  considerable  amount  of
    litigation and applications for review. He, and the Appellant, had just
    put the Respondent's inaction down to these ongoing  problems  and  had
    waited patiently for a further  decision.     As  to  the  question  of
    fairness and consistency, raised by him at 'error  of  law'  stage,  he
    submitted that in retrospect the Respondent was proven to be  wrong  in
    refusing  'legacy'  leave:  the  only  reason  given  by  the  Treasury
    Solicitors had been the lack of a Kugathas relationship,  a  matter  of
    factual dispute now settled in the Appellant's favour.


36. Whilst the evidence now before me indicates that the matter is  not  as
    clear cut as it had initially appeared, I am satisfied on  the  balance
    of probabilities that the Appellant did consider herself to be  waiting
    for a response from the Home Office in the years between  October  2005
    and December 2014.   I make that finding  in  the  absence  of  written
    evidence of those 'further representations' for these reasons. First, I
    have no hesitation in finding the Appellant herself to be a  completely
    credible and honest witness (indeed no suggestion has been made to  the
    contrary). Secondly the terms in which the matter was  pursued  in  the
    years 2010-14 make  it  perfectly  clear  that  Mr  Thoree  himself,  a
    qualified and regulated solicitor, believed  there  to  be  outstanding
    representations.  Third, it  is  not  in  dispute  that  the  Appellant
    remained in contact with the Home Office and never changed address: the
    fact that she remained 'in the open' is consistent  with  her  evidence
    that she understood her case to be under review, or at  least  this  is
    what she had requested.

37. As I note in the 'error of law' decision, delay in decision-making  can
    be relevant in a number of ways.  In  this  case  it  is  primarily  of
    relevance because it permitted the Appellant to remain with her family,
    deepening and strengthening her ties to them and life in London  whilst
    simultaneously seeing her ties to Equador diminish.   Whilst it may not
    be possible to say that the sisters love each other any more today than
    they did in 2005, I accept that the impact of separation would today be
    harder to bear.  Had the Appellant left the country in  2005  it  would
    have been upsetting for the children and adults alike but they would no
    doubt have learned to adapt.  Aida  and  Isabel  would  have  paid  for
    childcare, the children would gradually have learned  to  live  without
    her. The Appellant herself would have been returning to a country  from
    which she had been away for only four years, at the age of just 44.  It
    is likely that at point she would still have had  friends  and  family,
    and some contacts to whom she could turn  in  re-establishing  herself.
    Today the position is quite different. The Appellant is now approaching
    60 and has not been to Equador for 18 years. She  has,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found, no friends or family in that country.  This is a return
    scenario that understandably causes  the  Appellant  herself,  and  her
    family members, considerable  distress  and  anxiety.  Whilst  she  has
    always been an integral part of this family her removal now, after such
    a long time, would be far  more  challenging,  both  in  terms  of  the
    practicalities involved and the  emotional impact on three sisters  who
    have now come to anticipate growing old together.


38. I must in addition consider Mr Thoree's submissions as to the weight to
    be attached to the  public  interest  in  these  circumstances.  It  is
    established that unreasonable delay on the part of the  Respondent,  if
    resulting  from  poor  administration,  can   diminish   the   normally
    substantial weight that the 'maintenance of immigration control' should
    attract: EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.   I  have  accepted  that  further
    representations were made in 2005,  and  that  the  Appellant  remained
    living at the same address.   I  accept  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    receive a further decision until December 2014, some 9 years later.  Mr
    Duffy protests that if further representations were sent, they  do  not
    appear  to  have  been  received  by  the  Respondent  and   in   those
    circumstances she cannot be blamed for inaction.  I bear that in  mind.
    I see no  reason  to  doubt  the  Respondent's  contention  that  those
    representations are not on file (indeed very  little  of  the  material
    before   me,   including   letters   from   the   Respondent   or   her
    representatives, appears to be available today).   Even if I  disregard
    that initial period it is however clear  from  the  documents  produced
    that the Appellant wrote again to the Home Office in February 2010  and
    had to wait a full four years and 10 months  -  and  threaten  judicial
    review - before a decision was  forthcoming.  Whatever  might  be  said
    about the 'delay' between 2005 and 2010, it  is  incontrovertible  fact
    that there was a  further  delay  of  almost  five  years  between  the
    Appellant's 'chasing' letter of February 2010 and  a  decision  finally
    being taken, and that after a further 12 letters/set of representations
    being made by the Appellant's representatives. To  date  no  reasonable
    explanation has been given for that delay, and that is a matter that  I
    find diminishes to some extent the weight to be attached to the  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control.


39. I make no finding on Mr Thoree's arguments in respect of consistency of
    decision making. True, it is apparent from the documents that Cueva and
    Wilma were granted indefinite leave to remain as adult dependents to  a
    'legacy' claim. True, the First-tier Tribunal and I have found there to
    be clear evidence of a Kugathas family  life  in  this  case.  That  is
    however insufficient evidence, in my view, to support  a  finding  that
    there has been a clear historical injustice in the Appellant's case. Mr
    Thoree has produced the policy statement which set out  the  parameters
    of what became known as the 'legacy' concession, and on its  face  that
    document indicates that adult dependents such as  the  Appellant  would
    not ordinarily benefit from a grant.   The  letter  from  the  Treasury
    Solicitor appears to indicate that the Respondent considered exercising
    her discretion in  the  Appellant's  favour,  but  in  the  absence  of
    evidence that there was a particular dependency,  declined  to  do  so.
    The fact that a Kugathas family life has subsequently been  established
    is not capable  of  showing  the  Respondent's  decision  of  2005  was
    irrational. I infer from the terms of the Consent Order that this  much
    was recognised by her representatives at the time, who were content  to
    see her excluded from the terms of the settlement.

40. I have already  noted  the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and her family members in the UK, and I  have  accepted  that
    enforced separation would cause considerable anguish for all  of  them.
    By the date of the second hearing before me there had  however  been  a
    sad development  in  the  case  which  is  likely  to  exacerbate  such
    distress. In August 2017  Isabel  was  diagnosed  with  cancer  of  the
    pancreas and liver.   I have been provided with copies  of  her  recent
    medical notes and with correspondence showing her to be under the  care
    of specialist consultants at King's  College  Hospital,  where  she  is
    being treated with chemotherapy, administered as a day patient.  Isabel
    had prepared a short additional  statement  for  the  further  hearing.
    Therein she states that she is finding it very hard to  cope  and  that
    the Appellant is providing her with support and assistance. In her live
    evidence I asked her to elaborate  on  this.  She  explained  that  her
    daughter is now married and living on the  other  side  of  London  and
    although she continues to see her as  often  as  possible,  it  is  the
    Appellant to whom she has turned for emotional and  practical  support.
    Isabel has had six rounds of chemotherapy  since  August.  She  attends
    hospital and they inject her with the drug. For about a week after this
    she experiences constant nausea and exhaustion and in this  period  the
    Appellant does everything for her including cooking, cleaning  as  well
    as attending to her personally. Isabel acknowledged, in response to  Mr
    Duffy's questions, that there are other  people  who  could  give  this
    assistance if the Appellant were not here - she still lives with  Aida,
    Wilma and Cueva and their son and her own  daughter  manages  to  visit
    every couple of weeks. Isabel stressed however that it is the emotional
    support that the Appellant is giving her which is helping  her  through
    this very  difficult  time.    It  is  the  "little  things"  that  the
    Appellant does that her giving her strength.






    Conclusions


41. This is an unusual case for several  reasons.   First,  it  concerns  a
    somewhat unorthodox family unit. The Appellant is one of three  sisters
    who have an exceptionally strong bond, having each reached their  sixth
    decade of life with very little time spent apart: they  lived  together
    in Equador prior to their emigration to the United Kingdom and continue
    to  do  so  today.  Together  they  have  brought  up  a  further   two
    generations. Second, it serves to illustrate the  kind  of  inefficient
    administration that thankfully no longer persists as a matter of course
    at the Home  Office.  The  Appellant  has,  on  the  most  generous  of
    readings, waited almost five years for a decision; nine  if  you  count
    the period between 2005  and  2010.  This  is  ironic  given  that  her
    original application was  itself  based  on  the  'legacy'  program,  a
    concession designed to deal with the huge backlog that developed at the
    Immigration and Nationality Department during the 1990s.   Finally,  it
    now involves the serious illness of a close  family  member,  a  factor
    which introduces a significant additional weight to be considered  when
    assessing the Appellant's claim that this decision is disproportionate.


42. I remind myself that the public interest is a  weighty  and  ordinarily
    powerful factor in refusing leave to persons who  do  not  qualify  for
    leave under the Rules. Looking at all of the relevant  matters  in  the
    round in this case, I cannot however be satisfied that  the  Respondent
    here seeks to wield the power vested in her in a proportionate way.

43. True this is a woman who would, albeit with some difficulty, be able to
    "integrate" if returned to Equador. She lived in that country until she
    was 40 and although she no longer has any friends or family  there  she
    speaks the language and has a familiarity with the culture which  would
    stand her in good stead. Her family in the UK would be able to  support
    her with financial remittances.  She could continue  to  attend  Church
    and make new friends in  the  congregation  there.   It  is  for  those
    reasons that the Appellant  cannot  bring  herself  within  the  Rules.
    Looking beyond those bare practical factors, however, it is plain  that
    such a removal  would  have  a  devastating  impact  on  the  Appellant
    personally. She does not seek permission to remain in this country for,
    I am  quite  satisfied,  any  reason  other  than  the  fact  that  she
    desperately wants to stay and grow  old  with  her  sisters  and  their
    families, with whom she has lived for virtually all of her life.   They
    in turn would find it  hugely  distressing  and  worrying  to  see  her
    removed to Equador at her age, knowing as they do the  challenges  that
    she would face, and that they would be very unlikely be  reunited  with
    her for any length of time beyond a  short  visit.   As  I  note  above
    Isabel's illness adds a further dimension to that fear, since it would,
    it must be recognised, be a real possibility that these two sisters may
    not see each other again if the Appellant were to leave the UK at  this
    stage. Whilst Mr Duffy is right to point out that this is a  dependency
    of choice rather than necessity, it  is  presently  a  fact  that  this
    British  national  is  currently  dependent  -  both  emotionally   and
    physically - on this Equadorean national and that any interference with
    that relationship is likely to be extremely difficult for both of them.


44. Even taking into account the long residence without leave, the lack  of
    financial independence and the failure to  demonstrate  an  ability  to
    speak English to the required level,   I  am  satisfied  that  this  is
    precisely the sort of compelling case where it would be appropriate  to
    grant leave to remain.  I find that the impact upon the  Appellant  and
    her  family  of  her  removal  would  be  far  beyond  the  commonplace
    inconvenience generally felt by those separated by immigration control,
    and that is at least in part attributable to the long delays that there
    have been in resolving her case. Although this appeal was framed by the
    rule relating to private life it had at its heart an Article  8  family
    life of exceptional strength and warmth, such that an interference with
    it, at this late stage, has not been shown to be justified.


    Decisions


45. The making of the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved  an  error  in
    approach  such that the decision is set aside to the extent  identified
    above.


46. The decision is remade as follows: "I allow the appeal on human  rights
    grounds".

47. I have not been asked to make a direction  for  anonymity  and  on  the
    facts I do not consider it appropriate to do so.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           19th January 2018






PS. The Tribunal has no role to play, in a  statutory  appeal,  in  deciding
how long an appellant should be granted leave for. If an appeal  is  allowed
on human rights grounds, as this has been, it is for the Secretary of  State
for the Home Department to decide whether leave should be  granted,  and  if
so how long for. I believe that the usual grant would be for thirty  months.
I take the unusual step of adding this coda because I am  conscious  that  a
grant of thirty months would leave this Appellant,  upon  its  expiry,  just
short of the 20 years long residence that she would require to  qualify  for
leave under the rules.  Given  the  circumstances  in  this  case,  and  the
already long delay, that hardly seems justified. The Secretary of State  for
the Home Department may wish to consider whether a longer grant,  or  indeed
indefinite stay, would be more appropriate at this stage.


