
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01331/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 July 2014                               |On 31 July 2014              |
|Judgment given orally                         |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER



                                   Between

                                LUCY ASAMOAH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Garrod, Counsel, instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Lucy Asamoah, a Ghanaian  citizen.   She  applied
    for a derivative residence card as  the  primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen resident in  the  UK.   That  application  was  refused  on  18
    December 2013 for reasons set out in a letter dated the same date.  She
    appealed and her appeal was heard at the First-tier Tribunal on 8 April
    2014 and was dismissed.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal under the 2006 Regulations and also found that  the  refusal  to
    grant the appellant a residence card did not put the UK  in  breach  of
    its obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought and  granted  on  16  May  2014.    The
    Secretary of State by way of a Rule  24  response  dated  4  June  2014
    asserted that the appellant was not a credible witness  and  the  judge
    had been left with a lacuna in the  evidence  as  to  how  the  child's
    father would behave if the appellant were removed.   The  Secretary  of
    State drew attention to the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    that the child's  father cared for the appellant in practical ways  and
    that the findings were logical and sustainable as a result of that.

3.   The requirement to issue a derivative residence  card  comes  from  the
    Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006.    Under
    Regulation 18A the Secretary of State is required  to  issue  a  person
    with a derivative residence card on application  and  production  of  a
    valid passport and proof that the applicant has a derivative  right  of
    residence under Regulation 15A.  So far as Regulation 15A is  concerned
    the relevant  Regulation  is  15A(4A),  namely  that  if  Miss  Asamoah
    satisfies the criteria that she is  the  primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen, that British citizen is  residing  in  the  UK  and  that  the
    British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or in  another  EEA
    state if she were required to leave.  According  to  Regulation  15A(7)
    she is to be regarded as a primary carer if she is a direct relative of
    the child and if she is the person who has primary  responsibility  for
    that person's care.

4.   The issue in this case is  does  she  or  does  she  not  have  primary
    responsibility for this child?  Is she the primary carer of this  child
    who it is accepted is a British citizen.    She  and  a  relative  gave
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. On  the  basis  of  that
    evidence and the documentary evidence that was produced the judge  made
    adverse credibility findings as to her relationship with  Mr  Awari  in
    terms of whether he was an uncle or a  cousin,  whether  she  had  been
    trafficked and how she had met Mr Awari, whether or not  she  told  the
    solicitors that she had been trafficked, the circumstances  surrounding
    the registration of the child's birth and the involvement of  Mr  Awari
    in that registration, and the application for and subsequent  issue  of
    the child's British passport.

5.   The appellant claims that the father of the child  has  nothing  to  do
    with the child.  The judge on the basis of the evidence before him  did
    not accept that her account was credible in terms of the  circumstances
    surrounding the child's birth or the continued interest of the  father.



6.   The judge, however, on the basis of  not  accepting  the  circumstances
    around the registration of the child and the application for a passport
     because of the other adverse credibility issues, made  what  could  be
    described as a rather massive leap to say  that  that  therefore  meant
    that the father was involved in the care of the child  and  from  that,
    that she did not have primary responsibility for the child.  The  judge
    as was acknowledged by Mr Bramble failed to actually tackle  the  issue
    of responsibility as of the date of hearing.  I am satisfied  that  the
    judge erred in law in failing to address the requirements  of  the  EEA
    Regulations as of the date of the  hearing.

7.   I set aside the decision and remake it. I  heard  submissions  from  Mr
    Bramble and Mr Garrod.  In remaking my decision I bear in mind that the
    appellant has  very  llittle  credibility.  The  credibility  findings,
    although challenged in the grounds seeking permission to appeal, cannot
    be said to be unreasoned or unjustifiable.  The  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence are more than sufficient to confirm  that  she  has  not  been
    completely honest or truthful in the way  in  which  her  evidence  was
    produced.  That however relates and can be of relevance only  in  terms
    of the registration of the child's birth and the presence of the father
    at that registration and the acquisition of the passport.

8.   Documents that were drawn to my attention include a letter at  page  79
    of the  appellant's  bundle  from  the  child's  primary  school  which
    confirms that he attends nursery school and is brought  to  school  and
    collected by his mother or an aunt. The application  for  admission  to
    the primary school is signed by the appellant and there is  no  mention
    of the father although of course there is no requirement on  that  form
    for the father to be named.

9.   A tax credit award for the period  September  2013  to  March  2014  at
    pages 234 to 237 of the appellant's bundle  confirms  that  she  is  in
    receipt of child tax credit and that child tax credit calculation is on
    page 236 and does not indicate that is being paid as a  result  of  two
    people.  Page 237 states:

         "You claim tax credits as an individual.  You must tell us  if  you
         marry or enter into a civil  partnership  or  start  to  live  with
         someone as if you are married or  in  a  civil  partnership.   This
         award will then end and you will need to make a new claim with your
         partner if appropriate."

10.  There is an amended tax credit  letter  from  HM  Revenue  and  Customs
    dated 9 December 2013 which amends the figures but again refers to  her
    being a lone parent. This is on page 240 of the appellant's bundle.

11.  On page 427 is a copy of a letter  from  Family  Investments  dated  17
    February 2011 which is addressed to the child but care of  her  at  her
    and Ryan's home address.  The other correspondence in relation  to  the
    child trust fund is also addressed to the child at  her  address.   The
    appellant is the registered contact.

12.  Page 438 is a letter sent three months after the child was born to  the
    father at an address in Sutton whereas the child and the appellant live
    at an  address  in  south  east  London.   The  confirmation  of  voter
    registration issued by Southwark Council does  not  give  the  father's
    name. He is a Commonwealth citizen so far as I know and therefore would
    have been eligible to appear on the voter registration, and he  is  not
    there.

13.  It is very difficult to prove  a  negative.   The  evidence  does   not
    indicate that the father has anything to do with the child.   There  is
    no indication in the papers apart from the letter  three  months  after
    the child was born sent to him at his address in Sutton that he has had
    any contact with the child whatsoever other than  the  registration  of
    his birth and the acquisition of the passport.

14.  Mr Bramble very properly draws attention to the  fact  that  there  are
    quite serious adverse credibility findings for the appellant  and  that
    these need to be taken into account  in  assessing  the  weight  to  be
    placed on the other documents that are produced. On the other hand  the
    child tax fund documents, the tax credit and  the  working  tax  credit
    documents  and  the  child  tax  credit  documents  are  all  based  on
    information that the appellant has given to HM Revenue and Customs;  if
    this information were false or fraudulent in any  way  then  she  could
    expect serious criminal charges to flow  from  that.   There  does  not
    appear to have been any investigation by  HM  Revenue  and  Customs  in
    connection with the forms that she has completed and if HM Revenue  and
    Customs had any suspicions about the validity  of  that  information  I
    would have expected some sort of investigation to be undertaken.

15.  Accordingly on the basis of the documentary evidence that the child  is
    at school close to where he lives, that it is either her or an "auntie"
    who delivers him and collects  him  and  that  the  official  financial
    information is all indicative of her as a sole parent, I  am  satisfied
    that she is the primary carer of this child.  If she were  required  to
    leave the UK the child would have  to  leave  with  her.   She  is  the
    primary carer.  There is no evidence that the child would be able to go
    and live with somebody else.  It  appears  to  be  accepted  that  this
    father has another family.  There is no indication whatsoever that this
    other family know of this child's existence.  Therefore I am  satisfied
    that the appellant does  satisfy  the  criteria  for  the  issue  of  a
    derivative right of residence and I therefore allow the appeal.





Signed                                  Date 30th July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

