
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01599/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 July 2014                                  |On 31st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                          Mrs Manpreet Kaur sandhu
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Awan
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Mrs Manpreet Kaur Sandhu is one of  two  appellants,  the
    other being her husband,  whose  appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hembrough on  22  April  2013.   His  determination  was
    promulgated on 26 April 2013.  In the determination in relation to  the
    appellant with whom I am concerned the judge dismissed the appeal.

 2. The broad circumstances are these.  On 10 May  2011  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant leave was granted to the appellant or  her  husband  as
    valid until 12 July 2014.  A letter  was  prepared  on  27  March  2012
    written to the appellant curtailing her leave to 26 May 2012.  That was
    a period two months, hence on the balance of probabilities that  letter
    was not served.  The reason why the curtailment decision was  made  was
    that the sponsor's licence was revoked on 7 July 2011.

 3. Although the appellant stated that she was not aware of that revocation
    at the time it is apparent that she stated in a witness statement  that
    sometime in September 2011 she returned to Union College and found that
    the building was closed.  In her oral evidence she said that  this  was
    in October 2011 although she gave evidence that she was not sure at the
    time whether this was a permanent state of affairs.  By January 2012 at
    the very latest she was aware that Union College had  been  permanently
    closed down.  Accordingly these events have now taken  place  at  least
    two and a half years ago.  In that time, however, no  steps  have  been
    taken by the appellant to obtain further education  at  an  alternative
    education provider.

 4. On 9 January 2013 it is accepted that the letter of 27 March  2012  was
    communicated.  That was a finding that was made by Judge Hembrough, and
    so as from that date the applicant knew of  the  curtailment  decision.
    At the same time removal directions were served.

 5. It is common ground now that the  removal  directions  were  served  in
    circumstances which were not in accordance with the  law.   The  reason
    for that was that they were served at a time  when  the  appellant  had
    existing leave.  That  is  something  which  is  now  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State.  It follows from that that the  appeal  has  to  be
    allowed to the extent that the decision was not in accordance with  the
    law.  That was the basis upon which the grounds of appeal were  mounted
    before the Upper Tribunal and it is  a  challenge  to  the  Section  10
    decision.  I am satisfied that that challenge has  been  made  out  and
    accordingly it was not open to the Secretary of State to issue  removal
    directions on that occasion.  In those circumstances that is an end  of
    the appeal which is the appeal before the Upper Tribunal this  morning.



 6. There are arguments that  were  advanced  by  the  appellant  that  the
    decision under challenge is also the decision to curtail leave and that
    was an immigration decision in  itself  which  falls  within  paragraph
    82(2)(d) being a refusal to vary a person's leave to enter or remain in
    the United Kingdom.  I am not satisfied that that is a matter which  is
    before the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal that is before me is a challenge
    to the Section 10 decision.

 7. The effect of the application is, according to the appellant, to extend
    the applicant's leave to a  period  when  the  appeal  based  upon  the
    Section 82(2)(d) decision extends beyond 12 July 2014 when her  current
    leave expires, thereby giving her yet further leave  to  remain  whilst
    the appeal process continues.  I am not satisfied that that is a  gloss
    that can properly be put on the matters which are before me.  I confine
    myself to a decision in relation to Section 10 and I am satisfied  that
    the appeal succeeds to the extent that that Section 10 decision  was  a
    decision which was not in accordance with the law.

 8. At the conclusion of my judgment it has been drawn to my attention that
    it was not Section 82(2)(d)  that  was  referred  to  but  was  Section
    82(2)(e).  That was not the way the argument was advanced before me but
    for the reasons that I have already given I am not satisfied that there
    is an immigration decision falling within  Section  82(2)(e)  which  is
    before the Upper Tribunal in this decision.






                                        Signed                          Date


                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan

