

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/01719/2016

                                         IA/01720/2016

                                         IA/01721/2016

                                       IA/01722/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                  |  Decision signed:  11.10.2018   |
|On: 11.10.2018                         |  Sent out: 18.10.2018           |



                                 Before:

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOHN FREEMAN

                                 Between:

                            AMA YEBOAH & 4 OTHERS
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants: Harshaka Kannangara (counsel instructed by Jade Law)
For the respondent: Mr Steven Walker

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.    This is an appeal, by the appellants, against the decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Tracey Bowler), sitting at Hatton Cross  on
      22 August 2017, to dismiss article  8  human  rights  appeals  by  the
      (main)  appellant,  a  citizen  of  Ghana,  born  in  1967,  and   her
      dependants, against refusal of leave to remain on 15 March 2016. These
      were her husband, born 1969, and two daughters, C, born in  1998;  and
      M, born here on 10 April 2009.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper  Tribunal,  on  a  single
    point identified by the judge  as  'Robinson  ([1997]  EWCA  Civ  3090)
    obvious'. This turned on the fact that M, by the date of  the  hearing,
    though neither by the date of the application nor  the  decision  under
    appeal, had been in this country for seven years, ever since her birth.
    It followed that her case could only succeed  under  article  8,  taken
    with s. 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
    The very well-known authority referred  to  by  the  permission  judge,
    understandably briefly, was MA (Pakistan) & others [2016] EWCA Civ 705,
    in particular paragraphs 21 and 78. Paragraph  21  states  the  general
    rule in such cases as follows:

       The  same  range  of  considerations  falls  to  be  considered  when
       determining an application under section  117B(6)  as  in  any  other
       article 8 determination. Construing the section in this way, the only
       relevance of the seven year period is that once a child has  been  in
       the UK for that length of time, this is  a  factor  which  should  be
       given particular weight when assessing whether it would be reasonable
       for the child to leave the UK or not.

 3. At 48 the judgment  (Elias  LJ,  writing  for  the  court)  says  this,
    referring to EV (Philippines) & others [2014] EWCA Civ 874:

       Although this was not in  fact  a  seven  year  case,  on  the  wider
       construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would  apply  in
       such a case. However, the fact that the child has been in the UK  for
       seven years  would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
       proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first,  because  of
       its relevance to determining the nature and strength of  the  child's
       best interests; and second, because  it  establishes  as  a  starting
       point that leave should be granted unless there are powerful  reasons
       to the contrary.

 4. Paragraph 78 deals only with the facts of the individual cases; but  21
    and 48 between them set out the general rule. I can  now  turn  to  the
    decision in this appeal. The judge refers to M throughout as 'Appellant
    4', but  I  shall  use  her  initial,  since  names  for  children  are
    discouraged in decisions which will be publicly available.  At  55  she
    found that none of the appellants could qualify  for  leave  to  remain
    under the Immigration Rules: this is not, and could not be  challenged.
    That meant she needed to consider whether there were compelling reasons
    for considering article 8 outside the terms of the Rules:  for  reasons
    she gave at 57 - 58, she found there were, and went on to do so.

 5. The judge began her consideration at 65 - 73 by weighing  up  M's  best
    interests. At one point (71) she appears to refer to C, but in view  of
    what followed, she clearly meant M. At her age, her best interests  lay
    mainly in staying with her parents; but the judge went on at 72 - 73 to
    say this:

       However that does not need to be in the UK. There  is  a  functioning
       education system in Ghana. M is doing well at school in  the  UK  and
       there is no reason why she would  be  unable  to  in  Ghana.  She  is
       learning German at school and  given  the  support  of  both  of  her
       parents and her basic understanding of Twi, there is  no  reason  why
       she could not learn that language.

       There is no extended family in the UK to support the family. In Ghana
       M would have the opportunity to develop a relationship with her uncle
       and potentially further extended family.

 6. Then the judge turned to s. 117B (6), and in particular to  MA.  At  78
    she made it clear that "... wider public interest  considerations  only
    come into play via the concept of reasonableness". At 79 she went on to
    say this:

       Those wider public interest considerations  include,  in  particular,
       the need for effective immigration control. M is not to be blamed for
       her parents' immigration status or overstaying and given that she has
       been here for more than 7 years the starting-point is that her status
       should be legitimized unless there is  good  reason  not  to  do  so.
       However I should have regard to the wider public  interest  including
       the  immigration  history  of  [the   parents]   in   assessing   the
       reasonableness of expecting them to leave the UK.

 7. The judge considered that immigration history at  80:  the  mother  had
    overstayed a visit visa since 2000, and the father said he  had  joined
    her illegally in 2001 (though there was no documentary evidence of  his
    presence here before 2008, when C was brought in, also illegally.  None
    of them had applied for leave to remain till 2012, and no justification
    had been put forward for that. The judge went  on  to  take  notice  of
    their lack of any criminal convictions against them, and  of  a  letter
    describing them as hard-working and trustworthy, though as she  pointed
    out, she had not been prepared to accept what they had said about their
    immigration history.

 8. I am not concerned with the  judge's  conclusions  on  the  parents  or
    (after further consideration of her personal circumstances)  C,  except
    to note that they stand  unchallenged.  At  84  she  gave  her  general
    conclusions about M as follows:

       Considering the evidence overall and having particular regard  to  my
       findings about [the best interests of] M above I find that  it  would
       be reasonable to be expected to leave the UK with her  parents  given
       the continuing links to Ghana through her parents, the length of time
       she has been in the UK and the stages of her childhood in  which  she
       has been here.

 9. However that was not all. At 90 she  agreed  with  Mr  Kannangara,  who
    appeared for the appellants then as now, that the key issue was whether
    M (and C) could reasonably be required to leave this country. Referring
    to the children, she noted that "Both have spent more than 7  years  in
    the UK and that has been recognized to be a very significant period  in
    immigration control". After dealing with C,  now  grown-up,  the  judge
    went on at 92 as follows:

       M is still young, being only 8 years old. She has not yet moved  into
       secondary school. She is not faced  with  the  challenges  of  moving
       during preparation for public exams. She will  only  be  starting  to
       venture much beyond the  protection  and  support  of  her  immediate
       family and therefore the years she has spent in the UK to  date  have
       had less impact in terms of her social and cultural roots  than  they
       would do at a later stage. I have concluded that her  best  interests
       are served by being with her parents and that those best interests do
       not require her to be in the  UK.  I  have  also  found  that  it  is
       reasonable for her to be expected to leave the UK.

10. Finally at 93 the judge went on to conclude  that  the  decision  under
    appeal was proportionate  to  the  legitimate  purpose  of  immigration
    control, taking particular account of M's best interests,  and  of  the
    'considerable weight' to be given to the fact that she  had  been  here
    for more than seven years.

11. Mr Kannangara took his stand on the lack of any reference by the  judge
    to the requirement for 'powerful reasons' in a case of  this  kind:  he
    also referred, without being able to cite any  particular  passage,  to
    Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT (IAC) 197. The relevant part of the judicial  head-note  is
    this:

    (1)  The case law of the Upper Tribunal has  identified  the  following
        principles to assist in the determination of appeals where  children
        are affected by the appealed decisions:
         i)         As a starting point it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
        children to be with both their parents and if both parents are being
        removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point  suggests
        that so should dependent children who form part of  their  household
        unless there are reasons to the contrary.
         ii)       It is generally in the interests of children to have both
        stability and continuity of social and educational provision and the
        benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the society to  which
        they belong.
         iii)     Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
        origin can lead to development of social  cultural  and  educational
        ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in  the  absence  of
        compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence
        is not clear cut but past and present policies have identified seven
        years as a relevant period.
         iv)     Apart from the terms of published policies and  rules,  the
        Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be  more
        significant to a child that the first  seven  years  of  life.  Very
        young children are focussed on their parents rather than their peers
        and are adaptable.

12. While, as case-law, this has been  to  some  extent  overtaken  by  the
    changes introduced by the Immigration Act 2014, and  by  MA  and  other
    authorities, much of it remains as good  common  sense.  The  point  Mr
    Kannangara clearly  had  in  mind  was  (iii);  but  (iv)  is  also  of
    considerable importance in this case, where the seven years spent  here
    by M by the date of the hearing was from her birth.

CONCLUSIONS

13. It is noteworthy that what was said in MA at 48 (see 3) about 'powerful
    reasons' did no more than set the starting-point for consideration in a
    case like this. As the Court of Appeal made clear throughout, the final
    question in every case of this kind, set by Parliament in s. 117B  (6),
    is whether on all the relevant  factors,  including  the  child's  best
    interests, and the interests of the public, it would be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave this country.

14. It is worth looking briefly at the individual cases dealt with  in  MA:
    the only one where the judge below, dealing  with  the  appeal  on  its
    merits in the Upper Tribunal,  appears  to  have  said  anything  about
    'powerful reasons' was  the  one  involving  three  linked  Sri  Lankan
    appeals. That decision was upheld; but so was the decision in the  lead
    case, where there was no such reference. The  passage  cited  from  the
    first-tier decision at 67 shows the facts about  the  child  were  very
    similar to those in the present case; and so was the judge's  treatment
    of them, though perhaps less detailed and methodical than here.

15. While it may well be worth judges referring in terms to  the  need  for
    'powerful reasons', if only to avoid appeals like this, that can  never
    have been intended by the Court of Appeal as a magic  formula,  without
    which their decisions would crumble to dust. What the judge  needed  to
    do in the present case, was to deal with the child's best interests  as
    a primary consideration (which she did: see 5); then  to  identify  the
    starting-point. This the  judge  did  (see  6),  if  not  in  terms  of
    'powerful reasons'; but her understanding of what the  interests  of  a
    qualifying child, here for over seven  years,  required  is  very  well
    shown by her references to that being a 'very significant period'  (see
    9), and something to which 'considerable weight' had to be  given  (see
    10).

16.  Having  done  that,  the  judge  needed  to  go  on  to  consider  the
    reasonableness question as a whole, both in the light  of  the  child's
    best interests (which she did with great care: see 5  and  9),  and  of
    those of the public at large (see 7 -  8).  In  my  view  this  was  an
    exceptionally well-balanced and  careful  decision,  if  anything  more
    painstaking than it need have been in parts, but the  judge  was  fully
    entitled to find that, despite M's seven years or more here, from birth
    in this case, her parents' very poor immigration history,  though  that
    was not her fault, led to a strong public interest  in  their  removal,
    and M's best interests were to go to Ghana with them.

17. In general, while the starting-point can never be lost sight  of  in  a
    case of this kind, it would be wrong to encourage parents  of  children
    to expect seven years spent here by any child to be treated as a  trump
    card for the family as a whole. Detailed consideration of  the  child's
    individual position will be needed in every case  like  this,  all  the
    more so as a child gets older (see Azimi-Moayed). That is  what  M  got
    from Judge Bowler here.

Appeal dismissed

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                               11 October 2018
