

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/01746/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated               |
|On 6 September 2013                         |On 10 September 2013      |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                             Elizabeth Williams
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms L Targett-Parker, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This case comes before the Upper Tribunal following the grant of
      permission to appeal by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowen  on
      16 June 2013 against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Elek promulgated on 23 May 2013. The appellant, a  Nigerian  national,
      sought to appeal the respondent's decision  of  21  December  2012  to
      refuse to issue her a residence card  as  the  family  member  of  her
      sister, Jane Ipemeda Morel, an EEA national. Judge Elek  proceeded  on
      the basis that the appellant was currently  dependent  on  her  sister
      with whom she lived. She was not, however, satisfied  that  dependency
      prior to arrival in the UK was established. Accordingly, she dismissed
      the appeal.

   2.       The appellant was born on 28 August 1985. She arrived here as  a
      student in September 2008 but an application for an extension of  that
      leave in November 2009 was refused as was a further  application  made
      on the same basis in October 2011. Reasons for  the  refusal  are  not
      known. In August 2011 she made an application for a residence card but
      this was refused as well and her  appeal  against  that  decision  was
      dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  C  M  A  Jones  by  way  of  a
      determination promulgated on  27  February  2012  on  the  basis  that
      dependency either here or in Nigeria had not been established.

The Hearing

   3.       The appeal came before me on 5 September 2013. The appellant and
      the sponsor were in  attendance  and  I  heard  submissions  from  the
      parties as to whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had  made  errors
      of law.

   4.       Ms Targett-Parker relied on the first four of  the  grounds  put
      forward in the application.  The  first  complaint  (linked  with  the
      second and third) was that the judge, whilst acknowledging the correct
      standard of proof at paragraph  4  of  her  determination,  applied  a
      higher standard by requiring documentary evidence over and above  what
      had been adduced and accepted - that the appellant was dependent  upon
      the sponsor in the UK, that the sponsor had paid for her air fare  and
      visa to the UK  and  that  she  was  the  appellant's  legal  guardian
      following the death of their parents. The second  criticism  was  that
      the judge had failed to apply case law  on  the  issue  of  dependency
      which did not set out any requirement for  dependency  to  be  of  any
      particular duration and did not have  to  be  lengthy.  As  the  judge
      accepted that the sponsor had paid for the appellant's air fare,  that
      was sufficient to establish dependency. Thirdly, it  was  argued  that
      the judge had failed to properly apply Dauhoo (EEA Regulations  -  reg
      8(2) (Mauritius) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC) in that  whilst  she  relied  on
      paragraph  17  of  that  determination  with  regard  to  a  lack   of
      documentary evidence, she had failed to take account of  the  evidence
      that had been adduced and overlooked the oral evidence  regarding  the
      matter of Western Union payments. Finally,  it  was  argued  that  the
      judge had misapplied D (Tamil) [2012] UKIAT 00702 (Devaseelan) in that
      she had relied on the findings of Judge C M A Jones that money had not
      been sent to the appellant via a friend but had then gone on  to  find
      that two such payments had been made. The judge had therefore erred in
      reconsidering the findings in the first determination.

   5.       In response Ms Kiss argued that adequate reasons had been  given
      by the judge for rejecting the claim  of  prior  dependency.  She  was
      entitled to reject the oral evidence of the witness who had claimed to
      have regularly taken funds to Nigeria  for  the  appellant.  This  was
      because the appellant and sponsor had provided conflicting accounts of
      how the money had been sent. In that context the judge was entitled to
      expect documentary evidence  to  confirm  the  oral  evidence  of  the
      witness. The two deposits had been accepted  because  there  had  been
      documentary evidence of those. The sponsor is a  solicitor  and  would
      have been aware of what evidence was needed to remedy the reasons  for
      refusal; this had not been provided.  The  judge  had  considered  the
      other evidence. She found that the letter from the  college  principal
      did not clarify how he had known that the sponsor paid the school fees
      (given that he was new) and she noted that  all  the  receipts  simply
      named the appellant as the payee. She noted that the first  judge  had
      accepted that the appellant  had  lived  in  the  sponsor's  flat  but
      pointed out that there were issues over whom she lived  with  in  that
      she had failed to make  any  reference  to  another  sister.  Ms  Kiss
      accepted that there was no finding on the  affidavit  of  guardianship
      but submitted that it was just an affidavit and that it had  not  been
      produced to the first judge.  If  the  absence  of  findings  in  this
      respect were considered material then further oral evidence  would  be
      required. The issue of who the appellant had  lived  with  would  also
      have to be explored as that goes to  dependency.  Accommodation  alone
      was not a sufficient indication of dependency.

   6.       Ms Targett-Parker replied. She submitted  that  there  was  more
      than just the accommodation provided by the sponsor; she had paid  for
      the appellant's fare to the UK and her visa. It was not clear  whether
      the affidavit on guardianship had been  before  Judge  Jones  but  the
      document had not been challenged by the presenting officer at the most
      recent hearing.  It  would  be  unfair  to  re-open  this  issue.  The
      appellant's parents had died and as her older  sister  it  was  likely
      that she was the appellant's guardian. No further evidence was  needed
      and the decision should be re-made and the appeal allowed.

   7.       That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the hearing
      I reserved my determination.

Findings and conclusions


   8.       The issue  before  the  judge  was  whether  the  appellant  was
      dependent upon the sponsor prior to her arrival  in  the  UK.  I  have
      considered the submissions made and  the  evidence  and  determination
      with care.

   9.       The grounds are all  intertwined;  essentially  the  appellant's
      case is that the judge did not  properly  consider  the  evidence  and
      erred in requiring more when, it is argued, the evidence she  had  was
      sufficient for the appeal to be allowed.   I  do  not  find  that  the
      criticisms of the determination are made out for the reasons  set  out
      below (in no particular order).

  10.       Whilst the judge accepted the earlier finding that the appellant
      had lived in the sponsor's accommodation (presumably  in  the  periods
      when she was not at boarding school and not living  with  her  friends
      during holidays as her evidence indicated),  this  is  not  sufficient
      evidence of dependency. In fairness, Ms Targett-Parker did not  submit
      this was enough; her submissions were that  the  other  evidence  when
      taken along with this demonstrated dependency in Nigeria.

  11.       The judge looked at the other  evidence.  She  was  entitled  to
      reject the oral evidence of money transfers  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant and sponsor had provided wholly conflicting accounts of  how
      money was sent to the appellant. The appellant's evidence was that she
      received a fixed amount every month via Western Union.  The  sponsor's
      evidence was that she sent variable amounts at varying times and  that
      she did not use Western Union due to high commission charges.  It  was
      in that context that the judge was unwilling to accept the evidence of
      the witness who maintained she had been the friend ferrying money from
      the sponsor to the appellant. The judge was entitled to find that, had
      there been documentary evidence to show the  friend's  travel  to  and
      from Nigeria, it could easily have been  adduced,  particularly  given
      the fact that the sponsor is a solicitor and that the previous  appeal
      failed due to a lack of evidence on dependency.

  12.       There is no conflict in her findings with regard to the evidence
      of the witness and the money sent for the air fare. The judge was  not
      prepared to accept undocumented evidence as to money transfers due  to
      the inconsistent oral evidence.  In this she relied upon  the  finding
      of the first judge and the absence  of  any  documentary  evidence  to
      challenge  that.  She  was  nevertheless  entitled  to  consider   the
      documentary  evidence  that  had  been  produced  in  respect  of  the
      remittance for the air fare and visa. Despite her adverse findings  as
      to the other remittances, this was evidenced by  documents  and  hence
      was  accepted.  I  see  no  conflict  in   those   findings   and   no
      misapplication of the Devaseelan principles.

  13.       I now come to the other two complaints made. The payment of  the
      airfare and visa fee does not establish financial dependency. At  best
      it shows a one off payment. It cannot be relied upon  as  evidence  of
      the  appellant's  dependency  on  her  sister  when  there  was   such
      conflicting evidence as to how she was supported  for  all  her  other
      basic necessities. As it was not accepted by  either  judge  that  the
      sponsor was meeting  the  costs  of  the  appellant's  maintenance  in
      Nigeria, it follows that she must have been supported  by  some  other
      means. That was not explored but it did not need to be. It was  enough
      that the claim of dependency was rejected for the reasons given. As Ms
      Kiss pointed out, there was also conflicting evidence about  whom  the
      appellant lived with. For reasons which are  unexplained,  no  mention
      was made of the other sister, with whom it  transpired  the  appellant
      had been living, until late in the proceedings. This raises  questions
      of why the appellant sought to conceal  this  fact  and  whether  that
      sister might have had some responsibility for the appellant  or  might
      have supported her. Whilst I fully accept that dependency need not  be
      lengthy and that the required duration is unspecified, I do not  agree
      that the judge erred in finding that on the evidence before her,  that
      had not been established.

  14.       It has been argued that the judge disregarded evidence  such  as
      the affidavit of  guardianship  or  'guadianship'  as  it  incorrectly
      states. It is difficult to see the relevance of this  given  that  the
      only undertaking made by the sponsor in this  document  was  that  she
      would be responsible for the appellant until  she  came  of  age.  The
      appellant turned 18 in 2003 some five years prior to her entry to  the
      UK. There was no reliable evidence before the judge as to how she  had
      supported herself during that time. For all we know, she may have been
      employed as it seems she was here, despite her claim that she did  not
      where the 'salary' deposits in her bank account had come from. Even if
      the judge had taken account of it,  it  would  have  done  nothing  to
      resolve the  discrepant  evidence  about  money  transfers  which  are
      crucial to the issue of how the appellant was supported in Nigeria.

  15.       The judge considered the evidence from the  appellant's  school,
      which she left in 2003, but for valid reasons found that  it  did  not
      show that the sponsor had been paying the appellant's fees. The letter
      from the new principal, who had not been there when the appellant  had
      been a student, did not clarify the basis on which he claimed that the
      sponsor was responsible for the fees and, as the judge noted, all  the
      receipts are in the appellant's name with no reference to her sponsor.
       There are no corresponding debits to her bank account or  credits  to
      the appellant's.

  16.       There is nothing in the determination which  points  to  a  high
      standard of proof being applied. It is  acknowledged  that  the  judge
      cited the correct standard and I see nothing to suggest that any other
      standard was applied. The approach to the documentary evidence shows a
      proper application of the Tanveer Ahmed  principles.  The  judge  gave
      compelling reasons for not being able to  place  weight  on  the  oral
      evidence  alone  and  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  absence   of
      documentary evidence  which  could  have  easily  been  provided,  was
      indicative of the fact it did not exist.

  17.       Read as a whole, I therefore find that the judge's findings  are
      sound. She was entitled to find as she did. The determination does not
      show any error of law.



Decision

  18.       The Tribunal made no error of law. The decision to  dismiss  the
      appeal is upheld.



      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      9 September 2013

