
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/01902/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral determination given following      |                                    |
|hearing                                 |                                    |
|On 10 October 2019                      |  On 26 November 2019               |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr Muhammad Awais
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Arif Rehman, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan (as he then was) in which on the record
    he "allowed" an appeal by Mr Awais against the decision made some three
    years earlier to revoke the residence card which he had been issued and
    to remove him pursuant to Regulations 19(3)(a)  and  (b)  of  the  2006
    Regulations,  with  reference  to  Regulation  21(5)(b)  of  the   same
    Regulations.  For ease of convenience I shall throughout this  decision
    refer to the Secretary of State, who was  the  original  respondent  as
    "the Secretary of  State"  and  to  Mr  Awais,  who  was  the  original
    appellant, as "the Claimant".

 2. The underlying decision, as already indicated above was a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to revoke a residence card  which  the  Claimant
    had previously been granted as the spouse of a person  then  exercising
    EU treaty rights, a Ms Kutnik and to remove him.   The  basis  of  this
    decision was the Secretary of State's belief that the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience and  entered  into  simply  in  order  for  the
    Claimant to become entitled to residence rights to which  otherwise  he
    would not have been entitled.

 3. By the time the appeal came to be heard (on 26 March and 14  May  2019)
    matters had moved on within the three  years  which  had  since  passed
    because by that stage the Claimant had been divorced and  had  embarked
    on a new relationship with a Ms Brod.  It seems  that  at  the  hearing
    (albeit not originally in the grounds)  the  appeal  proceeded  on  the
    basis (which seems to have been incorrect) that the appeal was  against
    a refusal to grant a permanent residence  card  to  the  Claimant.   In
    order to succeed in an application for a permanent residence  card,  on
    the basis of his previous marriage to Ms  Kutnik,  the  Claimant  would
    have had to establish first that the marriage was  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience (or at any rate the Secretary of State must have been found
    unable to establish that it was not) and secondly, that at the date  of
    the termination of the marriage Ms Kutnik had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights.  This latter requirement was not however necessary in order  to
    challenge the  revocation  decision  which  had  been  made  and  which
    technically was the subject of this appeal.

 4. In his decision, Judge O'Callaghan found first that  the  marriage  was
    not a marriage of convenience, but secondly that the Claimant  had  not
    established  to  the  requisite  standard  that  the  requirements   of
    Regulation 10(5) of the 2006 Regulations  were  satisfied,  finding  at
    paragraph 104, as follows:

         "As the [Claimant's] divorce petition  subsequent  Decree  Absolute
         were issued in 2016, there  is  no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
         sufficient to enable the appellant to satisfy the requirement under
         Regulation 10 that Ms  Kutnik  [had]  exercised  EU  treaty  rights
         throughout the relevant time up to the divorce."

 5. As at paragraph 102 the judge had stated in terms that the Claimant "is
    also required that to establish that Ms Kutnik was exercising EU treaty
    rights during such period" it follows that logically, if the judge  was
    right about this, and on the basis that the appeal had been  against  a
    refusal to grant a permanent residence card (which technically  it  was
    not), he must have intended to go on to dismiss the  appeal.   However,
    although it is not explained as to why the judge reached this decision,
    in fact he went on to state under "notice of decision" that "the appeal
    is allowed".

 6. The basis of the Secretary of State's appeal as set out in the  grounds
    is that this must have been effectively a slip of the pen and that  was
    the reason why permission was granted to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    bring this appeal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge Saffer,  on  12  August
    2019, who, when setting out his  reasons  for  granting  permission  to
    appeal stated that "it is arguable that the judge intended  to  dismiss
    the appeal, by a slip of the pen allowed it, as he found  that  neither
    wife [this is a reference to a subsequent relationship with a Ms  Brod]
    had established that she was exercising EEA treaty  rights  during  the
    relationship".

 7. On the face of this decision, it certainly does appear as if the  judge
    had intended to dismiss the appeal but on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State before this Tribunal Mr Bramble very fairly stated that it  would
    not be right in all the circumstances for the  Secretary  of  State  to
    maintain this appeal.  His reasons were given succinctly and as I  have
    said extremely fairly and are as follows.  Whatever the judge may  have
    believed the issue to have been, in fact the challenge was not  to  any
    refusal to grant a permanent right of residence (in  respect  of  which
    the Claimant would have needed to  establish  that  Ms  Kutnik  or  his
    future partner had indeed been exercising treaty rights) but was simply
    a challenge to the revocation of the residence card which the  Claimant
    had previously had but  which  had  in  any  event  now  lapsed.   That
    revocation decision had been made on the sole basis that  the  marriage
    was a sham marriage and on that issue the judge had found in favour  of
    the Claimant.   As  there  was  no  requirement  for  the  Claimant  to
    establish the dates on which treaty rights had been  exercised  by  his
    former wife  (because  this  was  not  in  issue  with  regard  to  the
    revocation decision) any finding that the judge had made with regard to
    whether or not either Ms Kutnik or Ms Brod had been  exercising  treaty
    rights was otiose to the decision which was actually  under  challenge.
    It followed that if and to the extent that the judge  had  intended  to
    dismiss the appeal, he would not have been justified on his findings in
    so doing, because the only live issue before him  with  regard  to  the
    decision that was under challenge  was  whether  or  not  the  marriage
    between the Claimant and Ms  Kutnik  had  been  a  sham  one  from  its
    inception, and the judge had found that it was not.

 8. Accordingly, Mr Bramble accepted that insofar as the decision  made  by
    the judge does not appear to follow the logic of the findings  he  made
    and what he had considered to  be  the  issues  before  him,  any  such
    inconsistency, if an error, was not material because on  the  basis  of
    the judge's finding that this was not a sham marriage, he  should  have
    allowed this appeal in any event.

 9. I am very grateful to Mr Bramble for the exceptionally fair  manner  in
    which he has conducted this appeal and having given anxious scrutiny to
    the issues in this case I accept  that  his  submissions  are  entirely
    correct.  It follows that the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  must  be
    dismissed, the effect being that the original  decision,  allowing  the
    Claimant's appeal against the revocation and removal decision  must  be
    sustained and I shall so find.

10. I should however note that the maintenance of this  decision  does  not
    give this Claimant any retained  rights  of  residence;  it  is  merely
    confirmation that the revocation decision was not justified because  of
    the  judge's  finding  that  the  marriage  was  not  a   marriage   of
    convenience.  If and to the extent that this residence card having  now
    lapsed, and unless and until the Claimant  can  establish  that  he  is
    entitled to further rights of residence, he has no right to  remain  in
    this country.





Decision

There being no material error of law in Judge  O'Callaghan's  decision,  for
the reasons set out above, the Secretary of  State's  appeal  against  Judge
O'Callaghan's decision allowing the  Claimant's  appeal  is  dismissed,  and
that decision, allowing the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
State's decision to revoke his residence card is sustained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
              Date: 20 November 2019


