
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01082/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mrs MEHRNAZ ABELCHAIN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    absent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts, promulgated on  30  July  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 26 March 1955 and is a national of Iran.

4.    On 10 December 2014 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK as  the  partner  of  a
person who has leave to remain in the UK as a retired person of  independent
means.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Coutts  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against   the
Respondent's decision on ECHR grounds.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and, on 7 January 2016,  Judge  Grimmett
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "It is arguable that the Judge erred  in  concluding  that  failing  to
    return the Appellant's passport so that she could retake the  test  was
    an interference with her article 8 rights when the issues were  whether
    she met the requirements of the rules or whether  there  was  something
    exceptional about her position."

The Hearing

7.    The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor  was  she  represented  at
the appeal. I am satisfied that due notice of the  appeal  was  served  upon
the Appellant at the address that was given. I am therefore  satisfied  that
having been served notice of the hearing and  not  attended  it  is  in  the
interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in the Appellant's  absence
as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph 38 of The  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

8.    Ms Everett, for the respondent, adopted the terms of  the  grounds  of
appeal and  explained  that  the  Judge  had  found  that  the  respondent's
decision not to return the appellant's passport frustrated  her  ability  to
comply with the immigration rules. At [16] the Judge says "I find  that  the
respondent's   failure   to   return   the   appellant's   passport   is   a
disproportionate interference with the appellant's rights." Ms Everett  told
me that the retention of the passport does not amount to  a  breach  of  any
article 8 rights. She argued that the Judge might have used article  8  ECHR
in an attempt to fix a perceived unfairness, but that  the  Judge  fails  to
demonstrate a disproportionate  interference  with  article  8  rights.  She
urged me to set the decision aside.

Analysis

9.    At [14] the Judge decides that there are exceptional circumstances  in
this case which merit article 8 ECHR consideration out-with the  immigration
rules. At [15] the Judge finds that of private and family  life  rights  are
engaged. It is at [16] that the  Judge  finds  that  the  interference  with
article  8  ECHR  is  disproportionate.  He  specifically  finds  that   the
interference is the retention of the  appellant's  passport.  There  are  no
other findings about the manner in which article 8 ECHR is engaged.

10.   It is clear that the Judge has taken the  view  that  the  appellant's
chances of making a successful application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK
are frustrated because her passport has not been  returned  to  her.  It  is
obvious that having made that finding the Judge  has  tried  to  assist  the
appellant.

11.   Article 8 of the ECHR states:

    "(i)   Everyone has the right to respect for  his  private  and  family
    life, his home and his correspondence.

    (ii)   There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
    exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law and
    is necessary in a democratic  society  in  the  interests  of  national
    security, public safety or the economic well being of the country,  for
    the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of  health  or
    morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

12.   At [15] of the decision the Judge sets out the elements which make  up
private and family life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR in  this  case,
but  it's  at  [16]  that  he  finds  that  there  is   a   disproportionate
interference with the appellant's rights. The Judge does not  make  findings
of fact to demonstrate either the nature  of  the  interference  or  why  he
finds that that  interference  is  disproportionate.  He  does  not  specify
whether the interference is to the right  to  respect  for  family  life  or
private life, or both. He does not analyse the impact  of  the  respondent's
decision in order to define the nature of the interference.

13.    And  [9]  the  Judge  refers  to  section  117  of  the   Nationality
Immigration and Asylum act 2002, but no findings are made about  the  impact
of the factors set out in that statutory  provision.  The  result  is  that,
although the Judge concludes that article 8 ECHR is engaged,  his  balancing
exercise is inadequate and no meaningful assessment  of  proportionality  is
carried out. I find that that amounts to a material error  of  law.  I  must
set the decision aside.

14.   The Judge  has  decided  this  case  solely  on  the  basis  that  the
respondent has retained the appellant's passport and so prevented  her  from
taking the "knowledge of life in the UK "test. That is  an  error  of  fact.
The  evidence  indicates  that  the  respondent  returned  the   appellant's
passport to her on 19 June 2014, and that the appellant re-sat the  test  on
8 July 2014, but was (for a second time) unsuccessful.

15.   Although I set  the  decision  aside,  there  is  sufficient  material
before me to enable me to substitute my own decision.

Findings of fact

16.   For more than 20 years, the appellant and her husband  have  regularly
visited the UK, in part because the appellant's brother, sister,  niece  and
nephews all live in the UK. In 2009 both the appellant and her husband  were
granted leave to enter the UK for five  years.  The  appellant  was  granted
leave as the dependent of her husband, who was granted leave  as  a  retired
person of independent means.

17.   In March 2009 the appellant and her husband purchased the property  in
the UK in the UK in which they now live.

18. In April 2014 both the appellant and her husband applied for  indefinite
leave to remain in the UK. The appellant's husband  was  granted  indefinite
leave to remain as a retired person of independent  means.  The  appellant's
application was refused. It is against  that  decision  that  the  appellant
appeals.

19.   The respondent refused the appellant's  application  because  she  had
not passed the "life in the UK" test. The appellant attempted to re-sit  the
"life in the UK test" on 17 June 2014. She was unable to do so  because  the
respondent held her passport. On 10  June  2014  the  appellant's  barrister
wrote to the respondent asking for return of the appellant's passport.

20.   On 19 June 2014 the respondent returned the appellant's passport.  The
appellant then re-sat and failed the "life in the UK" test on 8  July  2014.
On  14  July  2014,  the  appellant's  barrister  returned  the  appellant's
passport to the Respondent and asked the respondent to  exercise  discretion
and grant leave to remain in the UK.

21.   The appellant's husband has returned to Iran  a  number  of  times  to
visit his mother, who is unwell. He has had  to  travel  alone  because  the
appellant cannot accompany him until this appeal is resolved.

Conclusions

22.   In the reasons for  refusal  letter,  the  respondent  says  that  the
appellant's passport was returned to her  on  19  June  2014  and  that  the
appellant sat the life in the UK test on 8 July 2014. The  respondent's  PF1
bundle contains a letter from  the  appellant's  barrister  (dated  14  July
2014) to the respondent returning  the  passport  and  confirming  that  the
appellant was not able to pass the life in the UK test. That letter  returns
the appellant's passport to the  respondent  and  asked  the  respondent  to
exercise discretion because the appellant is approaching her  60th  birthday
and might soon be exempt from the life in the UK test

23.   The appellant was 60 in March  last  year,  three  months  before  the
decision was promulgated. The respondent's own guidance provides

    "There is discretion to waive the knowledge of language and life in the
    UK requirement if, because of a person's age, it would be  unreasonable
    to expect them to meet it.  This  is  set  out  in  paragraph  2(e)  of
    Schedule 1 to the British Nationality Act 1981.

    Where the applicant is aged 65 or over you must waive the requirement

    ...

    Where the applicant is aged 60-64, you should normally be  prepared  to
    waive the requirements  if  the  time  needed  to  reach  the  required
    standard means the applicant would then be aged 65 or over."

24.   The appellant's application was considered  under  paragraph  273D  of
the immigration rules. The only part of that paragraph  that  the  appellant
could not meet is the knowledge of life in the UK test. At the date  of  the
hearing in this case  the  appellant  was  60  years  of  age.  She  is  now
approaching his 61st birthday. The  appellant's  husband  has  been  granted
indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK.  For  the  last  seven  years  the
appellant's home has been in the UK.

25.   In Ukus (discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  00307(IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) If a decision maker in the purported  exercise  of  a
discretion vested in him noted his function and  what  was  required  to  be
done when fulfilling it and then proceeded  to  reach  a  decision  on  that
basis, the decision is a lawful one and the  Tribunal  cannot  intervene  in
the absence of a statutory power to decide that the discretion  should  have
been exercised differently (see s 86(3)(b) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002); (ii) Where the decision maker has failed  to  exercise
a discretion vested  in  him,  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on  appeal  is
limited to a  decision  that  the  failure  renders  the  decision  'not  in
accordance with the law' (s 86(3)(a)). Because the discretion is  vested  in
the Executive, the appropriate course will be for the  Tribunal  to  require
the decision maker to complete his task by reaching  a  lawful  decision  on
the outstanding application, along the lines set out in SSHD v  Abdi  [1996]
Imm AR 148. In such a case, it makes no difference whether there is  such  a
statutory power as is mentioned in  paragraph  1  above;  and  (ii)  if  the
decision maker has lawfully exercised his discretion and  the  Tribunal  has
such a statutory power, the Tribunal must either  (a)  uphold  the  decision
maker's decision (if the Tribunal is unpersuaded that the  decision  maker's
discretion  should  have  been  exercised  differently);  or  (b)  reach   a
different decision in the exercise of its own discretion.

26.   The respondent has discretion to waive the  requirement  to  pass  the
knowledge of life in the UK test. That is a discretion which the  respondent
has not yet considered. If the  respondent  follows  her  own  guidance  she
could find that the appellant fulfils the requirements  of  the  immigration
rules. I therefore allow the appeal to the limited extent that I  remit  the
case to the respondent to enable the respondent to exercise  the  discretion
available.

Decision

27.   The determination of First Tier Tribunal Judge Coutts  promulgated  on
30 July 2015 contains a material error of law. I set the decision  aside.  I
substitute the following decision.

28.   The appeal is allowed. The application remains outstanding and  awaits
a lawful decision by the Secretary of State.


Signed      Date 15 February 2016
                                            Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            Doyle
