
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01585/2015
                                                               IA/01630/2015
                                                               IA/01634/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2016                       |On 7 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Habeeb [G]
                                 Fatimat [G]
                                    [A G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Walsh, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This the Secretary of State's appeal against the  decisions  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Dineen who in  a  determination  promulgated  on  8
    January 2016, following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 12 August 2015 had
    allowed  the  appeals  of  these  respondents  against   the   decision
    previously made by the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  to  grant  them
    residence cards under the 2006 EEA Regulations.  For ease of  reference
    I shall hereafter refer to  the  respondents,  who  were  the  original
    appellants as "the claimants" and to the Secretary of  State,  who  was
    the original respondent, as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The background facts are set out in Judge Dineen's  decision,  which  I
    now summarise.   The  claimants  are  all  nationals  of  Nigeria  born
    respectively on 15 June 1993, 25 August 1995  and  27  September  2001.
    They are the children of Mr Habeeb Owolabi [G] (whom I shall  hereafter
    refer to as "the father") and Mrs Omotunde [M-G]) hereinafter  referred
    to as "the mother".  The mother  and  father  apparently  separated  in
    2000, and on 12 July that year the father married one Manuela  [S],  an
    EEA national, in Nigeria.  It is obvious from the date of the birth  of
    the third claimant (September 2001) that although the mother and father
    had stopped their relationship, they must have continued seeing each at
    least from time to time.

 3. In any event, on 1 December 2001 the father together with his new  wife
    entered the UK.  The father was granted a five  year  residence  permit
    under the EEA Regulations on 5 March 2002, as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in this country.  Very shortly  after
    he had been resident in this country for five years, on 3 April 2007 he
    and his wife, Ms [S], were divorced.   The  three  claimants  had  been
    living in Nigeria during this period.

 4. The mother had come to the  UK  and  began  seeing  the  father  again;
    another child was born  to  them  on  11  July  2007,  following  which
    apparently they began cohabiting again.   They  have  had  another  two
    children.

 5. On 27 July 2008, the claimants entered the UK as visitors, since  when,
    after their leave expired, they have remained without leave.

 6. On 1 October 2011 the mother and father were married and on 30 November
    2011 the father was granted permanent residence as the divorced  spouse
    of an EEA national who  had  retained  rights  of  residence.   He  was
    entitled to permanent residence under  the  EEA  Regulations.   He  was
    naturalised as a British  citizen  on  21  April  2013  and  the  three
    youngest children have also been naturalised  as  British  citizens  in
    February 2014.

 7. On 4 March 2014 the claimants applied for  permanent  residence  cards,
    but their applications were refused because the  requirements  set  out
    within Regulation  10(5)(b)  of  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  were  not
    satisfied, they having entered the UK  after  the  termination  of  the
    father's marriage.  It is not argued on behalf of  the  claimants  that
    they are entitled to permanent residence under  the  2006  Regulations,
    but it is argued that they are so entitled under  the  2004  Directive,
    referred  to  below,  which  should  have  been  implemented   by   the
    Regulations.

 8. The claimants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal
    for their applications for  residence  cards  and  their  appeals  were
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen,  following  a  hearing  at
    which the Secretary of  State  was  not  represented.   The  judge  was
    referred to a skeleton argument which had been prepared  on  behalf  of
    the claimants, and in a very short  Decision  indeed,  he  allowed  the
    appeals.  The basis of the Decision appears to be that he was satisfied
    that the Regulations did not implement the provisions  set  out  within
    Article 13(2) of the Citizens Free Movement Directive 2004/38/EC, which
    was "directly applicable in the UK" (see paragraph 24 of the Decision).



 9. The Secretary of State now appeals against this Decision, leave  having
    been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 26 May 2016.

The Hearing

10. I heard submissions from Mr Melvin on behalf of the Secretary of  State
    and also from Mr Walsh on behalf  of  the  claimants.   Mr  Walsh  also
    relied on a skeleton argument he had prepared for the  hearing.   While
    it was accepted on behalf of the claimants that they could not  succeed
    under Regulation 10 of the 2006 EEA Regulations, it was submitted  that
    these Regulations did not implement properly the  2004  Directive,  and
    that this Directive  was  directly  applicable  in  the  UK  under  the
    doctrine of direct effect.  Mr Walsh relied in particular upon Articles
    2 and 13(2) of the 2004 Directive which provide as follows:

         "Article 2

         Definitions

         For the purposes of this Directive:

         1.   "Union citizen" means any person having the nationality of the
             Member State;

         2.   "Family member" means:

             (a)  The spouse;

             (b)  the partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted  a
                  registered partnership, on the basis of the legislation of
                  a Member State, if the  legislation  of  the  host  Member
                  State treats  registered  partnerships  as  equivalent  to
                  marriage and in accordance with the conditions  laid  down
                  in the relevant legislation of the host Member State;

             (c)  the direct descendants who are under the age of 21 or are
                  dependents and those of the spouse or partner  as  defined
                  in point (b);

             (d)  the dependent direct relatives in the ascending line  and
                  those of the spouse or partner as defined in point (b);

         3.   "Host Member State" means a Member  State  to  which  a  Union
             Citizen moves in order  to  exercise  his/her  right  to  free
             movement and residence ...

         Article 13

         Retention of the right of residence by family members in the  event
         of divorce, annulment of marriage or termination  of  a  registered
         partnership

         1.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  sub-paragraph,  divorce,
             annulment of the Union Citizen's marriage  or  termination  of
             his/her registered partnership, as referred to in  point  2(b)
             of Article 2 shall  not  affect  the  right  of  residence  of
             his/her family members who are nationals of a Member State.

             Before acquiring the right of permanent residence, the persons
             concerned must meet the conditions laid down  in  points  (a),
             (b), (c) or (d) of Article 7 (1).

         2.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  sub-paragraph,  divorce,
             annulment  of  marriage  or  termination  of  the   registered
             partnership referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2  shall  not
             entail loss of the right of residence  of  a  Union  Citizen's
             family members who are  not  nationals  of  the  Member  State
             where:

             (a)  Prior to the  initiation  of  the  divorce  or  annulment
                  proceedings or termination of the  registered  partnership
                  referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2,  the  marriage  or
                  registered partnership has lasted at  least  three  years,
                  including one year in host Member State; ...

         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements.  "Sufficient resources" shall be  as
         defined in Article 8(4).

         Such  family  members  shall  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on personal basis."

11. Mr Walsh submitted that these claimants came within the  definition  of
    "Family Member" as set out in Article 2-(c) and  that  they  also  came
    within the  category  of  persons  entitled  to  retain  the  right  of
    permanent residence under Article 13.  This is because the marriage had
    lasted for three years prior to divorce and the claimants "are  members
    of the family already constituted in  the  host  Member  State"  of  "a
    person satisfying these requirements".  That was the basis  upon  which
    the appeal had been allowed, although  it  has  to  be  said  that  the
    reasoning in support of this Decision was extremely sparse.

12.  Mr  Melvin's  argument  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    essentially that these claimants were never members of the family of an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in this country, or even  of  the
    spouse of an EEA member  exercising  treaty  rights  in  this  country,
    because they had not arrived in this country until after the father had
    been divorced from the EEA national.  Accordingly,  they  never  had  a
    right of residence in this country.

Discussion

13. The difficulty with Mr Walsh's submissions  is  that  in  order  to  be
    entitled to permanent residence, the claimants would have to  establish
    "that they are members of the family already constituted  in  the  host
    Member State of a person satisfying these requirements".  As they  were
    never in this country while the father was married to the EEA national,
    they were never members of a family "already constituted"  in  the  UK.
    As the father is not and has never  been  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in this country,  they  are  not  entitled  to  residence
    through him.  As a British  national  (which  he  now  is)  he  is  not
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  Accordingly, the claimants are not
    entitled to permanent residence under the 2004  Directive.   While  the
    father was entitled (because he had been the family member  of  an  EEA
    national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  this  country)  to  permanent
    residence under the Directive (and the Regulations)  he  was  not  then
    entitled  to  confer  the  benefit  of  permanent  residence  onto  his
    children, the claimants;  at  the  time  they  came  to  this  country,
    although their father had a right of  residence  himself,  he  was  not
    exercising treaty rights and nor was he any  longer  the  spouse  of  a
    person who was, and accordingly the claimants were never members of the
    already constituted family of  a  person  satisfying  the  requirements
    under the Directive.  This appeal must accordingly be dismissed.



Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen  as  containing
a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appeal of the claimants is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 4 November 2016
