
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01772/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 January 2017                   |On 12 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                           MD JAKIR HUSSAN SAIMON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     No appearance
For the respondent:    Mr N. Bramble


                        DECISION & NOTICE OF DECISION

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  11
    December 2013 to refuse leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant. The application was refused  under  the  general  grounds  for
    refusal contained in paragraph 322(1A) of the immigration rules on  the
    ground that a letter and statement from  Affin  Bank  relating  to  his
    third party sponsor, Sahad Bin Sultan Al Hussan, had been  verified  by
    the bank as not genuine.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet dismissed the appeal in  a  decision
    promulgated on 03 June  2014.  She  was  satisfied  that  the  Document
    Verification Report (DVR) produced by the  respondent  (it  is  unclear
    when it was produced) was sufficient evidence to discharge  the  burden
    of proof to show that the appellant had submitted a false  document  in
    support of the application. The appeal was dismissed with reference  to
    paragraph 322(1A).

3.    A First-tier Tribunal Judge refused permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal in a decision sent on 23 June 2014. An  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    refused a renewed application  for  permission,  relying  on  the  same
    reasons, in a decision sent on 27 August 2014.

4.    The appellant filed an application for judicial review  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision. At a rolled up hearing on 28 April 2015  Mr  Justice
    King granted permission, allowed the judicial review and made an  order
    quashing the Upper Tribunal decision. The effect  is  that  a  decision
    relating to the application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal remains outstanding.

5.    I can see no evidence on the court  file  to  suggest  that  a  formal
    order has been made granting permission to appeal. The Tribunal's other
    records do not indicate that permission has been granted. It is unclear
    why the Upper Tribunal has not dealt  with  the  matter  following  the
    judicial review decision but it  appears  that  copies  of  Mr  Justice
    King's decision and order were not received by the Upper Tribunal until
    very recently. As such, instructions were given for the  matter  to  be
    listed for hearing.

Decision: permission to appeal is granted

6.    Further to the decision and order made by Mr Justice King on 28  April
    2014, and for the avoidance of doubt, I grant permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Decision: appeal to be treated as abandoned

7.    There was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.  I  was
    satisfied that the file indicated that a hearing notice was sent to the
    appellant at his last recorded address and  to  his  last  known  legal
    representatives, Universal Solicitors, on 09 December 2016. During  the
    course of the morning the court  clerk  tried  to  telephone  Universal
    Solicitors on the telephone number  given  on  their  website  but  was
    unable to obtain a response. By lunchtime,  I  was  satisfied  that  no
    explanation had been provided for the appellant's failure to attend the
    hearing and that I could proceed to decide the appeal in his absence.

8.    Mr Bramble produced several  screenshots  from  the  Home  Office  CID
    database, which recorded  that  the  appellant  was  reported  to  have
    departed from the UK on 12 August 2015. The  records  showed  that  the
    case was subsequently registered  by  the  Third  Country  Unit  on  29
    September 2015. The CID records it  as  a  "Third  Country  IN  Case  -
    Article 34 (Dublin 3)". The notes record that there was no evidence  to
    show that he had applied for international protection or  asylum  while
    in the UK or that he was removed by the UK authorities. It was  assumed
    that he had left the country of his own  accord  before  travelling  to
    Ireland.

9.    I am satisfied that the combination of  the  appellant's  absence  and
    the CID records shows on the balance of probabilities that it is likely
    that the appellant left the UK in August 2015.   It  is  reasonable  to
    infer from the entries on the CID records that the respondent  received
    a request from the Irish authorities relating to the Dublin Regulation.
    The indication is that the appellant is likely to have  claimed  asylum
    in Ireland. Given that there is no record of him  having  ever  claimed
    asylum in the UK it is highly unlikely that he would have been returned
    here under the Dublin Regulation. The CID records would have recorded a
    transfer if it had taken place. In contrast, there is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the appellant is still in the UK. He did  not  attend  the
    hearing and there is nothing to suggest that he is continuing to pursue
    this appeal.

10.   The appeal was begun, and determined by the First-tier Tribunal,  well
    before the commencement of the  amended  appeal  provisions  introduced
    through the Immigration Act 2014. Although paragraph 47(2) of Part 4 of
    Schedule 9 of the 2014 Act makes provision for section  104(4)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002")  to  be
    omitted,  the  effect  of  the  saving  provisions  outlined   in   The
    Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No.3,  Transitional  and  Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014  preserves  the  effect  of  section  104(4)  in
    relation to cases of this type. Section 104(4) provides:

         "(4) An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is
         in the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  treated  as  abandoned  if  the
         appellant leaves the United Kingdom."

11.   In light of  the  above  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  sufficient
    evidence to show that the appellant has left the UK and that the appeal
    should be treated as abandoned by operation of the statutory  provision
    contained in section  104(4)  of  the  NIAA  2002,  which  is  a  saved
    provision for the purpose of this particular appeal.



DECISION

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted

The appeal is treated as abandoned by operation of  section  104(4)  of  the
NIAA 2002

The Upper Tribunal will take no further action


Signed   [pic]   Date 11 January 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
