
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01659/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2nd September 2014                           |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD



                                   Between

                        miss ABIOLA ATINUKE LOREMIKAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Shores Anchor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a  national  of  Nigeria  who  applied  for  permanent
    residence as the family member of  her  father  and  whose  appeal  was
    dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Prior  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 19th June 2014.   Grounds  of  application  were  lodged
    primarily on the basis that the judge had failed to take  into  account
    evidence of dependency with reference being made to well-known case law
    including Reyes v Sweden [2014] EUECJ C-43/12.   Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle who said that dependency
    was a matter of fact and the judge had failed to take proper account of
    the evidence of dependence, noting that the Appellant continued  to  be
    accommodated by her father.

 2. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 3. Mr Ahmed indicated that he had  not  drafted  the  grounds  (which  are
    unhelpfully long and the first and final grounds unsound) but the  test
    under the 2006 Regulations was whether there was  material  support  to
    meet essential needs.  The evidence  before  the  judge  was  that  the
    Appellant continued to reside with  her  father  in  the  holidays  and
    sometimes at weekends.  Furthermore the judge had  made  a  finding  at
    paragraph 22 that the Appellant  was  in  receipt  of  money  from  her
    father.  I was asked to set the decision aside, remake it,   and  allow
    the appeal.

 4. For the Home Office Ms Everett agreed with some of  the  points  taken.
    The case of Reyes was not authority for the proposition that dependency
    was not required.  The issue on what dependency was required was  still
    a matter that was not wholly clear when the non-EEA national was  in  a
    member state.

 5. I reserved my decision on all issues.

Conclusion

 6. Under the Citizens Directive the  descendants  of  union  citizens  may
    travel with a union citizen to another EU  member  state  if  they  are
    under 21.  If they are over 21, they  have  to  demonstrate  dependence
    upon  the  union  citizen  and  in  this  case  the  Appellant  has  to
    demonstrate dependency on her father.  The judge found the evidence  of
    the father (the Sponsor) to be "consistent, unhesitant and  unrehearsed
    witness whose testimony was credible" (paragraph 20).   He  appears  to
    have accepted that the Appellant was in receipt of no regular financial
    support from the Sponsor, only being in receipt of cash  gifts  as  and
    when the Sponsor had cause to make them or when she had  cause  to  ask
    for them. The judge did not consider that this was sufficient  to  meet
    the dependency test.

 7. However what the  judge appears to have overlooked  is  what  both  the
    Appellant and  the  father  said  in  their  witness  statements.   The
    Appellant said "I am still residing with  my  father  and  step  family
    during the holidays and some weekends" (paragraph 6)  and  the  Sponsor
    said "she is still residing  with  us  during  the  holidays  and  some
    weekends" (paragraph 10) of their respective witness  statements.   For
    the judge not to take  account  of  this  evidence  was  a  significant
    factual error which translates into a material error in law.

 8. While the judge did not say if  he  was  accepting  or  rejecting  that
    evidence he was accepting the Sponsor as an entirely  credible  witness
    and he makes no comments which might go against the credibility of  the
    Appellant.  It therefore seems reasonable to  me  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant was a credible  witness  as  well  given  that  her  evidence
    dovetails with that of her father who has been found to be credible.

 9. I am therefore accepting as true  that  the  Appellant  does,  as  many
    students do, reside with her father  and  extended  family  during  the
    holidays which is therefore for a significant period of time.

10. In my view this evidence is eloquent of the  Appellant  having  a  real
    dependency on the Sponsor irrespective of the irregularity of any  cash
    payments made by the Sponsor to his  daughter.  I  use  the  word  real
    deliberately as that  appears  to  be  the  jurisprudential  test.   It
    follows that, in terms of the current case law, that the Appellant  has
    provided evidence of dependency and it is therefore  necessary  to  set
    the judge's decision aside as containing a material error  in  law  and
    remake the decision allowing the appeal.





Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

12. I set aside the decision.

13. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


