
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/01743/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th September 2016                     |On 15 September 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          eduardo de castro caetano
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Junior, Lawland Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this decision I shall refer to the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department as "the Respondent" and to Mr Eduardo De Castro  Caetano  as
    "the Appellant" (to reflect  their  respective  appearance  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).

Preliminary Issue

 2. Through an administrative oversight when this appeal was  first  called
    on I was informed that  there  was  no  attendance  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Since the time was well past 10:00 a.m. I indicated  to  Mr
    Duffy that I would deal with the matter on the  papers  before  me  and
    that it was not necessary to hear submissions from him.

 3. Before I was able to conclude the matter I was informed by my clerk  at
    the end of my list that the Appellant and his  representative  were  in
    attendance. I therefore called the matter on. Mr Junior assured me that
    he had been  present  in  the  Tribunal  building  since  10:00  am.  I
    explained the situation to him and asked him how he wished to  proceed.
    Did he wish me to carry on by starting the proceedings afresh or did he
    wish to return on another day before another judge? He was of the  firm
    view that I should restart the  proceedings  afresh  hearing  his  oral
    submissions. Mr Duffy was also content with this course.

Background

 4. The Appellant is a citizen of Brazil (born 27th June 1981).  He arrived
    in the UK in 2004 on a visit visa. Following the expiry of  that  visa,
    he did not return to Brazil but has remained  here  since.   He  is  an
    overstayer.

 5. Whilst remaining here the Appellant entered into a relationship with  a
    Swedish national who at that time was exercising treaty rights. A child
    was born of that relationship  in  2010.   He  therefore  submitted  an
    application for a Residence card as an extended family  member  of  the
    Swedish national. By August 2013 before the application was  processed,
    the Appellant's relationship with the Swedish national broke down.

 6. The Appellant then formed a new relationship with  a  Polish  national,
    Karolina  Klimek.   In  November  2014  the  Appellant  applied  for  a
    residence card under the EEA Regulations 2006, (Regulation  8)  on  the
    basis that he and Miss Klimek  were  in  a  durable  relationship.  The
    Respondent refused the application by way of a decision issued on  17th
    December  2014.  The  subsequent  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Metzer) in a decision promulgated on 2nd
    February 2016 allowed the Appellant's appeal. The judge  accepted  that
    the Appellant and his partner, had a child together. The child was born
    in December 2015.  The Appellant and his partner had married by way  of
    proxy marriage  shortly  before  the  child's  birth.   The  judge  was
    satisfied therefore, that the Appellant had established that he was  in
    a durable relationship with an EEA national [11].  He went on to  allow
    the appeal outright.

 8. The Respondent appealed the FtT's decision on the basis that the  judge
    erred in allowing the appeal outright.  The grounds outlined  that  the
    judge had no power to do that, as it is for the Secretary of  State  to
    exercise  her  discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.  Having found that the  Appellant  was  an  extended/other
    family  member  of  an  EEA  citizen  exercising  treaty  rights  under
    Regulation 8(5), the judge should  have  remitted  the  matter  to  the
    Secretary of State for further consideration and for  the  exercise  of
    her discretion under Regulation 17(4).  The grounds relied upon Ihemedu
    (other family members - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).

 9. Permission was initially refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Osborne) but granted on a renewed application to the Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law/UT Hearing

10. Before me, Mr Duffy  relied  on  the  grounds  seeking  permission.  He
    submitted that it was now settled law that the FtT could not  allow  an
    appeal of this nature outright.  The Secretary of  State  retained  the
    residual right  to  exercise  her  discretion  conferred  upon  her  by
    Reg.17(4) of the 2006 Regulations and it was not open to the  judge  to
    consider exercise of discretion in these  circumstances.  The  decision
    should be set aside and  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  under
    Reg.17(4).

11. Mr Junior sought to persuade me otherwise. He submitted that the  judge
    had allowed the appeal outright  because  the  Appellant  had  met  the
    conditions set out in Regulation 8. He referred to the  fact  that  the
    FtT (Judge Osborne) had initially refused permission and submitted that
    the  FtT  was  correct  to  say  that  the  Respondent  had  had  ample
    opportunity to exercise her discretion before the  date  of  the  final
    hearing before the FtT.

Consideration

12. I find I am satisfied that the FtT's decision to allow the  Appellant's
    appeal outright was in error and the decision must be set aside to  the
    extent that the matter  is  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    exercise her discretion under Reg.17(4) EEA Regs 2006.

13. I find that it was not open to Judge Metzer to consider the exercise of
    discretion in the circumstances of  the  present  appeal.  I  find  the
    Appellant was wrong to seek to rely upon  the  fact  that  because  his
    bundle of documents was served three months before the FtT hearing  the
    Secretary of State had ample time to review  her  decision.  The  power
    contained in Reg. 17(4) is a residual one. The Secretary of  State  has
    retained the power  of  exercise  of  discretion.  In  any  event,  the
    Secretary of State could hardly have forecast what the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal would be before the matter was heard.

14. I accept Mr Duffy's submission that the case law  is  well  settled  on
    this matter and there was nothing before me which would persuade me  to
    do otherwise that to follow it.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  2nd  February
    2016 is set aside.  The finding that the Appellant and his  partner,  a
    Polish national have been involved in and continue to be in  a  durable
    relationship shall stand.  The matter is remitted to the  Secretary  of
    State in order that she may exercise her  discretion  under  Regulation
    17(4) of the EEA Regulations 2006.

16. No anonymity direction is made.

17. Since I have set aside the FtT's decision I  also  set  aside  the  fee
    award made.


Signed   C E Roberts   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts 15 September 2016

