
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/01764/2016

                                                      IA/01765/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7th March 2018                          |On 4th April 2018              |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                           mr faheem abdul hameed
                              mrs ariba faheem
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy, Counsel instructed by SG Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellants appeal with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Andonian sitting at Taylor House on  8th  September
    2017.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Blum.
    The original grounds were detailed and there were ten such grounds  but
    ultimately when Judge Blum granted permission he said as follows,

         "The grounds/skeleton argument did however raise  Article  8  as  a
         ground of appeal.   The  FtJ  did  not  engage  with  this  ground.
         Although  the  Appellant  is  likely  to   face   difficulties   in
         demonstrating a breach of Article 8 it cannot be said at this stage
         that had the FtJ considered Article 8 the appeal  would  inevitably
         have been dismissed."

    The learned Upper Tribunal Judge made it clear that he was not granting
    permission to appeal in respect of the Tier 1 Entrepreneur  Immigration
    Rules aspect nor was he granting permission  in  respect  of  paragraph
    245AA and/or the evidential flexibility policy.


2.    Mr Murphy in clear and focused  submissions  says  that  there  is  an
    apparent error of law in the circumstances because the judge had failed
    to deal with Article 8 and he referred,  for  example  to  two  letters
    which are in the judge's decision which merely say "PA" and  Mr  Murphy
    speculates as to whether the judge intended to deal with Article  8  or
    not but in any event his submission is that the judge  failed  to  deal
    with Article 8.  Mr Murphy says that this is a case in which there  are
    two relevant children and that issues in respect of the best  interests
    of the children pursuant to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 had to be considered as a  primary  consideration,
    but they do not feature within the judge's decision.  He  asked  me  to
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal where  the  matter  can  be
    considered with up-to-date evidence.

3.    Mr Nath in his submissions, also clear and focused, said  one  has  to
    ask the question as to whether it would have made a material difference
    if the judge had considered Article 8.  He invited me to  consider  the
    judge's Record of Proceedings to see the way in  which  the  Appellants
    had then sought to argue Article 8 and he asked in a rhetorical way was
    it therefore incumbent upon the judge to make findings  in  respect  of
    matters which had not been pleaded?

4.    Having looked at the Tribunal's file and having sought to look at  the
    Record of Proceedings, it is right to  say  that  it  is  a  Record  of
    Proceedings in manuscript, is not the easiest to decipher,  but  in  my
    judgment  the  fundamental  difficulty  here  in  this  case  is   that
    identified by UTJ Blum. Namely that Article 8 had been raised  both  in
    the grounds and in the skeleton argument by  the  Appellants.   It  was
    therefore essential for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to deal with that
    issue.  The Judge may well have concluded that  this  was  a  difficult
    Article 8 claim. The problem though is that  that  task  has  not  been
    completed and in view of the factors  which  Mr  Murphy  brings  to  my
    attention in my judgment there is a material error of law.  The  matter
    in respect of  Article  8  is  therefore  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  There has been no proper  first  instance  consideration  of
    those Article 8 matters and so the appropriate  venue  for  the  appeal
    will be at the First-tier Tribunal.

5.    There was no permission granted in respect of  the  Immigration  Rules
    or the Tier 1 aspects so that aspect remains dismissed.  The First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House will give further appropriate directions as to
    bundles and such like which the Appellants must  comply  with  but  for
    today's purposes my decision is that there is a material error  of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  That decision is set aside
    and there will be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal on Article  8
    issues only.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed A. Mahmood                            Date: 7 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood





























