
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 October 2014                        |On 4 November 2014               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                            AMAN ESMATULLAH AMAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Graham, Counsel instructed by St Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, who is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  20  June  1995,
    has been granted permission to appeal against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Walters, who by a determination promulgated  on  23
    July 2014 dismissed his appeal against a decision of the respondent  to
    refuse to vary his leave by way  of  the  grant  of  further  leave  to
    remain.

2.   The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  28  November  2011,
    concealed in the back of a lorry, as  an  unaccompanied  minor  seeking
    asylum.   His  asylum  application  was  refused  but  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 20 December 2012 on account of  his
    age.  His appeal against  refusal  of  asylum  was  dismissed.   On  15
    December 2012, which was a few  days  before  his  discretionary  leave
    expired, he submitted an application for further leave on the basis  of
    rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   In the letter from his solicitors  that  accompanied  that  application
    dated 13 December 2012 it was said that he  was  still  relying  on  an
    asylum claim on the basis of being an unaccompanied  minor  but  before
    the judge Counsel confirmed that that was not  being  pursued  and  the
    only matter at large was  the  issue  of  whether  there  would  be  an
    impermissible infringement of rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR
    in connection with his right to respect for the private and family life
    he had established in the United Kingdom if leave were not granted.  Mr
    Graham, who appears on the appellant's behalf today as  indeed  he  did
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  confirms  that  that  is  still  the
    position.

4.   In that letter from his solicitors the following matters were  asserted
    on the appellant's behalf.  The appellant's parents are deceased.   His
    father died in an accident in 2008  and  his  mother  died  of  natural
    causes in 2006.  He has no remaining close  relatives  in  Afghanistan.
    The uncle who arranged for his journey to the United  Kingdom  has  now
    moved to Pakistan and the appellant's older sister is now also  in  the
    United Kingdom.  His younger sister  remains  in  Afghanistan  but  her
    whereabouts are unknown.  Both of  the  appellant's  brothers  are  now
    settled in the United Kingdom and the appellant has  been  living  with
    one  of  those  brothers  and  his  family  who  have   supported   him
    financially.  As a minor the  appellant  has  family  life  with  those
    relatives and he has established also a  strong  private  life,  making
    friends and pursuing English language courses.

5.   The respondent in the refusal letter first  considered  the  Article  8
    claim under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   This  was  an
    application that could not succeed under paragraph 276ADE  because  the
    appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  concerning  his  length  of
    residence in the United  Kingdom  and  because,  as  he  had  lived  in
    Afghanistan for the first fifteen years of his life, he being  just  17
    years old when he made the application, the respondent did  not  accept
    that he had lost ties with his country of nationality.

6.   The respondent then said this:

         "It has been considered whether your application raises or contains
         any exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the  right  to
         respect for family and private life contained in Article 8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights, might warrant consideration by
         the Secretary of State of a grant of leave to remain in the  United
         Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It  has
         been decided that it does  not.   Your  application  for  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom is therefore refused."

7.    Before  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   the   appellant's
    representative accepted that the decision of the  respondent  that  the
    appellant's claim could not succeed under the Rules  was  unassailable.
    Therefore the judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and from the
    brother with whom he had been living.  The effect of that evidence  was
    to confirm all that had been asserted on the appellant's behalf in  the
    solicitors' letter I have just referred to.

8.   The judge also heard oral evidence from the appellant's  tutor  at  the
    college where he had been taking courses in the English language.   The
    tutor spoke positively about the appellant's good attitude towards  his
    studies and his success in examinations.  He said  that  the  appellant
    had achieved a good deal within a relatively short period of time under
    difficult circumstances relating to what he referred to as  the  tragic
    circumstances concerning his immediate family which  I  take  to  be  a
    reference to the death of both of the appellant's parents.

9.    The  conclusions  reached  by  the  judge  are  to  be  found  between
    paragraphs 32 and 35 of the determination, which I reproduce in full:

           "Ms Mogbeyi [the  respondent's  representative]  submitted  that
           following the case of Gulshan (20030 UKUT 640 (IAC) the facts of
           this case did not make it exceptional. She relied  on  paragraph
           15 of  Gulshan  where  it  is  stated  that  "exceptional  means
           circumstances in which refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably
           harsh consequences for the individual or their family such  that
           refusal of the application would not be proportionate."


           As  I  have  specifically  discounted  the  evidence  that   the
           Appellant's Article 2 and 3 rights would be breached  if  he  is
           returned (the fear here is fear of the Taliban) I did  not  find
           that a return to  Kabul  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
           consequences for the Appellant.


           It was submitted by Mr Graham  [the appellant's  representative]
           that the Appellant's "physical and  moral  integrity"  would  be
           threatened by a return to Kabul because it would put him in  the
           "zone of tension".  However,  Mr  Graham  submitted  no  country
           material which showed in what  way  an  ordinary  returnee  (who
           feared no Article 2 or 3 threats) could be adversely affected by
           the circumstances that apply to all ordinary citizens in Kabul.


           I therefore did not find  that  I  was  required  to  conduct  a
           "freestanding" Article 8 judgement."


10.  The grounds upon which permission to appeal has  been  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows:

    (a)  The judge erred in failing to take into account  relevant  factors
         including the appellant's age, health, vulnerability, closeness  of
         social ties, family history, dependants and cultural traditions.


    (b)  In particular the judge failed to have regard to the  strong  bond
         of dependency between the appellant and his relatives in the United
         Kingdom as well as the absence of any relatives or other family  or
         social support in Afghanistan.


    (c)  The judge  also  erred  in  failing  to  have  regard  to  factors
         identified in the documentary evidence relied  upon  including  the
         witness statements and numerous letters of support and evidence  of
         the appellant's  strong  emotional  and  financial  ties  with  his
         brother and other family members in the United Kingdom.


    (d)  The judge failed to consider adequately the impact of  removal  on
         the appellant's moral and physical integrity.


    (e)  The judge was wrong to refuse to carry out an  assessment  of  the
         Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules.

11.  Having heard brief submissions from both representatives  it  is  clear
    that there is a consensus between  the  parties  as  to  the  best  way
    forward which I reflect in what I  say  next.   The  applicant's  claim
    under Article 8 was one that had no prospect of  succeeding  under  the
    Immigration Rules but that though did not mean that  it  was  bound  to
    fail.  All we know about the assessment of the Article 8 claim  carried
    out outside the Rules by the respondent is that which is  said  in  the
    refusal letter.  I have  to  say  that  that  is  a  wholly  inadequate
    assessment which makes no pretence at all of engaging with matters  the
    appellant had put forward about his circumstances.   I  have  no  doubt
    that the approach taken by the judge was legally flawed.   The  grounds
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal could not  have  made  more  clear
    that the appellant was  advancing  a  claim  that  there  would  be  an
    infringement of rights  protected  by  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  as  a
    consequence of the decision or the decisions under appeal.

12.  Section 86(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    makes clear that the judge is required to determine any  matter  raised
    as a ground of appeal.  This judge has simply declined to do that.  The
    reason given  by  the  judge  for  declining  to  carry  out  a  proper
    assessment of the Article 8 claim was  that  there  was  no  protection
    claim made out or at large before him.  If he thought  that  there  was
    some form of threshold test to be met before the appellant could expect
    his claim under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  to  be  assessed  outwith  the
    constraints of Appendix FM of the Rules he was wrong  to  do  so.   The
    judge made no attempt to engage with all that had been advanced on  the
    appellant's behalf concerning the private and family life  he  said  he
    had  established  here  or  the  asserted  dependency   he   said   had
    characterised those family relationships.  There was no attempt at  all
    to strike a balance between the competing interests in  play.   As  was
    observed by Lord Justice Aikens in R (MM & Ors) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 129:

         "I cannot see much utility in imposing this further,  intermediary,
         test.  If the applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there  either
         is or there is not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be
         determined by the relevant decision-maker."

  13. For all of these reasons I am entirely satisfied that the  judge  made
      an error of law and so his  decision  cannot  stand  as  it  is.   The
      question is where we go from there.  Because the judge simply declined
      to determine as he should have done the human rights appeal  that  was
      before him there has been no determination by the First-tier  Tribunal
      of that ground of appeal, despite the fact that a good deal of written
      and oral evidence was offered and relied upon. That oral evidence will
      have to be received afresh. In those circumstances, and given that the
      circumstances of this particular appellant do not necessarily indicate
      that any particular outcome must  inevitably  be  the  result,  it  is
      common ground and agreed between the parties that the most appropriate
      way forward is to provide the appellant with that which he has not yet
      been given which is the right to  present  his  arguments  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore the appeal will  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal so that the human rights grounds can be considered
      and determined.


   Summary of decision:


  14. The first-tier Tribunal made an error  of  law  and  the  decision  to
      dismiss the appeal is set aside.


  15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
      afresh.






Signed        [pic]

Date: 31 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

