
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01608/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22 January 2018                  |On: 31 January 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                             Mr Bibhuti Tamrakar
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 25 September 2017  dismissing
      his appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  him  leave  to
      remain as a student.

   2. A section 120 notice under the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act
      2002 was served on the appellant. The appellant gave notice of  appeal
      on 20 March 2016, citing his reliance on Articles 3, 6 and  8  of  the
      Human Rights Convention.

   3. The First-tier Judge dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
      further student leave under the Rules. He noted that his  appeal  also
      contended that there would be insurmountable obstacles to  his  return
      to Nepal because of the post earthquake situation there. He noted  his
      wife's outstanding appeal before the Court of Appeal; he  stated  that
      the best interests of his daughter had to be taken into account  under
      s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

   4. In dismissing his appeal the Judge noted at [11] that their leave  had
      always been precarious. Paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM did  not  apply.
      Nor did he satisfy  the  private  life  requirements  under  paragraph
      276ADE of the Rules. The earthquake in Nepal has caused great hardship
      but he did not accept that it has caused insurmountable  obstacles  to
      his return to Nepal where he has several close family members, or that
      it amounts to exceptional circumstances  warranting  consideration  of
      his Article 8 rights outside the Rules. At most it would be  a  reason
      for considering compassionate leave but  this  is  a  matter  for  the
      secretary of state alone.

   5. In  granting  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hollingworth stated that it was arguable that the  appellant  and  his
      wife would face very serious hardships, in the light  of  the  factors
      explained by the appellant. The 'concatenation  of  circumstances'  in
      his case set in juxtaposition to the content of the Immigration  Rules
      enabled the Judge to proceed to consider  whether  there  would  be  a
      breach of Article 8 outside the Rules. The Judge however  declined  to
      take that course.

   6. At the commencement of the hearing  of  22  January  2017,  Mr  Jarvis
      accepted that the First-tier Judge had erred. In particular there were
      no  specific  reasons  or  findings  made  with  regard  to  paragraph
      276ADE(vi)  of  the  Rules.  The  Judge  referred  to  "insurmountable
      obstacles" which was not the test. There  is  a  different  applicable
      test, namely "very significant obstacles."

   7. Nor did the Judge deal with the fact that the appellant's wife had  an
      appeal before the Court of Appeal which had not been decided  yet.  (I
      was informed that as at the date of hearing  it  had  still  not  been
      heard, albeit that a date has been scheduled).

   8. Mr Jarvis stated that this was relevant as the Judge was  required  to
      deal with the position of whether the appellant would be  required  to
      separate from his family pending the outcome of his wife's appeal. The
      effect on the rest  of  the  family,  including  the  child,  was  not
      considered.

   9. Nor was the Judge precluded from considering the  compassionate  leave
      in this case, having regard to the circumstances.

  10. In the circumstances, Mr Jarvis submitted that  the  Article  8  claim
      needs to be reconsidered. There are  unusual  features  applicable  in
      this case which have not been properly considered.

      Assessment

  11. Mr Jarvis has very fairly and properly accepted that  various  matters
      relevant to the appellant's appeal had not been  fully  considered  by
      the Judge. In  particular,  no  consideration  was  given  as  to  the
      potential separation of the family,  including  their  child,  in  the
      event that his appeal, which included a decision to remove  him,  were
      dismissed.

  12. In the circumstances I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. The parties agreed that in  that  event,  a  fresh  decision
      would have to be made. The appellant accepts that the case  should  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the hearing.

  13. I am satisfied that the extent of the judicial fact finding  which  is
      necessary for the decision to be re-made  is  extensive.  I  have  had
      regard to the overriding objective and conclude that it would be  just
      and fair to remit the case.

      Notice of decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. The decision is set aside.

      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      No anonymity direction made.










      Signed                             Date 29 January 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer





