
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01895/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 February 2018                           |On 28 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                  Uche [N]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith, Counsel, instructed by IR Immigration
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's refusal to
    grant her leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds, based on her family and private life  with  her  husband,  and
    their children, a daughter aged 9 and a son age 5, who  are  dependants
    in this appeal. All members of this family are Nigerian  citizens,  and
    none is a British citizen.

 2. The appellant represented herself before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    produced a quantity of material  about  the  children's  schooling  and
    private life including a letter from the daughter which was taken  into
    account (see [19]).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  the
    younger child was of an age where he would be primarily focused on home
    life with his  parents.   The  judge  had  regard  to  the  appellant's
    conduct, when  assessing  whether  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave the United Kingdom and return to Nigeria  with  their
    parents (see [20] and [23] in the decision)

 3. The Judge's decision did not mention the guidance given by the Court of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan) & Ors,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v  Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA  Civ  705,
    nor does it appear that he had the test as  there  enunciated  in  mind
    when  reaching  his  conclusions  in  relation  to  the  children.   MA
    (Pakistan) requires the judge to  assess  the  best  interests  of  the
    children without reference to the parents' immigration history.  On the
    basis of the limited reasoning in this decision I am not satisfied that
    MA (Pakistan) has been correctly applied.

 4. Accordingly, I allow the appeal and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal
    for hearing afresh with no findings of fact or credibility reserved.

 5. I make the following direction for the future conduct of this appeal:

 a) Not later than 14  days  from  the  sending  out  of  this  order,  the
    appellant shall serve and file an updated and  consolidated  bundle  of
    evidence for the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, to include witness
    statements for any witnesses on whose evidence she seeks to rely at the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.

The First-tier Tribunal may make further directions before the rehearing  of
    the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.




Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date: 26 March 2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

