
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01553/2015
                                                               IA/01555/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 1 March 2016                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                             Mr Nelson Obatarhe
                            Mrs Charity Obatarhe
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr I. Khan, solicitor, Ikon Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Nigeria and are husband and  wife.  The
    second appellant is the dependant of her husband, whom I shall refer to
    as "the appellant."

 2. The appellant entered the UK in February 2011 as a  student.  His  wife
    entered with him as his dependant.

 3. On 21 August 2012 he was granted further leave remain as a post student
    migrant. On 28 August 2014, their applications  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) were refused on 18 December 2014. The
    appellants appealed those decisions.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed their appeals under the Rules.

 5. On 16 October 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds granted  the  appellants
    permission to appeal against that decision. The Judge arguably did  not
    consider the evidence relating to  the  domain/website  which  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 41-SD of the Rules.

 6. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Mills  contended  that  "a  number  of
    people have missed the point in this case." The only issue  raised  was
    that there needed to be evidence  that  the  appellant's  business  was
    trading prior to 11 July 2014.

 7. He referred to the relevant rules as applied at the date  of  decision.
    The relevant requirement is set out at 41-SD at paragraph e-iii,  which
    requires that an applicant  must  also  provide  one  or  more  of  the
    following   specified   documents   covering   (either   together    or
    individually) a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014 up  to
    no earlier than three months before the date of his  application:  that
    included advertising or marketing material, articles or online links to
    articles in the newspaper or other publications showing the applicant's
    name or information from a trade fair which the  appellant  has  had  a
    stand, or personal registration with a UK  trade  body  linked  to  the
    applicant's occupation.

 8. Mr Mills accepted that the appellant had sent  in  advertisements  from
    Gumtree. That was discounted because it  was  not  dated  until  August
    2014. He also provided personal registration with a UK trade  body  but
    that was also not before July 2014.

 9. Mr Mills referred to paragraph (e)(iii)(1) requiring  that  he  provide
    one of the specified documents set out in that  sub  paragraph.   Where
    his business is trading online, confirmation of his  ownership  of  the
    domain  name  of  the  business's  website  is  sufficient  to  satisfy
    provisions under the paragraph. The document must additionally cover  a
    continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014 up to no earlier  than
    three months before the date of his application.

10. Mr Mills very fairly accepted that  the  appellant  had  produced  that
    evidence.

11. He referred to [14] of the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  where
    the Judge had regard to an argument in relation  to  the  domain  name,
    that it is in the name of a business which is owned  by  the  appellant
    "in that he is the sole director of the business." The Judge found that
    the fact that he is a sole director of  the  company  is  "to  a  large
    extent irrelevant." The company can be sold to another  individual  and
    it would retain the same identity although ownership would have passed.

12. However, the document relied on by the appellant was  provided  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal at p.14 of his bundle. The domain name is set  out.
    The registrant is  Ebens  Consulting  Services  Ltd.  The  registrant's
    address is set out. The date of registration was  12  June  2014  which
    complies with the requirement under the rule.

13. Mr Mills further noted that other evidence had already  been  accepted.
    It was not disputed that the appellant owned Ebens Consulting  Services
    Ltd.

14. In the circumstances Mr Mills very fairly and  properly  conceded  that
    there had in the circumstances been an error of law. He  also  accepted
    that in the circumstances, the appellants'  appeals  should  have  been
    upheld.

15. I am satisfied for the reasons given that the concession was  correctly
    made.  I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier  tribunal
    involved the making of a material error of law. I  accordingly  set  it
    aside and remake it.

16. Having regard to the foregoing I find that the  appellants  have  shown
    that the relevant specified evidence required had been  provided at the
    date of application entitling them to be awarded  the  relevant  points
    under Appendixes A.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside. I re-make it and substitute for that decision,
    a decision allowing the appellants' appeals.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 24/2/2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
