
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01254/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             RAJESH KUMAR JANGIR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Prashant, solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by of the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M J Gillespie) allowing an appeal by the
    applicant against the decision made on 12 December  2014  refusing  him
    further leave to remain in the  UK  and  to  give  directions  for  his
    removal.  In this decision  I  will  refer  to  the  applicant  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent

Background

2.   The background to the appeal can briefly be summarised as follows.  The
    appellant is a citizen of India born in February 1985. He  was  granted
    leave to enter the UK in April 2011 as a Tier 4  student,  having  been
    granted entry clearance for the period 21  March  2011  to  20  October
    2013. On 17 December 2013 his leave was extended to  14  October  2014,
    when he applied for further leave to remain.

3.   His application was accompanied by a letter  from  his  representatives
    which explained that the appellant was enrolled  with  Forbes  Graduate
    School to pursue a Diploma in Healthcare Management.  However,  he  had
    received an e-mail from his college on the 1 July 2014 confirming  that
    their licence was suspended. Since then he had been in regular  contact
    with the college to find out whether the licence would be reinstated or
    revoked but had received no confirmation to date. If  the  licence  had
    been revoked he would have written to the respondent asking  for  a  60
    day extension or possibly have got enrolled at another college. He  now
    had no option but to seek further leave so that  he  could  pursue  his
    education.

4.   The respondent's decision is set out in the reasons for refusal  letter
    dated 12 December 2014. The respondent set out her policy  that  grants
    of leave outside  the  immigration  rules  would  only  be  made  where
    particularly compelling circumstances  existed.  Careful  consideration
    had been given to the appellant's claim to remain on the basis  of  the
    issues with his educational establishment's licence and enrolling  with
    another college. The respondent was not  satisfied  that  circumstances
    were such that  discretion  should  be  exercised  outside  the  rules.
    Further consideration was given to whether the appellant could meet the
    requirements  of  the  rules  or   whether   there   were   exceptional
    circumstances justifying a grant under article 8 but the respondent was
    not satisfied that this was the case and his application was refused.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

5.    The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision.  His   appeal   was
    considered at an oral hearing on 31 July 2015. The judge noted that the
    applicant had made the application to preserve his  status  hoping  for
    the grant of leave for 60 days in order to enable him, if necessary, to
    make a fresh application [2]. The evidence showed  that  the  appellant
    had been informed by his college of  the  suspension  of  its  licence,
    although no documentation had been produced by the respondent as to its
    suspension or as to the current status of the college. It had not  been
    shown that the appellant who was affected by the suspension  was  dealt
    with or even considered for treatment in accordance with the  published
    policy relating to such situations.

6.   The judge commented  that  the  appellant  or  his  legal  adviser  was
    considerably to blame for the circumstances as the application was  not
    expressly framed as a request for a 60 day period of grace but appeared
    to be a non-specific and open-ended request for  leave  to  remain  for
    rather ill stated reasons, namely that he had invested  a  considerable
    amount of funds on his education in the UK and was now in some doubt as
    to  his  status.  He  said  that  a  thoughtful  consideration  of  the
    application would have shown that it should be treated as a request for
    a 60 day period of grace but in the event it had been  treated  as  the
    open-ended request as arguably it appeared to be.

7.   The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  proved  that  he  had  been
    affected by the decision to suspend the sponsor licence of his  college
    and that during the period of suspension his visa expired. He made  the
    application to preserve his position but what ought to  have  been  the
    primary thrust of the basis of the application was  not  considered  by
    the respondent. In considering the application the respondent  had  not
    had regard to her published policy relating to the grant of the  period
    of grace to students so affected in order to enable them to  regularise
    their positions [6]. For these reasons he allowed  the  appeal  to  the
    extent  that  the  application  was  remitted  to  the  respondent  for
    consideration of whether the appellant in the light of published policy
    ought to be granted a period of grace 60 days within which  to  make  a
    lawful application to regularise his position.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

8.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the judge erred  in  law  as
    the appellant had not been disadvantaged by matters of fairness falling
    within the remit of Patel (Revocation of sponsor  licence  -  fairness)
    India [2011] UKUT 00211 and was therefore not entitled to60 days leave.
    It was not a case of an applicant providing details of a valid CAS with
    the application  but  where  the  sponsor's  licence  was  subsequently
    revoked while the  application  was  pending.  The  appellant  had  not
    submitted a valid CAS and the application made was for leave to  remain
    outside the rules.

9.   Ms Isherwood adopted her grounds. She emphasised  that  an  application
    had not been made under Tier 4. The application had  to  be  considered
    within the rules. In any event the appellant could not bring him within
    the terms of the policy as there would be no 60 day extension if  there
    was less than six months leave outstanding. In any event the  appellant
    had been aware of the position affecting his college from June 2014.

10.  Mr Prashant submitted that the appellant  had  had  no  option  in  his
    circumstances but to make the application he did. The  college  licence
    been suspended and the appellant was seeking to protect  his  position.
    He should not be faulted for taking  such  a  course  in  circumstances
    where it was the respondent's policy to grant an applicant 60  days  to
    find another college.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

11.  The issue for me at this stage of the  hearing  is  whether  the  judge
    erred in law such that his decision should be set aside.  The  starting
    point must be the application actually made by the appellant which  was
    for the exercise of discretion outside the rules. The respondent  dealt
    with this application accordingly. She made the point in  the  decision
    letter that it was her policy to consider granting  leave  outside  the
    rules only where particularly  compelling  circumstances  existed.  The
    application considered whether the  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    requirements relating to private life within the rules but  found  that
    he could not and  indeed  there  is  no  challenge  this  finding.  The
    respondent  went  on  to  consider  whether  there   were   exceptional
    circumstances including article 8 and human rights. In that context the
    respondent considered the issue raised by the appellant that he  wanted
    to complete his studies in the UK. The respondent  recorded  that  this
    had been carefully considered but it was open to him to return to India
    to pursue his studies there or alternatively, if he wished to undertake
    studies in the UK it was open to him to make an application  for  entry
    clearance under Tier 4 from India. It is therefore  clear  that  within
    the context of  exceptional  circumstances  the  respondent  took  into
    account the particular situation of the appellant. I am satisfied  that
    the  respondent  reached  a  decision  lawfully  open  to  her  on  his
    application.

12.  The issue at the heart of the appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was whether the respondent had complied with her  published  policy  of
    granting period of 60 days grace  to  make  a  further  application  to
    enable the appellant to regularise his position. An  extract  from  the
    policy (pages 76-80 of Tier 4  Policy  Guidance  version  11/2015)  was
    produced before me but this does not  satisfy  me  that  the  appellant
    could bring himself within the terms of the policy, which is predicated
    on the sponsorship licence being revoked or surrendered. In the present
    case the licence has only been suspended. At the hearing before  me  Mr
    Prashant accepted that he did not know when the licence was revoked and
    Ms Isherwood had no information on this issue. Therefore, there was  no
    adequate evidence before the judge to show that the terms of the policy
    relied on could be met  (page  78).  A  further  difficulty  arises  in
    respect of the policy in that the appellant made his  application  very
    shortly before his leave to remain expired and this was not a case of a
    valid CAS being submitted which then became invalid during the currency
    of his application (also page 78).

13.  For the sake of completeness I will deal  with  the  issue  of  whether
    there has been any procedural unfairness on the part of the  respondent
    to bring into play the principles set out in Patel v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department. This  decision  was  recently  considered  and
    upheld by the Court of Appeal in R (Raza) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 36. The court emphasised at  [31]  that
    what fairness required was necessarily fact and context specific and at
    [37] that the fact that there was in general no duty on the  respondent
    to give notice of what was believed to  be  a  deficiency  in  the  CAS
    before making an adverse decision did not mean that there  may  not  be
    some cases where fairness demanded that the Secretary of  State  should
    not refuse the application without  further  enquiry.  In  the  present
    case, there was no evidence before the respondent and  there  is  still
    none before me to confirm whether or when the licence was  revoked  and
    in any event, on his own account the appellant was aware  of  the  fact
    that his college's licence had been suspended and  that  his  leave  to
    remain would expire on 14 October  2014.  He  had  been  aware  of  the
    problem with his college since the beginning of July 2014 and  had  had
    the opportunity of finding another college and of putting himself in  a
    position where he could make an application supported with a valid  CAS
    before his leave expired. I am not satisfied that there  is  any  basis
    for  an  argument  that  the  respondent  failed  to  comply  with  the
    requirements of procedural fairness.

Re-making the decision

14.  I am therefore satisfied that the judge erred in law by  remitting  the
    application to the respondent. The appellant has failed to show that he
    could come within the terms of the respondent's policy.  There  was  no
    evidence to show whether or  when  the  licence  was  revoked  and  the
    appellant had had an opportunity of resolving the issues  arising  from
    the suspension of his college's licence. The respondent's  decision  on
    the application made outside the rules was a decision properly open  to
    her and the appellant had no prospect  of  succeeding  in  a  claim  on
    article 8 grounds. For these reasons I substitute a decision dismissing
    the appeal against the respondent's decision

Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision is set  aside.  I
    re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal.


Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter  Date: 15 February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

