
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP/DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01019/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 September 2014                 |On 30 September 2014                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

              MR MOHAMED THASRIEF MEERA LEBBIE MOHAMED MOWJOOD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 16 November  1982.   On
    23 April 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands dismissed  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent dated 27 December 2012 to refuse
    to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  Student
    Migrant.  On 14 May 2013 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  refused
    the appellant permission to appeal the judge's decision.   On  20  June
    2013 an Upper Tribunal Judge also refused the appellant  permission  to
    appeal.  On 24 January 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Southern following  an
    order of the High Court on  23  October  2013,  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal on ground 1 only and refusing  permission  on  all
    the other grounds.  On  21  March  2013  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Appleyard in light of the  High  Court  order  of  the  Honourable  Mrs
    Justice Andrews set aside the First-tier Tribunal's determination in so
    far as it relates to paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the  Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 (as amended) ground.  The judge's remaining findings were to stand.

2.    Mr  Karim  submitted  a  skeleton  argument  for  the   appellant,   a
    supplementary bundle which included  a  Section  120  statement  and  a
    consolidated bundle and an authority's  bundle  five  days  before  the
    hearing.

3.   On the day of the hearing Mr Melvin submitted a  skeleton  argument  on
    behalf of the respondent.

4.   In his skeleton argument Mr Karim identified the two issues; the  first
    dealt with the appeal under 245ZX of the  Immigration  Rules  and  more
    importantly dealing with the interpretation of 245ZX(ha) of the  Rules.
    The second was a Section 120 claim made by the appellant on  the  basis
    that he has now qualified for indefinite leave to remain under 276B  of
    the Immigration Rules.

5.   I decided to deal with the Section 120 notice first.  Mr  Karim  relied
    on the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  MU  ("Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds" - long residence -  discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]  UKUT  442
    (IAC) in particular the first head note which states:

         "As held in AS (Afghanistan) and NV (Sri  Lanka)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
         1076, there is no time limit on serving a Statement  of  Additional
         Grounds in response to a "Section 120 notice".  Thus, an  appellant
         may accrue ten years' lawful leave  (including  leave  extended  by
         Section 3C of the 1971 Act)  while  his  appeal  is  pending.   The
         Tribunal  may  then  be  asked  to  decide  whether  the  appellant
         qualifies for indefinite leave under the long residence Rule."

6.   Mr Karim also relied on the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  Patel  and
    Others [2013] UKSC 72.  At page  5  under  the  heading  Alam/Anwar  it
    states:

         "(iv)    Whether the conclusion of the majority in AS Afghanistan v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
             1076, [2011] 1 WLR 385, that an appeal to the FTT  covers  not
             only any ground before the Secretary of State  when  she  made
             the decision under appeal  but  also  any  grounds  raised  in
             response to a one stop notice issued under Section 120 of  the
             2002 Act, even if  they  had  not  been  the  subject  of  any
             decision by the Secretary of State and did not relate  to  the
             decision under appeal, is correct.

         (v)  Whether the statements and evidence filed by Mr  Alam  and  Mr
             Anwar to the FTT to "additional grounds" under Section 120  of
             the 2002 Act  which  the  FTT  was  obliged  to  consider  and
             determine, notwithstanding the bar  in  Section  85A  of  that
             Act."

7.   At paragraph 41 the Supreme Court said:

         "41  The broader approach  of  the  majority  seems  to  gain  some
             support for the scheme of  Section  3C,  under  which  (as  is
             common ground) the initial application for leave to remain, if
             made in time, can later be varied to include wholly  unrelated
             grounds  without  turning  it  into  a  new   application   or
             prejudicing  the  temporary  right  to  remain  given  by  the
             Section.  Thus the identity of the application depends on  the
             substance  of  what  is  applied  for,  rather  than  on   the
             particular grounds or Rules under  which  the  application  is
             initially made.  The same  approach  can  be  applied  to  the
             decision on that application, the identity or  "substance"  of
             which in the context of an appeal  is  not  dependent  on  the
             particular grounds first relied on."

8.   At paragraph 66 the Supreme Court held as follows:

         "66  Where the Secretary of State chooses to give a Section  120(2)
             notice, the aim is to flush out any new:

             (a)  reasons for wishing to enter or remain and/or

             (b)  grounds for being permitted to enter or remain and/or

             (c)  grounds for not being removed or required  to  leave  the
                  UK.

             The statement in response need not repeat reasons  or  grounds
             set out in the existing application or decision which  is  the
             occasion for giving the notice equivalent Section 120(3)."

9.   In light of the above decided cases, I ruled that the  appellant  could
    raise at the hearing before me additional grounds by way of  a  Section
    120 notice and that I was not barred from  considering  his  additional
    grounds, even though I will be the primary decision maker.

10.  I took the view however that I was not going to consider the merits  of
    the application and that I would remit the application to the Secretary
    of State to consider whether the appellant  met  the  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the  ground  of  long  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom.

11.  For that reason this part of the appeal is remitted  to  the  Secretary
    of State.

12.  Mr Karim then said that my decision to remit  the  Section  120  notice
    application to the Secretary of State rendered the  appellant's  appeal
    academic.  Mr Melvin on the other hand wanted the Tribunal  to  make  a
    decision on the issues upon which the appeal was remitted to the  Upper
    Tribunal by the High Court.  Consequently, I heard submissions from the
    parties.

13.  Permission was granted by Mrs Justice Andrews on  ground  1  only.   In
    her observation she states as follows:

         "C contends that the FTT  erred  in  law  in  taking  into  account
         periods  that  were  spent  when  C  was  not  studying  owing   to
         disruptions in the college or  during  summer  vacations.   The  UT
         arguably fell into error in refusing leave on this point.  The case
         raises an important issue  of  principle  on  the  construction  of
         paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules, a relatively new Rule
         on which there is no authority, and in light of the language of the
         Rule, the appeal  on  that  ground  stands  the  real  prospect  of
         success.  However the requirements of Cart  are  not  satisfied  as
         regards the remaining grounds.  The FTT was entitled to decide that
         the ACCA course was "at  degree  level"  for  the  purpose  of  the
         relevant Rule and there is no obvious error of law or other legally
         compelling reason for allowing an appeal on the Article 8 point."

14.  The issue before me is the construction of paragraph  245ZX(ha).   This
    Rule states as follows:

         'If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of  leave  to
         remain the applicant is seeking must  not  lead  to  the  applicant
         having spent more than five years in the UK as a Tier  4  (General)
         Migrant, or as a student, studying courses at degree level or above
         unless:'

15.  It was  not  argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  any  of  the
    exceptions identified under this Rule applied to him.

16.  The facts of this case that I can glean from the  documents  before  me
    are that the appellant first entered the UK in 2004 with leave to study
    at the University of Gloucester until 2007.   He  did  not  attend  the
    university and  had  taken  short  level  3  and  level  4  courses  in
    information technology.  In 2007 he applied for further leave to  study
    a BSc in technology and e-commerce at British Institute  of  Technology
    and e-commerce (BITE) and was granted leave until 31 October 2010.  For
    about one and a half years of the period between September 2007 and  31
    October 2010, he was  not  in  fact  studying.   He  found  the  course
    difficult.  There were problems with  the  college.   BITE's  college's
    licence was also suspended for 6 months and as such he did not complete
    the course.

17.  It appears from Mr Melvin's  skeleton  argument  that  the  appellant's
    application to study on an  ACCA  course  at  Axon  College  was  first
    refused on 29 April 2010 because he could  not  show  that  he  had  an
    established presence in the UK because the financial requirements  were
    stricter.  His appeal was allowed by a  First-tier  Judge  on  1  April
    2011.  It would appear also that  as  a  result  of  his  appeal  being
    allowed the Secretary of State extended the appellant's leave as a Tier
    4 (General) Student until 30 January  2014  to  undertake  an  ACCA-NQF
    level 7 course at Axon College.  Axon College had its  licence  revoked
    on 24 April 2012 and on 8 June the appellant's leave was  curtailed  to
    expire on 7 August 2012.   According  to  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal, he made a further Tier 4 application on 6 August 2012  that  he
    made an in time application to study a CIMA NQF level 7 course from  20
    August 2012 until 20 August 2015 at Shakespeare College.   Having  gone
    through the papers with a fine tooth comb, it is the  refusal  of  this
    application that is the basis of this appeal.  Indeed the  respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter dated 28 December  2012  confirms  that  the
    appellant made an application on 6 August 2012 for leave to remain as a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and that this application is to  study
    CIMA-NQF Level 7 from 20 August 2012 to 20 August 2015  at  Shakespeare
    College.

18.  On this evidence I find that the judge erred in law  in  deciding  this
    case on the basis of the ACCA course.

19.  Mr. Karim in his  skeleton  argument  at  paragraph  5  relied  on  the
    definition  of  "degree  level  studies"  in  the  Immigration   Rules,
    paragraph 6:

         '"degree level study" means a course which  lead  to  a  recognised
         United  Kingdom  degree  at  bachelor's  level  or  above,  or   an
         equivalent qualification  at  level  6  or  above  of  the  revised
         National Qualifications Framework, or levels  9  or  above  of  the
         Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework.'

20.  Mr. Melvin relied on the respondent's Guidance on Tier  4  (General)  -
    maximum time allowed to study at degree level or above.   The  Guidance
    is valid from 5 September 2014.

21.  Under the heading Applications made  on  or  after  6  April  2012,  it
    states:

         'For  applications  made  on  or  after  6  April  2012,  paragraph
         245ZX(ha) of the Immigration   Rules  restricts  Tier  4  (General)
         students to a maximum of five years at degree level or above.   Any
         period studying at degree level or above in the  student  route  in
         place before 31 March 2009 also  counts  toward  the  maximum  five
         years permitted at this level.  Degree level courses are defined as
         those at:

                . National Qualification Framework (NQF) level 6

                . Qualifications and Credit Framework (QCF) level 6

                . Scottish Credit and Qualification Framework level 9'

22.  I  find  applying  the  definition  of  "degree  level  study"  in  the
    Immigration Rules and the definition in the respondent's Guidance  that
    the CIMA-NQF Level 7 course the appellant was seeking further leave  to
    study was at degree level or above.   Consequently,  the  appellant  is
    caught by paragraph 245ZX(ha).

23.  My understanding of paragraph 245 is that it is  about  "the  grant  of
    leave".  This is confirmed in the respondent's Guidance on Tier 4 (page
    59).  The Guidance states that Immigration Rules  paragraphs  245ZX(h)-
    (hb) are based on the "grant of leave".

24.  In this case the appellant was previously granted leave  to  study  BSc
    Technology & Ecommerce from 24 September 2007 to 27 August 2010 at  the
    British Institute of Technology.  He was last granted  leave  to  study
    ACCA-NQF Level 7 from 18 October 18 October 2010 to 24  April  2012  at
    Axon College.  I find that his current application  to  study  CIMA-NQF
    Level 7 from 20 August 2012 to 20 August 2015 at Shakespeare College if
    granted, will lead to the appellant having spent more than  five  years
    in the UK at a Tier 4 student migrant.

25.  The respondent's Guidance on Tier 4 states at page 59

         'When calculating the period, you must not take into account:

           . Interruptions to study - you  must  include  the  fore  course
             period in the calculation  unless  there  are  compelling  and
             compassionate circumstances (for example, serious  illness  or
             disability).  This is because the Immigration Rules paragraphs
             245ZX(h) - (hb) are based on the "grant of leave".

           . Additional "periods of leave granted before and  after  course
             dates", and ...'

26.  It also states that to calculate how long a Tier 4 (General)  applicant
    has studied at degree level or above,  the  caseworker  must  base  his
    calculation on course start and end dates given in case notes, on  visa
    letters and/or Confirmation(s) of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) used in:

           . relevant previous decisions to grant leave to the  student  as
             either a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a student, and

           . the CAS submitted with the current application.

27.  Mr Melvin relied on the submissions in his skeleton argument that  from
    2007 the appellant was granted leave for three  years  to  undertake  a
    degree level course which he did not do.  The fact is that at  no  time
    during this  period  of  leave  did  the  appellant  write/contact  the
    Secretary of State in order to request a change of course/college.  The
    Secretary of State when granting leave confers with the college  as  to
    the dates of the course and the leave is granted  on  that  basis.   It
    would be perverse and the system would  be  unmanageable  if  only  the
    attendant  days  count  towards  the  five  year  Rule.   The  idea  of
    discounting summer vacation/spring vacation, non-term  times,  weekends
    for the purposes of calculating the length of course has no merit.

28.  He added that on the issue of college's licence being suspended, it  is
    the Secretary of  State's  policy  that  ahead  of  revocation  of  its
    licence, the college is deemed to be  still  functioning  and  students
    still studying.

29.  He added that the fact that Axon College was  closed  down  was  not  a
    compelling or a compassionate circumstance.

30.  Mr Karim on the other  hand  submitted  that  on  the  construction  of
    paragraph 245ZX(ha), the periods that the appellant  was  not  studying
    must not be taken into account when calculating the five year period of
    study.  In this instance the appellant's college was  closed  down  and
    that was a compelling and compassionate circumstance.

31.  I find from the evidence the appellant gave to the judge  and  recorded
    at paragraph 4 of the determination is that from September 2007 and  31
    October 2010, he  did  not  study  for  one  and  a  half  years.   His
    explanation was  that  he  found  the  course  difficult.   There  were
    problems with the college (BITE).  They  were  not  providing  adequate
    teaching and the college's licence was also suspended for 6 months.   I
    do  not  find  that  these  explanations  amount  to   compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances.  I accept Mr. Melvin's argument that it is
    the Secretary of  State's  policy  that  ahead  of  revocation  of  its
    licence, a college is deemed to be still functioning and students still
    studying.   Nevertheless  if  the  appellant  was  finding  the  course
    difficult, he should  have  enrolled  on  a  course  that  was  not  so
    difficult.  If the college was  not  providing  adequate  teaching,  he
    should have a better college.  He did not do any of this  and  did  not
    inform the respondent about his difficulties. Rather,  he  did  nothing
    for one and a half years.  The fact that he did not study for one and a
    half years, I find, undermines his claim to be a genuine student.

32.  For the reasons given above I find that the appellant's  appeal  cannot
    succeed.

33.  I dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

