
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01011/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 March 2016                          |On 31 March 2016                    |
|Oral judgment                            |                                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                AQEEL SHAHZAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Crown & Mehria
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is a challenge by the Secretary of State  to  a  determination  of
    Judge O'Garro of the First-tier Tribunal, promulgated  on  7  September
    2015,  in  which  he  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal   outside   the
    Immigration Rules on the basis the decision to remove the appellant was
    disproportionate on the facts.

2.   The case history is  to  be  found  at  paragraphs  13  to  18  of  the
    determination.  The judge sets out the chronology showing the appellant
    was involved in a relationship with his partner who  he  met  in  2014.
    They have lived together  since  1  May  2014.   His  partner  has  two
    children who at the time were aged 6 and 3.  The judge refers to issues
    relating to the children's welfare and the connection the appellant has
    with the children.  The judge refers in paragraph 17 to  the  fact  the
    children were very unsettled and unhappy, as a result of  matters  that
    had arisen within their immediate parental family.  The  children  have
    no contact with their father.  In paragraph 18 the  judge  states  that
    the appellant has become a father figure to the children.

 3.  The judge considered the correct legal provisions in  relation  to  the
    Immigration Rules and found that the appellant could not succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE because the appellant could  not  show  he  had  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for twenty years.   I  refer  to  an
    element of carelessness at paragraph 36 of the decision where the judge
    seems to suggest that the failure was the appellant not showing that he
    had lived in the United Kingdom for less than  twenty  years  where  it
    clearly was the case that he had lived here for less than twenty years.
     It was not found there were very significant obstacles to  integration
    into the country to which the appellant would have to go if required to
    leave the United Kingdom.  The appellant  is  a  national  of  Pakistan
    whose partner is a national of India.

4.   The judge thereafter went on to consider the matter outside  the  Rules
    by reference to MM (Lebanon) and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 985  and  found
    in paragraph 38 that as Appendix FM and 276ADE had not been found to be
    a complete code the judge must proceed to consider Article 8  ECHR  and
    went on to do so.  Although not raised by Mr Tarlow in the grounds,  as
    discussed with Mr Tufan  this  morning  whether  that  is  an  accurate
    statement of law is debatable in light of the decision of the Court  of
    Appeal in Singh and Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74 in  which  the  Court  of
    Appeal confirm that paragraph 30 of the decision of Sales  J  in  Nagre
    was a correct statement of the law, namely that it was  only  if  there
    was a reason that required consideration outside the Immigration  Rules
    by way of a freestanding Article 8 assessment, was it necessary  so  to
    do.

5.   In this case the judge did  consider  that  it  was  a  case  in  which
    matters had to be considered as a freestanding Article 8 assessment and
    I do not find that amounts to an error of law material to the  decision
    that was eventually made.  In fact this is a case in which it was found
    that although the appellant was unable to succeed under the Immigration
    Rules he was able to succeed, having applied the  statutory  provisions
    set out in part 5 of the  2002  Act  which  include  the  Secretary  of
    State's own interpretation on how weight should be placed  in  relation
    to an Article 8 balancing exercise.

6.   The judge went through the questions set out  in  the  case  of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 and found that there was family and private life between
    the appellant and his  partner  and  children.   The  judge  considered
    Section 55 at paragraph 48 of the determination and thereafter moved on
    at paragraph 51 to consider, as the  judge  was  required  to  do,  the
    provisions of 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
     The judge made the following specific finding [51].  I  will  read  it
    out as it is written:

         "I bear in mind 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
         Act 2002 which states that in the case  of  a  person  who  is  not
         liable to deportation, the public interest  does  not  require  the
         person's removal where the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and it would not  be
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   The
         appellant's partner's children are British and therefore qualifying
         children and  I  accept  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship with these children.  I also accept that it
         would not be reasonable for the children to move to  Pakistan  with
         the appellant."


    In paragraph 53 the judge goes on:


         "In undertaking my balancing exercise, I have  considered  all  the
         matters set out in Section 117B cumulatively, such as the fact  the
         appellant can speak English, his partner works and he himself  will
         be able to work which means that he is financially independent  and
         will not be a burden on taxpayers.  The fact that he is easily able
         to integrate into society having lived in the United Kingdom  since
         2011 and can speak English.  The fact that he formed a relationship
         when he was in the United Kingdom lawfully and has always  complied
         with the immigration laws and most importantly is in a genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with qualifying child/children who
         cannot leave the United Kingdom to relocate with the appellant."


7.   Two pieces of case law are specifically relevant  to  the  decision  of
    the judge.  The judge found the appellant is not the biological  father
    of the children and the children do not have contact with their natural
    father.  The  evidence  before  the  judge  suggests  a   step   parent
    relationship. Whether this can satisfy the definition  of  a  'parental
    relationship' under the  Rules  was  specifically  considered  by  this
    Tribunal when exercising its judicial review jurisdiction in  the  case
    of  R  (on  the  application  of)  RK  (Section  117B(6)   -   parental
    relationship) IJR [2016] UKUT 31 in which the Tribunal found it:

         "(i) It is  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  parental
             responsibility  in  law  for  there  to   exist   a   parental
             relationship;


         (ii) whether a person who is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a
             parental relationship with a child for the purposes of Section
             117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
             depends on the individual circumstances and whether  the  role
             that individual plays establishes that he or she  has  stepped
             into the shoes of a parent  through  applying  that  approach,
             apart from the situation of split families where relationships
             between parents are broken down and an actual or de facto step
             parent exists, it would be unusual but not impossible for more
             than two individuals to have a parental  relationship  with  a
             child.   However,  the  relationships  between  a  child   and
             professional or voluntary carers or  family  friends  are  not
             parental relationships."


8.   The Tribunal  therefore  examined  the  reality  of  many  cases  where
    marriages break down and others within a family assume a parental role.
     It was accepted by the Tribunal that a step parent who  has  a  proper
    involvement with the lives of step children can satisfy the  definition
    of a person with a parental relationship as defined in Section 117B(6).
     That was the finding of the judge in this case and  it  has  not  been
    made out on the basis of the evidence that was available to the  judge,
    which I have looked at in some considerable detail, that that  decision
    was outside the range of permitted decisions the judge was entitled  to
    make on the evidence.

9.   Having found that the requirements of 117B(6)  were  satisfied  it  was
    necessary for the judge to consider  what  impact  that  had  upon  the
    proportionality  of  the  decision  under   challenge.   The   Tribunal
    considered that issue in the case of  Treebhawon  and  Others  (Section
    117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 in which it was held that:

         "(i) Section 117B(6) is  a  reflection  of  the  distinction  which
             Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are, and who
             are  not  liable  to  deportation.   In  any  case  where  the
             conditions enshrined in Section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are  satisfied,  the  Section
             117B(6) public interest prevails  over  the  public  interests
             identified in Section 117B(1)-(3);


         (ii) Section 117B(4) and (5) are not parliamentary prescriptions of
             the public interest.  Rather, they operate as instructions  to
             courts and Tribunal to be applied in cases where the balancing
             exercise  is   being   conducted   in   order   to   determine
             proportionality under Article 8 ECHR, in cases where either of
             the factors which they identify arises."


10.  What we therefore have in relation to 117B(6) is what  was  classed  in
    Treebhawon and Others as a parliamentary  prescription  of  the  public
    interest i.e. if the requirements of Section 117B(6) are met, it  will,
    according to Parliament, not be proportionate to remove the person with
    a subsisting parental relationship from the United  Kingdom.   That  is
    the finding of the judge which on the facts of this matter is a finding
    that was properly open to the judge that  has  not  been  shown  to  be
    susceptible to challenge on the basis of arguable legal error.


11.  Moving on to deal with grounds on which permission  was  granted,  this
    relates to paragraph 52 of the determination where the judge makes  the
    following finding:


         "I have noted what the Tribunal said in R (on  the  application  of
         Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Appendix  FM  -
         Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT
         001 which said that it  will  be  for  the  individual  to  provide
         evidence   that   such   temporary   separation   will    interfere
         disproportionately with protected rights."


12.  As the judge found in the prior  paragraph  that  the  requirements  of
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act could be met, which is  a  sustainable  finding
    supporting the decision to allow the appeal, if the judge  has  legally
    erred in relation to the reference to Chen it is not a material factor.
     It is not  acceptable  to  quote  paragraphs  from  case  law  without
    establishing in the body of the determination, either expressly  or  by
    inference, how they apply to the case in question.   Had  this  been  a
    case where Section 117B(6) was not satisfied and therefore the position
    under Article 8 was one based upon the relationship that existed and no
    more, and the issue was the removal from the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    appellant to make a formal application to  return  lawfully,   I  would
    have found in favour of the Secretary of  State  that  the  finding  in
    paragraph 52 was inadequate as the judge did not go on to set out  what
    the factors were that  had  been  identified  and  the  impact  of  the
    temporary separation upon the individuals such as to show that it was a
    disproportionate decision.  However, any such  error  is  not  material
    because the decision to dismiss the  appeal  based  upon  parliamentary
    prescription and the nature of the relationship the appellant has  with
    his partner and children is clearly one that justified the finding that
    was made.  For that reason I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 16 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
