
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01955/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th July 2014                               |On 04th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                               Esosa Eromosele
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Lee of Salam & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Phull promulgated on 22nd April 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male Nigerian citizen born 10th April  1972  who  on
    30th  September  2013  applied  for  a  Permanent  Residence  Card   as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis
    that he is the spouse of Mary Teresa Eromosele, an Irish  national  who
    had been exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period of five years
    in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  The  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

 3. The application was refused on 11th November  2013  with  reference  to
    regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations.  The  Respondent  did  not
    accept that the Appellant had provided evidence to  show  how  his  EEA
    national spouse was exercising Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 2008 and 2013.

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, requesting that  his
    appeal be determined on the papers.

 5. The appeal was considered by Judge Phull  (the  judge)  on  28th  March
    2014.  The judge found that insufficient evidence had been submitted to
    support the Appellant's claim  that  his  spouse  had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights as a worker.   The  judge  also  considered  whether  the
    Appellant's spouse was a self-sufficient person and  exercising  Treaty
    rights in that way, but this required evidence of health insurance  and
    that there had been no claim on  public  funds,  whereas  the  evidence
    submitted indicated that the  Appellant's  spouse  had  been  receiving
    public funds.

 6. The judge dismissed the appeal finding that insufficient  evidence  had
    been submitted to support the Appellant's claim  that  his  spouse  had
    been exercising Treaty rights as  an  EEA  national  for  a  continuous
    period of five years, from 2008 until 2013.

 7. The Appellant then instructed solicitors who applied for permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In summary it  was  contended  that  the
    judge had erred in her  consideration  of  the  2006  Regulations,  and
    failed to consider the Appellant's rights, and those  of  his  children
    under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the
    1950 Convention).

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    TRP Hollingworth who found the Article 8 ground to be arguable.

 9. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

10. Ms Lee accepted that there had been insufficient  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  to  prove  that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    permanent residence, and therefore she did not pursue the ground  which
    had contended that the judge had erred in her consideration of the 2006
    Regulations.

11. Ms Lee submitted that the  judge  had  erred  in  not  considering  the
    Appellant's children and their best interests, and had made no findings
    in relation to Article 8.  Ms Lee pointed out that  the  Appellant  had
    referred to having three children in section 4 of his application form.
     Ms Lee  submitted  that  the  three  children  are  British  citizens,
    although it was conceded that this was not stated  in  the  application
    form, neither did the application form refer to their dates  of  birth.
    However  their  dates  of  birth  were  contained  in   the   Statutory
    Declaration prepared by the Appellant's spouse  which  was  before  the
    judge.

12. Ms Lee submitted that the Home Office should have considered  the  best
    interests of the children and it was an error of law for the judge  not
    to have considered those best interests and Article 8.   The  Appellant
    was not legally represented when he submitted his appeal, and  was  not
    aware that he should have provided further evidence.  If enquiries  had
    been made of the Appellant, he could have confirmed that  the  children
    are British and given further details.

The Respondent's Submissions

13. Mr Harrison accepted that the judge had not considered any human rights
    issues, but this was because such issues were not  raised  before  her.
    The judge dealt with the appeal on the evidence that  had  been  placed
    before her.

14. I was asked to note that human rights had not been raised, and that the
    Appellant had not requested an oral  hearing.   Mr  Harrison  submitted
    that the judge had been presented with insufficient evidence,  and  the
    burden of proof was on the Appellant.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. Ms Lee was  correct  to  concede  that  the  judge  had  not  erred  in
    dismissing  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  to  issue  a  Permanent
    Residence Card.   There  was  insufficient  evidence  provided  by  the
    Appellant to discharge the burden of proof.

16. I do not find that the judge erred in failing to consider Article 8  of
    the 1950 Convention.   There  was  no  indication  in  the  Appellant's
    application that Article 8  was  relied  upon.   It  appears  that  the
    Appellant completed section 4 of the application form in error, as this
    section should only be completed if the applicant is divorced  from  an
    EEA national, or the EEA national is deceased or has  left  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant did include in  that  section  the  information
    that he has three children, but did not indicate their  nationality  or
    dates of birth.  I am not satisfied in any event, that this application
    form was before the judge.  It was not in the Tribunal  file  that  was
    placed before the Upper Tribunal, which  is  the  same  file  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and this application form was  provided
    to the Upper Tribunal by Ms Lee.

17. There is no mention of children in the Respondent's reasons for refusal
    letter or Notice of Immigration Decision, the reason for this being, in
    my view, that the application was  not  pursued  on  any  human  rights
    grounds, but was made simply on the basis that the Appellant claimed to
    be entitled to permanent residence in the  United  Kingdom.   This  was
    based upon his spouse having exercised Treaty rights, and was not based
    upon  the  fact  that  he  had  children.    The   Appellant   provided
    insufficient information to the Respondent, for any consideration to be
    given to his children.  The application was not made on that basis.

18.  I  take  into  account  that  the  Appellant  did   not   have   legal
    representation, but it was the Appellant's choice to request an  appeal
    on the papers rather than an oral hearing.  It is the responsibility of
    the Appellant to provide to the Tribunal sufficient evidence  to  prove
    his case.

19. The evidence submitted by the  Appellant  in  relation  to  his  appeal
    amounts to a Statutory Declaration sworn by his spouse on 24th December
    2013 to which there is attached five exhibits.  This was considered  by
    the judge who refers to it in paragraph 3 of her determination.

20. The birth certificates of the Appellant and his spouse's three children
    are attached to the affidavit.  No evidence was submitted to show  that
    the children are British.  There  was  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
    spouse has another child from a previous relationship.

21. The Respondent had not made a  removal  decision.   It  is  clear  that
    Article 8 was not raised as a Ground of Appeal.  If Article 8 had  been
    raised as a Ground of Appeal, the judge would have erred in law in  not
    determining that ground, even if there was no removal  decision.   This
    is because section 86(2)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 requires that any matter raised as a Ground of Appeal must  be
    determined.  That however was not the case in this appeal.

22. Even though Article 8 was not raised, taking into account the Appellant
    was unrepresented,  I  have  considered  whether  it  was  a  "Robinson
    obvious" point that Article 8 needed to be considered.  I do  not  find
    that to be the case.  The  judge  was  faced  with  an  appeal  against
    refusal of permanent residence with no removal decision.  The Notice of
    Immigration Decision and the Respondent's reasons  for  refusal  letter
    both indicate that the Appellant had the option  to  submit  a  further
    application for consideration if he believes that he has the  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom as a matter of European law and  is  in  a
    position  to  submit  the  necessary   information   to   support   his
    application.

23. The Notice of Immigration Decision also indicates that if the Appellant
    does not submit a further application and does  not  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, then a separate decision may  be  made  at  a  later  date  to
    enforce his removal, which may be an appealable decision.

24. In my view  the  judge  had  insufficient  information  before  her  to
    properly consider Article  8  and  the  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    children, which were not issues that had been specifically raised,  and
    the judge would have been aware that it was open to  the  Appellant  to
    make a further application and raise the issue of the best interests of
    his children if he thought appropriate.

25. I therefore, for the above reasons, conclude that the judge did not err
    in law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date 24th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


Fee Award

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 24th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



