
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01025/2015
                                                               IA/01034/2015
                                                               IA/01039/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Niravkumar Kanubhai Kakadiya
                        Binalben Niravkumar Kakadiya
                                     J K
                         (anonymity ORDERs NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No Attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Background

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Freer promulgated on 28 July 2015 brought with the permission  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge White granted on 5 November 2015.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and Mr and  Mrs  Kakadiya  and  their  daughter  are  the
    respondents, for the sake of consistency with  the  proceedings  before
    the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to the Kakadiyas as the
    Appellants and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

3.   The personal details of the Appellants are a matter of record on  file,
    as are their respective immigration histories:  it  is  unnecessary  to
    repeat those matters here.

4.   This appeals arise in  circumstances  where  the  First  Appellant,  Mr
    Kakadiya, had previously held leave as a Tier 4  student  migrant,  and
    his wife and child had  held  leave  in  line  as  his  dependants.   A
    decision was taken by the Respondent to curtail leave such  that  leave
    would expire on 8 August 2014, which would afford the  First  Appellant
    60 days in order to find a new academic institution.

5.   Just at the end of that period the Appellants made an  application  for
    further leave to remain by way of application  forms  FLR(FP)  together
    with a covering letter from their representatives dated 8 August  2014.
    The covering letter has the subject line "Application for further leave
    to remain for a period of three months", and its opening  paragraph  is
    then in these terms:

         "We have been instructed by the above named applicant to assist him
         in his immigration matter.  He is submitting his application  along
         with his dependent wife and daughter for further leave to remain in
         the United Kingdom under Article 8 of ECHR and on humanitarian  and
         compassionate circumstance."

6.   The rest of the letter sets out the difficulties  that  the  Appellants
    had experienced in obtaining a further sponsoring course  provider  for
    the First Appellant to continue to pursue his studies, and  in  essence
    what is asked in that letter is more time to resolve the  matter:  e.g.
    see paragraph 8 of the letter.

7.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants'  applications  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  12
    December 2014.  The basis of the reasons are summarised at paragraphs 5-
    9 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is to be  noted  that
    the Secretary of State considered  the  applications  by  reference  to
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and also by reference to paragraph
    276ADE.  It was additionally said by the Respondent that there were  no
    exceptional circumstances in respect of Article 8 'outside' the Rules.

8.    The  matter  was  considered  on  the  papers  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: see paragraph 21.  I pause to note that although  the  matter
    has been listed for an oral hearing today  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    correspondence has been received from the Appellants' solicitors by way
    of a letter dated 7 January 2016 indicating that  the  Appellants  wish
    the appeal to be considered in their absence. The letter also  enclosed
    some supporting documents (as set out in the index, which is  a  matter
    of record on file), and submissions by way of a Rule 24 response.

9.   In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Appellants  have  had  due
    notice of the hearing today and that it is appropriate  to  proceed  in
    their absence.

Consideration: Error of Law

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  allowed  the  Appellants'  appeals  with
    reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.  Having  set  out  some  Article  8
    related case law, the Judge says this at paragraph 27:

         "The decision maker did not consider Article 8 adequately after the
         Rules.  The  short  extension  sought  was  not  a  run-of-the-mill
         request for additional years of leave.  It  is  hard  to  find  the
         public interest in refusing it, as the situation is not  attractive
         to future students who would bring a large influx  of  income  with
         them."

11.  Much of the rest of the First-tier Tribunal's decision thereafter is  a
    recitation of Article 8 itself, the case of Razgar, and the  provisions
    of section 117B and 117D of the 2002 Act.   Paragraph  32  then  states
    this: "The refusal of a short extension is wholly  disproportionate  on
    the facts."  There is then some reference to the difficulties suggested
    to have been encountered in obtaining English language testing relevant
    to the Appellant's studies.

12.  It seems to me absolutely clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has
    not made any attempt to go through the five Razgar questions.   Nowhere
    does the Judge identify the nature or the quality of the family  and/or
    private life said to  be  enjoyed  by  the  Appellants  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   The  reference  at  paragraph  32  to  a  'disproportionate'
    decision is not obviously an Article 8 balancing exercise because there
    is no evaluation of the private/family life element. Rather it  appears
    that the Judge merely considers the decision to refuse an extension  of
    a short period of time for the First Appellant to seek to  put  himself
    in a situation where he could support an application  to  continue  his
    studies to be 'harsh' or 'unfair'. In the alternative, if it was indeed
    the Judge's view that the decisions disproportionately interfered  with
    any aspect of private or family life, the decision is deficient  for  a
    lack of analysis and an absence of findings as to private and/or family
    life.

13.  More particularly in this regard any such analysis would  have  had  to
    have taken on board the decision in Patel - a matter that  was  clearly
    influential in the grant of permission to appeal  by  Judge  White.  In
    Patel [2013] UKSC 72 at paragraph 57, in the now well-known  speech  of
    Lord Carnwath, it is stated:

         "It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power.  It is to be distinguished from the Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right.  The merits of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6).  One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call in
         Pankina for "commonsense"  in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying  in  the  UK  for  some  years....
         However, such considerations do not by themselves  provide  grounds
         of appeal under article 8,  which  is  concerned  with  private  or
         family  life,  not  education  as  such.   The  opportunity  for  a
         promising student to complete his course in this  country,  however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under article 8."

14.  In my judgment the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  plainly
    runs contrary to the principles and guidance to  be  derived  from  the
    case of Patel, and the First-tier Tribunal Judge nowhere identifies any
    basis for distinguishing those principles and guidance of the facts  of
    this particular case.

15.  Accordingly, in all the circumstances I am satisfied that there  was  a
    material error of law which requires that the decisions of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should be set aside.

Remaking the decisions

16.  I proceed to remake the decisions in the appeals.

17.  As I have already identified, the Appellants were in effect asking  for
    a short  period  of  leave  to  enable  the  First  Appellant  to  make
    arrangements whereby he could be in a position  to  apply  for  further
    leave as a student - it being his case that he had not  had  sufficient
    time so to do.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  unfortunate  in  those
    circumstances  that  any  reference  was  made  to  Article  8  in  the
    application letter drafted by his representatives at all.  It may  well
    be that it is because of that reference that the Secretary  of  State's
    decision-maker embarked on no more than a  consideration  of  the  case
    against the framework of the Immigration Rules relating to  family  and
    private life.

18.  The reality is that the Appellants were not  seeking  to  secure  leave
    under the Rules by reference to Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE,  but
    were in fact asking for a short period of leave outside the Immigration
    Rules. In effect, recalling the passage from Patel  quoted  above,  the
    Appellants  were  inviting  exercise  of  "the  Secretary  of   State's
    discretion to allow leave to remain outside the  rules,  which  may  be
    unrelated to any protected human right".

19.  In my judgment the RFRL does not engage with the  application  in  that
    manner, and to that extent I am satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law.  In  short,  the
    Secretary of State failed to engage with  an  application  based  on  a
    request for a short period of discretionary leave outside the Rules.

20.  It is beyond the jurisdiction of this Tribunal to  make  a  substantive
    decision on the basis of discretion outside the Rules, and  accordingly
    I conclude that the appeal is to be allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    decisions of the Respondent were not in accordance with  the  law,  and
    the Appellants' applications in effect remain  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State and now requires to be determined in accordance with
    the law.



Notice of Decisions

21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and are set aside.

22.  I remake the decisions in the appeals.

23.  The appeals are each allowed on the basis that  the  decisions  of  the
    Respondent were not in accordance with the  law,  and  accordingly  the
    Appellants' applications now require to be decided by the Secretary  of
    State in accordance with the law.

24.  No anonymity orders are sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:  Date: 4 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeals  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, I have considered making a fee award. I  have  decided  to  make  a
whole fee award because the Respondent has failed to engage  with  the  real
basis of the Appellants' applications.


Signed:  Date: 4 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

