

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/01525/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision Promulgated           |
|On 12 September 2017                   |On 18 September 2017           |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                         AHMED OBADIRAN OBANIYI KUTI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr Adelakun of Arndale Solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Appellant was born on 4 November 1987 and is a national of Nigeria.


3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on 27 March 2017  which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated  2  March
   2016 to refuse the Appellants human rights claim.
5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons which were in essence that :
   a) The Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements in relation to
      his private life in the UK under the Rules as he  had  an  outstanding
      debt to the NHS for medical treatment.
   b) It was not accepted that the Appellant had lived in the UK since  2004
      as claimed as there was no evidence of his presence.
   c) There would not be very significant obstacles to his reintegration  in
      Nigeria for the purpose of paragraph 276 ADE1(vi) of the Rules  as  he
      had spent the majority of  his  life  there,  his  mother  is  usually
      resident in Nigeria, he has family ties there.
   d) In relation to  reasons  outside  the  Rules  the  Appellants  medical
      history this did not justify a grant of leave as his cancer  had  been
      successfully treated and he  was  no  longer  on  medication  and  any
      further surgery would be elective.
   e)  In relation to the Appellants claim that he would be at  risk  as  he
      had converted to Christianity there was no reason  why  he  could  not
      relocate and no explanation as to why he had not claimed asylum.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Thorne ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision.
7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing: that the Judge was  wrong  to  fal
   to consider the  Appellants  medical  condition  and  wrong  to  fail  to
   consider  his  risk  on  return  as  a  result  of  his   conversion   to
   Christianity.
8.  On 11 May 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Omotosho  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Adelakun  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) The Judge had failed to address two of the grounds of appeal that  had
      also been addressed in the Appellants witness statement.

   b) His client claimed that while the Judge recorded that  Ms  Bremang  of
      counsel had conceded that she would  not  be  relying  on  the  Geneva
      Convention  or Article 3 he could not recall discussing this with her.

   c) When reminded by me that he had been successfully treated  for  cancer
      and was on no other medication but aspirin he conceded that Ms Bremang
      was right to concede that the Appellants health did not meet the  high
      threshold of engaging Article 3.

   d) In relation to the Appellants conversion to Christianity this was only
      briefly addressed in paragraph 55 (xi)

10. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Diwnycz submitted that :

   a) The Judges task was to adjudicate on what was contested.

   b) In  this  case  the  Appellants  professional  advisor  made  a  valid
      concession in relation to  both  the  issues  relied  on.  She  is  an
      experienced representative.

11. In reply Mr Adelakun on behalf of the Appellant submitted  that  counsel
   should not have made the concession as  the  Appellants  health  and  his
   conversion were the only issues in the case.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. Mr Adelakun did  not  represent  the  Appellant  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal . The Appellant was represented by Ms  Bremang,  an  experienced
   and competent member of the Bar who has appeared before me on a number of
   occasions. I note that at paragraph 13 of the decision, that  during  the
   course of the Appellants evidence, the Judge records:

   "Mr Bremang said that he (sic) was making no argument  under  the  Geneva
   Convention."

14. I further note that at paragraph 19 the Judge records that during  final
   submissions Ms Bremang :

   "said that he was not arguing that A was at risk of persecution  or  that
   his medical condition engaged Article 3."

15. Before me although initially relying on the argument that the Judge  had
   failed to consider his health claim Mr Adelakun when  asked  to  identify
   the health features of the case that engaged  Article  3  quite  properly
   conceded that the high threshold of Article 3 was not met. This was  also
   a quite proper concession  when  made  by  Ms  Bremang  given  the  clear
   evidence in the bundle that the Appellants salivary gland cancer had been
   successfully treated in the UK and the only matter still outstanding  was
   an elective, therefore not necessary, operation to seal  a  hole  in  his
   mouth. There was no evidence before the Judge that medical  treatment  in
   Nigeria was not free or as good as in the UK  and  given  that  the  only
   medication he took was aspirin an Article 3 claim was  unsustainable.  In
   so far as he was required to do so for the purpose of Article  8  outside
   the Rules adequately addressed the Appellants health at paragraph 55  (v)
   of the decision based on the very limited material before him.

16. In relation to Ms Bremang's explicit concession both in  the  course  of
   evidence and during final submissions that she would advance no arguments
   under the Geneva Convention of  course  I  have  no  statement  from  her
   explaining the basis of  this  decision  ,  whether  it  was  a  tactical
   decision or an implicit acceptance that she had insufficient material  in
   the bundle and in the Appellants witness statement on which to mount  any
   arguments. It would have been open to the Appellant  to  waive  privilege
   and secure such a statement. I  find  it  difficult  to  accept  that  an
   experienced  and  competent  member  of  the  Bar  who  has  professional
   obligations and requirements in relation to her behaviour would  not  act
   in accordance with those obligations. There was also  no  statement  from
   the Appellant setting out the circumstances in which this concession  was
   made.

17. Moreover her decision makes sense even without  that  information  given
   the woeful  lack  of  evidence  in  respect  of  his  alleged  conversion
   contained within the Appellants bundle. The Appellant had allegedly  been
   in the UK for 12 years but never claimed asylum; there was no evidence in
   the bundle to support his claim that he was a practising Christian and no
   statement from a Minister of Religion confirming the claimed  conversion;
   the Appellants witness statement  makes  only  a  very  brief  and  vague
   mention of this aspect of his case in 2 short paragraphs (11 and 12) with
   no detail as to the circumstances of his conversion and how he  manifests
   his faith. There was no background  material  in  the  Appellants  bundle
   support this aspect of his claim and no material that would suggest  that
   he could not safely relocate to another area of Nigeria which has a large
   Christian population. Clearly the Appellant has not  been  prejudiced  by
   this decision as it is always open to him, as it always was open to  him,
   to make an asylum claim. The findings made by the Judge in assessing this
   aspect of his claim for the purpose of Article 8  outside  the  Rules  at
   paragraph 55 (xi) were therefore based on Ms Bremangs concession and  the
   lack of any objective material to support his claim  other  than  in  the
   context of Article 8.

18. I find no merit in Mr Adelakuns argument that without the health  issues
   and the alleged risk from his family as a result of  his  conversion  the
   Appellant had no case and therefore it was illogical for  the  concession
   to have been made as clearly given the length of time the  Appellant  had
   claimed he lived in the UK there were issues in relation to  his  private
   life to be resolved which included but were not solely concerned with his
   health and his religion.

CONCLUSION

19. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
15.9.2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell






