
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01718/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                          |Promulgated                         |
|On 27th January 2016                      |             On 12th February 2016  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ALI USMAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner, Counsel instructed by Middlesex Law
Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  8th  February  1989.   His
    appeal against the refusal to  issue  him  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of  residence  as  the  spouse  of  a  Romanian
    national was allowed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Coutts  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 in a decision  promulgated  on  28th
    July 2015.

2.   The Respondent appealed on the grounds that the  judge  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for the positive findings made and  failed  to
    engage with, or address any of the grounds taken against the  Appellant
    by the Respondent. The decision failed to record any of the evidence of
    the four witnesses and failed to give reasons  for  why  he  found  the
    witnesses to be credible.

3.   The Respondent relied  on  the  case  of  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 where the Tribunal found:

         "If a Tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
         unreliable or a document to be worth no  weight  whatsoever  it  is
         necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to
         be supported by reasons. A bare statement that a  witness  was  not
         believed or that a document was not afforded weight is unlikely  to
         satisfy the requirement to give reasons."


4.   The  Respondent  submitted  that  the  principle  applied  to  positive
    credibility findings and also relied on the case of Budhathoki (reasons
    for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) where the Tribunal held that  it
    was necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
    evidence and explain in clear and brief terms their reasons so that the
    parties could understand why they had won or lost.

5.   Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade  on  the
    ground that it was arguable that  the  judge's  findings  and  reasons,
    which were no more than half a  page  in  length,  did  not  engage  or
    address any of the Respondent's objections  and  consequently  did  not
    give confidence that the judge had engaged in  a  thorough  and  proper
    analysis of the evidence presented.

6.   Mr Staunton relied on the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  that  this
    was a reasons challenge.  The  judge  did  not  pay  attention  to  the
    refusal letter and did not deal with the matters  therein,  namely  the
    absence of female clothing and belongings in the Appellant's room  when
    it was searched by an Immigration Officer and the false reply  he  gave
    in relation to his mobile phone.

7.   The judge's conclusion at [17] that "on balance I find that  the  whole
    weight of the oral and documentary evidence here  points  towards  this
    being a genuine and subsisting relationship between the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor" was not substantiated by reasons. The judge had failed to give
    reasons for why he came to that conclusion and [14] was insufficient to
    show that the judge had considered the evidence of all four  witnesses.
    The judge failed to  show  how  the  conflicts  in  evidence  had  been
    resolved and had not addressed the specific factual  issues  raised  in
    the refusal letter.

8.   Mr Turner submitted that the issue before the  judge  was  whether  the
    relationship was genuine or not.  The oral evidence in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings was referred to at [3] of the decision and  the  judge  had
    also considered the significant documentation submitted. The judge  set
    out the Respondent's case at [7] to [9] and had therefore  not  ignored
    it.

9.   The judge had regard to the evidence of all four witnesses to  whom  he
    referred at [13]. Credibility was a key issue and the judge  found  all
    four witnesses to be  credible.   The  judge  summarised  the  evidence
    before him in the Record of Proceedings and identified  the  issues  in
    the case.  The judge had properly directed himself in law and there was
    no arguable error in his decision to allow the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006.
Discussion and Conclusions

10.  The judge's findings and reasons are brief. However, I am of  the  view
    that they are sufficient to support his conclusion that  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor were in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  for  the
    following reasons.

11.  The Respondent relied on a visit made by Immigration  Officers  to  the
    Appellant's home address and the following facts are  set  out  in  the
    refusal letter:

         "When asked about your Sponsor you  claimed  she  had  returned  to
         Romania because  of  her  sick  daughter.  You  claimed  that  your
         Sponsor's daughter was suffering from a fever and  unable  to  give
         any other information. You were unable to state when  your  claimed
         spouse left the UK and did not know her date of birth.  When  asked
         by officers to show your wife's belongings you  opened  a  wardrobe
         full of female clothing all of which were in a  size  small.   When
         asked what size your spouse was you stated that you  did  not  know
         and that your spouse was much larger than you,  further  confirming
         this with photographs. You then claimed that you did not  know  who
         the clothing belonged to. No cosmetics or shoes were present in the
         bedroom.  You were then asked if you could show  evidence  of  your
         relationship by way of texts and calls on your  mobile  phone.  You
         stated that your mobile phone was only a week old and  unlocked  it
         and handed it over to our officers.  When checked it was found that
         the phone was much older than one  week  old  as  calls  were  made
         earlier than a  week  ago.   There  was  no  communication  through
         facebook, whatsapp or viber, even though you claim to have been  in
         a relationship with your spouse since January 2011."


12.  It is evident from the Record of Proceedings that the issues raised  in
    the refusal letter were dealt with by the witnesses in  oral  evidence.
    It is noteworthy that there was no Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  However,  the  Record  of  Proceedings
    indicates that the Appellant, the Sponsor and  the  two  witnesses  had
    given consistent evidence about when they married, where  they  married
    and when they had met.

13.  The Appellant and the Sponsor, also dealt with the  items  of  clothing
    found when Immigration  Officers  visited  the  Appellant's  room.  The
    Appellant explained that the clothing in the wardrobe belonged  to  his
    wife (the Sponsor) and that there were  some  cosmetics,  hand  lotion,
    shampoo and cream on the dressing table in the room. He explained  that
    he had not made any calls to his wife on his mobile  phone  because  he
    had used prepaid calling cards.

14.  The Sponsor explained that she had to go to  Romania  as  a  matter  of
    urgency because her daughter  was  sick  and  that  she  had  left  her
    belongings in the  room  which  she  shared  with  the  Appellant.  The
    clothing belonged to her and the smaller clothing was given to  her  by
    an aunt for her daughter.

15.  The evidence of the other two witnesses was consistent in  relation  to
    when the parties met and when they were  married.   Accordingly,  there
    was evidence before the judge which dealt with the  matters  raised  in
    the refusal letter. The judge was entitled to rely on this evidence  to
    come to the conclusion that he did. There was no material error of  law
    in his failure to set out the oral evidence in his decision.

16.  The judge found the witnesses credible on the  basis  they  gave  their
    evidence in a straightforward manner. This  finding  was  open  to  the
    judge given the consistent accounts  given  by  each  witness  and  his
    reasons were adequate.

17.   The  judge  also  took  into  account  at  [14],  [15]  and  [16]  the
    documentary evidence which  had  been  submitted  confirming  that  the
    Appellant's wife had been living at the same address since  2010,  that
    there was a medical certificate confirming her daughter's admission  to
    hospital and that there were numerous  tax  returns,  bank  statements,
    council tax statements, water statements all showing that the Appellant
    and the Sponsor had lived at  [                          ]  during  the
    period from November 2011 to December 2015. The judge took into account
    all this evidence  in  coming  to  his  conclusion  at  [17]  that  the
    relationship was genuine.

18.  Whilst the judge may be criticised  for  failing  to  set  out  why  he
    preferred the Appellant's evidence over and above the evidence  of  the
    Respondent when Immigration Officers attended the Appellant's home, the
    failure to deal with that was not in fact material to the decision.

19.  It is clear from reading the determination as a whole,  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and the Appellant's bundle  of  documents  that  the  judge
    considered the Appellant's explanation for the matters set out  in  the
    refusal letter and that on the totality of the  evidence  he  preferred
    the evidence of the Appellant as opposed to that of the Respondent.

20.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision dated 9th July 2015. The judge's reasons were brief  but  they
    were adequate and there was ample evidence before him  to  support  his
    findings at [17]. The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

J Frances

Upper                 Tribunal                 Judge                 Frances
  Date: 9th February 2016
