
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01313/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 September 2016                 |On 20 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                   Between

                                 AJAY KUMAR
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

                        Immigration Officer, HEATHROW
                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Chohan (barrister employed by SZ Solicitors)
For the respondent:    Mr Chris Avery


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a student appeal from a decision  following  a  hearing  before
    Judge Peter Ievins at Taylor House on 14  January  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against refusal of leave to enter  and
    cancelation of his leave to remain on 7 January 2015.

2.   The decision under appeal was made on the basis  that  the  certificate
    in question, which was given by what appears to be  a  degree  awarding
    body called ISA, was false, so that the appellant had obtained his most
    recent period of leave to remain, for studies at South Chelsea College,
    by false representations.

3.   What both sides and the judge  had  before  them  was  the  immigration
    officer's very full and detailed explanatory  statement  of  30  August
    2015.  However it is not clear that either side or the  judge  had  the
    full Home Office bundle, which gives the attachments which  are  before
    me.  The certificate which the appellant had produced in order  to  get
    his leave to remain to study at South Chelsea College was  an  extended
    Diploma in Business and Enterprise Level 5,  which  purported  to  have
    been issued by ISA on 4 June 2014.

4.   The explanatory statement says this at paragraph 15:

         "Subsequent to the cancellation decision Officer S Khan scanned the
         ISA diploma and emailed a copy to the verifications team  with  ISA
         Education.  On 12 February ISA Education responded  confirming  the
         diploma did not match their records."

5.   So that  put  the  appellant's  representatives  on  notice  that  some
    evidence did exist to show that the diploma was  false.   The  evidence
    which actually existed was an e-mail of 12 February 2015  addressed  to
    the Immigration Officer who had made the enquiry  saying  this:  "Thank
    you very much for the required information you were  looking  for.   We
    have checked in our records and it does not match."

6.   To justify his decision, the immigration officer needed to satisfy  the
    judge on the balance of probabilities that the certificate  was  false.
    So the terms of the ISA e-mail were of some relevance.  The  judge  (at
    paragraph 6) quotes as the presenting officer as saying that there  had
    been nothing on the Home Office system and it  would  take  a  week  to
    obtain information from the port. So it is clear  that  some  enquiries
    had been made, as a result of what the explanatory statement had  said.
    The  presenting  officer  went  on  to  suggest  that  the  immigration
    officer's own decision was unlawful as he  had  not  had  any  original
    evidence, and the case should be sent back to the Secretary of State to
    make a lawful decision.

7.   The next paragraph shows that Mr Chohan  for  the  appellant  took  his
    stand on the absence of any evidence to support the decision.  He  said
    in terms that there was nothing from the  certificate  -awarding  body.
    So the judge went ahead with the hearing and dealt  with  the  evidence
    before him at paragraph 21.  He dealt  with  the  appellant's  previous
    studies at Zaskin College but  this  is  all  he  said  about  the  ISA
    diploma, which was the crucial piece of evidence in the case

         "The  extended  diploma  in  business  and  enterprise  comes  from
         somewhere called ISA Education centre number 00125. It is not clear
         to me if ISA Education actually had premises or whether they  award
         certificates at other educational institutions but the  appellant's
         evidence was on the whole vague."

    He went on to say


         "Although it is for the respondent to prove her case, the appellant
         has known what the issues were for a year or  so  and  he  has  not
         produced any evidence from Zaskin, ISA or anywhere else."

8.   In fact of course, it was for the respondent to produce  the  evidence.
    It is now clear that it did exist, but for one reason  or  another  was
    not available to either side or to the judge at  the  hearing,  and  it
    seems to me the result has got to be a  fresh  hearing  before  another
    judge.

9.   It should be a very clear and  simple  question  in  this  case  as  to
    whether the ISA certificate which I have mentioned was the one e-mailed
    to ISA verification on 9 February 2015, and was  regarded  by  them  in
    their reply on 12 February as not  matching  their  records.   Although
    those representing the appellant may have  been  rather  rash  to  take
    their stand on the absence of evidence as  they  did,  because  of  the
    burden of proof they were entitled to see before the hearing  what  the
    respondent had got.

Notice of Decision

10.  For one reason or another that did not happen so there was  a  material
    error of law and the decision is set aside and the  result  must  be  a
    fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.


                                 [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                                             Upper Tribunal)
                                                           20 September 2016

