
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01102/2014
     IA/01201/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2014                               |On 12 August 2014            |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                            Yadwinder Singh Sidhu
                                Rakesh Kumar
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by S & S
Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal brought by the appellants against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 19  May  2014  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 25 April 2014.   The  issue  can  be  stated
    succinctly.

 2. The appellants applied  to  vary  their  leave  to  remain  as  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur)  Migrants  but  their  applications  were  refused   for
    effectively one reason only which was  that  the  evidence  which  they
    submitted that they had the requisite funds available to them could not
    be  verified  by  the  respondent.   This  was  a  points-based  system
    application and the Rules  include  a  requirement  for  points  to  be
    awarded under Appendix A 'Attributes' showing  that  an  applicant  has
    access to funds as required.  Applicants also have to  show  that  they
    have funds in a regulated financial  institution  and  that  they  have
    available funds which are disposable in the United  Kingdom.   In  this
    case the appellants provided letters and statements from HDFC  Bank  as
    evidence that they met the requirements to be  awarded  points  in  the
    categories I have set out.

 3. It is provided in the Rules that this evidence has to be  "verifiable".
    In the refusal letter sent to each appellant on 10  December  2013  the
    respondent stated that:

         "We have attempted to verify the documents detailed above [that  is
         the documents said to be from HDFC Bank which showed that they  had
         funds available which were  in  the  name  of  a  third  party]  as
         evidence that you meet the requirements to be  awarded  points  for
         applicant  has  access  to  funds  as   required   using   standard
         procedures, but have been unable to do so.

         We have therefore been unable  to  include  this  evidence  in  our
         consideration of your claim for points for applicant has access  to
         funds as required."

 4. As a result of this the appellants were not awarded any  points  either
    for 'funds held in regulated financial institution' or funds disposable
    in the United Kingdom

 5. The appellants appealed against this  decision  and  as  already  noted
    their appeal was heard  before  Judge  Khan,  who  dismissed  it.   The
    central plank of the appellants' appeal was that the documents they had
    provided from the bank were indeed verifiable and that the  failure  of
    the respondent to verify these documents  was  not  the  fault  of  the
    appellants but must have been because the respondent had  in  some  way
    made a mistake when attempting to verify these documents.

 6. In support of the appeal the appellants put before the judge a  further
    letter from HDFC Bank dated 17 April 2014  (and  which  was  apparently
    produced at the hearing not having been served prior to the hearing) in
    which it was said on behalf of the bank  that  the  funds  said  to  be
    available were indeed available.  This  letter  is  signed  by  someone
    called Meena Kumari, said to be  a  personal  banker.   Obviously  this
    document has not itself been verified either and could  not  have  been
    before the date of the hearing.

 7. At the hearing the respondent provided a copy of what  is  said  to  be
    "GCID - Case Record Sheet" which sets out  what  steps  were  taken  in
    order to verify the information.  Apparently the CID in GCID stands for
    Computer Information Database or something similar and the G refers  to
    "General" which is used for enquiries which are general in  respect  of
    either deportation or asylum claims.  In any event the document  refers
    to various emails which were sent by the respondent both  to  the  bank
    and Entry Clearance Officers outside the UK but parts of the  enquiries
    they made have been redacted, it just being stated  within  the  record
    sheet that in respect of these parts of the record they are "restricted
    - not for disclosure outside of Home Office".  This  evidence  was  all
    considered  by  Judge  Khan  whose  "conclusions"  were  set  out  from
    paragraphs  20  onwards.   I  set  out  the  relevant  parts  of  these
    conclusions as follows:

         "Conclusions as to the Appeal

         20   I have taken all of the  evidence  into  consideration  before
             arriving at my decision in this matter.

         21   Both appellants made a joint application for leave  to  remain
             in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants.
             The respondent is not satisfied that the appellants  meet  the
             requirements of paragraph 245DD(b) of the Immigration Rules.

         22   Both appellant[s] provided letter[s] and documents to  confirm
             that their funds for the investment in  the  UK  business  are
             available in HDFC Bank in India.  These funds are held in  the
             name of one Afsar Mohiddin.  The HDFC letter dated  03/06/2013
             provides Mr Mohiddin's details.  On 28/10/2013, the respondent
             sent an email to the bank for the confirmation of  information
             provided in their letter of 03/06/2013.   There  has  been  no
             response from the bank  to  the  respondent's  request.   This
             information is noted in  the  respondent's  GCID  case  Record
             Sheet.  Having  received  no  response  to  the  enquiry,  the
             respondent refused the appellants' application.

         23   The appellants now provide a further  letter  from  HDFC  Bank
             dated 17/04/2014, which is mostly  in  similar  terms  as  the
             letter of 03/06/2013.  It makes no reference to any  enquiries
             by the respondent.  This letter is post  decision  and  it  is
             open to the appellants to  use  such  evidence  in  any  fresh
             application to the respondent.

         24   I remind myself that it is for  the  appellants  to  establish
             their case on the balance of probabilities and  this  includes
             verifiable evidence, which in this case they may  have  failed
             to provide.

         25   On the evidence before me, on the balance of probabilities,  I
             am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  have  met  all  the
             requirements of paragraph 245DD(b) of the Immigration Rules."

 8. In the grounds of appeal settled on behalf  of  the  appellants  it  is
    argued that a document verification report should have  been  provided,
    this having been requested on behalf of the appellants.  At paragraph 7
    of the grounds it is asserted as follows:

         "7.  It is submitted that a DVR should  have  been  provided  as  a
             matter of course in such cases, but the Home Office  can  have
             no justification to conceal  it  from  the  appellant  despite
             specific requests to disclose it."

         It is further asserted that:

              "It is an error of law for the  Immigration  Judge  to  decide
             this appeal against the appellant in such circumstances."

 9. Complaint is then made at paragraph 8 that  although  the  GCID  record
    sheet was provided during the hearing "this makes mention that an email
    was sent, but confirms nothing more, such as the email address  it  was
    sent to and what the email said.  Most crucially, there is no  copy  of
    the purported email."

10. Then at paragraph 9  the  assertion  is  repeated  that  "there  is  no
    justifiable reason for the respondent not disclosing  the  DVR  or  the
    purported email to the appellant" and "in particular, there can  be  no
    reason to refuse to disclose it despite the appellant  making  repeated
    requests to see it so that they could then contact their  bank  on  the
    basis of the information in the DVR".  Then  at  paragraph  10  of  the
    grounds complaint is made that "it is impossible for the appellants  to
    investigate this matter any further if they did not know who the  email
    was sent to, when it was sent, which email address it came from,  which
    branch of the bank it was sent to etc." particularly because "HDFC Bank
    is a huge organisation with many branches  in  and  outside  India"  of
    which particulars are given.  Essentially, the complaint  is  that  the
    process is not a fair one because once the respondent states  that  she
    or those acting on her behalf have  been  unable  to  verify  documents
    there is no way that this can be challenged  if  the  details  are  not
    provided to the appellants.  It is said at paragraph 12 of the  grounds
    that "there has been no allegation of deception or  wrongdoing  against
    the appellants other than this claim by the Home Office that  the  bank
    did not reply to a request for verification" and it is said  also  that
    the judge appeared to give no weight to the evidence from the bank that
    the funds were there.

11. Complaint is made of the finding that the letter from the bank provided
    at the hearing merely confirmed what the  bank  had  stated  previously
    because it is said that "this letter  confirmed  the  presence  of  the
    funds at the time of the application and was just further  evidence  to
    reconfirm this in the face of the respondent's  allegations"  and  that
    the judge was obliged to consider this letter as part of  the  evidence
    "that went to the very root of this appeal".

12. Before me on behalf of the appellants Mr Bellara relied on his  grounds
    and attempted to  reinforce  them  by  means  of  succinct  and  cogent
    argument.  He reminded the Tribunal that the respondent had not made  a
    formal allegation of forgery and that all that was said  was  that  she
    could  not  verify  the  documents.   Everything   was   said   to   be
    "inconclusive" and the guiding principle in a case such as this  should
    be that "he who asserts must prove".  In this case the respondent  said
    that she could not verify the documents and therefore what should  have
    happened was that  the  further  documents  which  the  appellants  had
    produced should have been reconsidered by the respondent;  they  should
    have  been  remitted  back  to  the  respondent  to   reconsider.    If
    verification had been attempted but had not resolved the situation  the
    appellants should have  been  given  an  opportunity  to  address  that
    position.  There was no Section 108 notice (this is a reference to  the
    provisions under Section 108 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 concerning investigation of documents  alleged  to  be  forged
    where disclosure is said to be contrary to the public interest) and  in
    this case a Section 108 notice should have been  served.   Essentially,
    if the respondent had documents which she was not prepared to disclose,
    she should have said what those documents  were.   The  difficulty  the
    appellants  were  in  is  they  could  not  rebut  the  assertion.  The
    appellants should not have been punished by the respondent's  inability
    to verify the documents.

13. On behalf of the respondent Mr Jack submitted that the judge's decision
    was correct in law; there was  no  irrationality  or  perversity.   The
    judge had the  GCID  record  sheet  before  him.   He  considered  this
    document and the subsequent letter from the bank and there was no error
    of law in his approach when considering what weight to  give  to  these
    documents.  There was no allegation of forgery and therefore no general
    paragraph 322 grounds of refusal so there was  nothing  to  stop  these
    appellants reapplying, if indeed they  had  verifiable  evidence  which
    they were able to produce.  Further, because this  was  a  PBS  appeal,
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act applied and subsequent evidence such as the
    later letter from the bank was not admissible in this appeal.

14. In reply  Mr  Bellara  submitted  that  although  the  judge  may  have
    "considered" the subsequent letter he really ought to  have  given  the
    document closer consideration.  If documents were  produced  after  the
    hearing which may be verifiable then the appellant should have  had  an
    opportunity of having that document verified.

Discussion

15. In my judgment the determination of Judge Khan, while  short,  did  not
    contain any error of law; I set out my reasons  below  and  shall  also
    deal briefly with the submissions which were made.  I consider it right
    that I deal first of all with the submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent  that  by  virtue  of  Section  85A  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the subsequent letter from the bank was
    not admissible.  The starting point is Section  82  which  provides  as
    follows:

         "82. Right of Appeal: General

             (1)  Where an immigration decision is made  in  respect  of  a
                  person he may appeal to the Tribunal.

             (2)  In this part "immigration decision" means - ...

                  (d)  refusal to vary a person's leave to enter  or  remain
                      in the United Kingdom if the result of the refusal is
                      that the person has no leave to enter or remain."

16. It is accordingly clear that because this is  an  immigration  decision
    pursuant to Section 82(2)(d) the appellants may  appeal.   This  appeal
    has to be brought on one of the grounds set out  in  Section  84(1)  of
    which the relevant parts provide as follows:

         "84. Grounds of appeal

             (1)  An appeal under  Section  82(1)  against  an  immigration
                  decision must be brought on one or more of  the  following
                  grounds -

                  (a)   that  the  decision  is  not  in   accordance   with
                      Immigration Rules;

                       ...

                  (e)  that the decision is otherwise not in accordance with
                      the law;

                  (f)  that the  person  taking  the  decision  should  have
                      exercised  differently  a  discretion  conferred   by
                      Immigration Rules...".

17. The matters to be considered are then set out in Section  85  of  which
    the relevant parts provide as follows:

         "85. Matters to be considered

             (1)  An appeal under Section 82(1) against the decision  shall
                  be treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal  against
                  any decision in respect of which the appellant has a right
                  of appeal under Section 82(1).

             ...

             (4)  On an appeal under Section 82(1) ... against  a  decision
                  the Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter  which
                  it thinks relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
                  including evidence which concerns a matter  arising  after
                  the date of decision.

             (5)  But sub-Section (4)  is  subject  to  the  exceptions  in
                  Section 85A."

18. The relevant provisions of Section 85A are as follows:

         "85A.    Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions

              (1) This section sets out the exceptions mentioned in Section
                  85(5).

              ...

              (3) Exception (2) applies to an appeal under Section 82(1) if
                  -

                  (a)  the appeal is against an immigration decision of  the
                      kind specified in Section 82(2)(a) or (d),

                  (b)  the immigration decision concerned an application  of
                      a kind identified in Immigration Rules  as  requiring
                      to be considered under a "points-based system", and

                  (c)   the  appeal  relies  wholly  or  partly  on  grounds
                      specified in 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).

             (4)  Where exception (2) applies  the  Tribunal  may  consider
                  evidence adduced by the appellant only if it -

                  (a)  was submitted in support of, at the time  of  making,
                      the application to  which  the  immigration  decision
                      related,

                  (b)  relates to the appeal insofar as it relies on grounds
                      other than those specified in sub-Section (3)(c),

                  (c)  is adduced to prove that a  document  is  genuine  or
                      valid, or

                  (d)  is  adduced  in  connection  with  the  Secretary  of
                      State's reliance on a  discretion  under  Immigration
                      Rules,  or  compliance  with   the   requirement   of
                      Immigration  Rules,  to  refuse  an  application   on
                      grounds not related to the  acquisition  of  'points'
                      under the 'points-based system'...."

19. This is an  appeal  brought  under  Section  82(1)  in  respect  of  an
    immigration decision as defined in Section 82(2)(d) and this is also an
    appeal which is subject to the provisions of Section 84.   The  grounds
    of appeal are indeed that the decision is not in  accordance  with  the
    Rules (as provided under Section 84(1)(a)) or alternatively that it  is
    otherwise  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  (an  argument  advanced
    forcefully before me at this hearing by Mr Bellara) as  provided  under
    Section 84(1)(e).  It is accordingly necessary to consider what is  set
    out within Section 85(4) and (5) which is effectively that although the
    Tribunal may consider any evidence relevant to  the  substance  of  the
    decision including evidence concerning a matter arising after the  date
    of decision this is subject to  the  exception  in  Section  85A.   The
    exception that is relevant in this  case  would  be  exception  (2)  as
    provided by Section 85A(3) because this is an immigration  decision  of
    the kind specified in Section  82(2)(d)  being  a  refusal  to  vary  a
    person's leave.  It is a decision concerning an application of  a  kind
    identified in the Rules as requiring to be considered under the points-
    based system and the appeal also relies wholly or partly on the grounds
    specified in Section 84(1)(a) and (e).  For this reason the  provisions
    of Section 84A(4) bite and accordingly the Tribunal may  only  consider
    evidence adduced by the appellants if:

    (a)  it was submitted in support of and  at  the  time  of  making  the
         application (which was not the case in respect  of  the  subsequent
         letter), or

    (b)  it relates to the appeal insofar as it  relies  on  grounds  other
         than those specified in Section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f) (which is  not
         the case here), or

    (c)  it is adduced to produce that  a  document  is  genuine  or  valid
         (which is the key question here), or

    (d)  is adduced in connection with the respondent's reliance on  either
         a  discretion  under  Immigration  Rules  or  compliance  with  the
         requirement to refuse an application on grounds not related to  the
         acquisition of points.

    This does not apply in this case either.

20. The basis upon which Mr Jack on behalf of the respondent asserted  that
    the subsequent evidence should not be admitted is  that  this  evidence
    could not properly be said to  have  been  adduced  to  prove  that  "a
    document is genuine or valid" and that is the only basis upon which the
    subsequent evidence would be admissible.  When asked as to what was the
    difference between "genuine" and "valid" Mr Jack submitted that while a
    document that was not genuine obviously would not be valid either,  the
    term "valid" was wider  because  it  included  documents  which,  while
    genuine, did not satisfy requirements  under  the  Rules,  for  example
    because they did not cover the specified period.  So for example, where
    an  applicant  under  the  points-based  system  (which  covered   many
    applications other than applications in the category under which  these
    appellants were applying) was required to provide bank statements for a
    particular period, a document provided might be genuine but because  it
    did not cover the necessary periods would not be "valid".

21. I asked Mr Jack whether or not this category  could  therefore  include
    genuine documents which should be treated as not valid because they had
    not been "verifiable" to which he replied that the  words  "verifiable"
    and "valid" were treated differently in the Rules but he could not take
    this argument any further at this time.

22. Without hearing more considered argument on this point, in light of  my
    other findings below, I do not consider it is necessary for me to reach
    any definitive conclusion as to whether or not  the  use  of  the  word
    "valid" is sufficiently wide to include "verifiable".   Accordingly,  I
    make it clear that for the purposes of this determination only and  not
    because I am making a formal finding to  this  effect  which  might  be
    relied upon by other applicants in other cases, I  will  consider  this
    appeal on the basis that the subsequent letter from  the  bank  at  the
    very least might be admissible.  On this basis I now turn  to  consider
    Judge Khan's determination.

23. Although brief, in  my  judgment  this  determination  is  sufficiently
    reasoned to  satisfy  the  requirements  that  a  determination  should
    contain within  it  sufficient  findings  to  enable  both  parties  to
    understand the basis upon which the decision was reached.

24. Judge Khan  considered  all  the  evidence  put  before  him  and  gave
    considerable weight to the fact that the respondent had  made  attempts
    to verify the information provided but had been unable to  do  so.   He
    also gave consideration to the subsequent letter provided by  the  bank
    but the weight he gave this letter was not great because as he noted it
    was mostly in similar terms to the earlier letter provided and made  no
    reference to any enquiries which had been made by the respondent.

25. I have considered whether it is implicit in his then stating that  this
    letter could be used in any fresh application the appellants may choose
    to make that he did not consider it in the  present  appeal,  but  have
    concluded that this cannot be implied.  In my judgment he did  consider
    this evidence and gave it the weight he considered appropriate for  the
    reasons which he gave.

26. I note that when granting  permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fisher stated at paragraph 4 that "it is arguable that the  judge
    erred in law in concluding that the fact that the  respondent  had  not
    been able to verify the bank letter should weigh  heavily  against  the
    appellants,  especially  when  there  was  apparently  no  evidence  in
    support"  and  that  "there  would  certainly  have  been  insufficient
    evidence to substantiate an allegation of fraud" but having  considered
    this argument I find that he did not err in law in so concluding.  What
    weight to attach to particular pieces of evidence were  for  the  judge
    and there is no obligation on the  respondent  to  provide  details  of
    confidential enquiries she or those working for her undertake in  order
    to verify documents which have been produced.  In order to  operate  an
    effective system of immigration control the respondent must  from  time
    to time keep her sources confidential and while there may be  cases  in
    which a judge finds on the facts that even though the respondent claims
    to have been unable to verify a document, that document was nonetheless
    verifiable,  it is for a judge to decide on a case-by-case  basis  what
    weight to place on evidence that despite trying to verify a  particular
    document, the respondent has been unable to do so.  This is not a  case
    where the requirements of fairness include a requirement  to  make  the
    system more complicated.  In this case,  the  respondent  put  evidence
    before the Tribunal that she had attempted to verify the documents  and
    had been unable to do so and on the  basis  of  this  evidence,  having
    taken into account the further evidence provided by the appellants, the
    judge found and was entitled to find that the material provided was not
    verifiable.  It follows that this appeal must be  dismissed  and  I  so
    order.



Decision

There being no error of law in Judge Khan's  determination  the  appellants'
appeal is dismissed.



Signed:

[pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                        Date: 11 August 2014


