
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/01016/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 April 2019                          |On 24 April 2019                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                  SOFIA IDD
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Alastair Mackenzie, Counsel instructed by TRP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal from  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (which was promulgated on or about 20  March
    2017) on the ground that it is arguable that, in  failing  to  consider
    whether her appeal against the  refusal  of  ILR  could  be  determined
    fairly and justly without her husband being given the opportunity to be
    heard,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  denied  the   appellant   the
    opportunity of a full and fair hearing.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Somalia,  whose  date  of  birth  is  10
    October 1982.  On 8 February 2009  she  married  her  husband,  Hussain
    Hassan, in Uganda.  At the time, Mr Hasan was a Somali national who had
    been granted refugee status in the UK.  Mr Hassan has  since  become  a
    British citizen.

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK from Uganda on 18  November  2011  with
    valid entry clearance as the spouse of a person of a person present and
    settled here.  On 27 December 2012 she applied for leave to remain as a
    spouse. As evidence that she met the English language requirement,  she
    submitted a TOEIC certificate in speaking and  listening  from  ETS  in
    respect of a test purportedly undertaken by her at a test centre on  16
    October 2012. She was granted further leave to remain as a spouse until
    8 March 2015.  On 30 July 2014 the  appellant  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as a spouse.

 4. On 10 February 2016 the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    ("the Department") gave their reasons for refusing her application.  In
    an interview of 14 September  2015  (the  transcript  of  which  is  in
    Section D of the Home Office bundle) she had  explained  that  she  was
    aware that part of her TOEIC test on 16 October 2012 had been completed
    on her behalf.  She had failed to inform the authorities of  this,  and
    so she had admitted that there was  an  element  of  deception  in  her
    acquisition of the TOEIC certificate.

 5. ETS had a record  of  her  speaking  test.   Using  voice  verification
    software, ETS was able to detect when a single person  was  undertaking
    multiple tests.  ETS had via the  use  of  computer  voice  recognition
    software, and a further human review by anti-fraud staff, undertaken  a
    check of her test and had confirmed to the Department  that  there  was
    significant evidence to conclude that her certificate was  fraudulently
    obtained by the use of a proxy test-taker.  Her scores  from  the  test
    taken on 16 October 2012 at BIETTEC had now been cancelled by  ETS.  On
    the basis of information provided by ETS, the Department was  satisfied
    that the certificate was fraudulently obtained and that  she  had  used
    deception in her application of 27 December 2012.

 6. Accordingly, the Department was satisfied that her presence in  the  UK
    was not conducive to the public  good,  because  her  conduct  made  it
    undesirable to allow her to remain in the UK.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Birk sitting at Birmingham  on
    8 March 2017.  Both  parties  were  legally  represented.   Mr  "Y"  is
    described  in  the  Judge's   decision   as   the   appellant's   Legal
    Representative, but he was apparently a Barrister. In any  event,  that
    was how he introduced  himself  to  the  appellant,  according  to  her
    witness statement served with the application for permission to appeal.
    Mr  Y  was  engaged  by  the  appellant's  solicitors  to  present  the
    appellant's case at the hearing before the Judge. He presented  to  the
    Judge a typed skeleton argument in which he said that evidence had just
    emerged of "Mr Idd" suffering a stroke prior to  the  hearing,  and  in
    which he invited the Judge to exercise discretion in the Article 8 ECHR
    proportionality assessment, "given the impact a refusal could  have  on
    the family following Mr Idd's deteriorating health".

 8. The bundle of documents filed by the  appellant's  solicitors  for  the
    hearing included an unsigned witness statement from Mr Hassan.  In this
    witness statement, Mr Hassan said that his spouse  was  a  genuine  and
    honest person.  When she had sat the TOEIC test he thought that finally
    she could apply for leave to remain and they could continue their lives
    as  a  couple  without  constantly  worrying  about   her   immigration
    situation.  He believed that his wife was proficient  in  English,  and
    the fact that she had obtained many certificates, including Life in the
    UK, further highlighted her ability to pass exams in English.

 9. At paragraph [4] of his subsequent decision, Judge Birk said:

         "The Appellant's husband  ...  had  provided  an  unsigned  witness
         statement and was intending to attend the hearing as a  witness  in
         support of the Appellant. The medical documentation  shows  he  was
         admitted to hospital  on  2.3.17  and  was  unable  to  attend  any
         meetings or appointments in the coming weeks.  The medical evidence
         is that he has had a stroke and will be unable to be fit  for  work
         for 6 weeks.  On that basis I do place some weight on his  evidence
         even though the statement is unsigned  and  he  cannot  attend  the
         hearing due to an unforeseen medical emergency."

10. The appellant was called as a witness, and she adopted as her  evidence
    in chief her signed witness statement.  She confirmed that she sat  the
    TOEIC test as a genuine student.  She had received two papers back from
    the test centre.  The aspect of the TOEIC that she had  sat  and  which
    she had submitted to  the  Home  Office  was  genuinely  done  by  her.
    Anything that was not done by her she did not acknowledge, as  she  was
    an honest person.

11. Mr Y asked her supplementary questions about her taking  of  the  test.
    According to paragraph [8] of the Judge's decision, she said  that  she
    had taken the test over two days.  She had taken Speaking and Listening
    on the first day, and on the second day she had embarked on  a  Writing
    test, but had not been allowed to complete it.  She had answered 1 or 2
    questions and then had left.  She was  subsequently  given  three  test
    results.  She had taken the first and second results, but had ripped up
    the third one in front of the  Receptionist.   She  had  submitted  the
    Speaking, Listening and Writing test results, but had not submitted the
    Reading test result.

12. In cross-examination, she repeated that the test had  been  taken  over
    two days.  The Writing test was on the second day.  When  she  went  to
    collect her results, the Receptionist told her that she  had  an  A  in
    Writing and a B in Reading.

13. At paragraphs [16] to [18], the Judge gave his reasons for finding that
    the Department had discharged both the  legal  and  evidential  burdens
    placed upon them to show that the appellant had deliberately  presented
    a false document.  The appellant had provided detailed evidence at  the
    hearing that the test took place over two  days.   She  confirmed  this
    several times in the course of her evidence.  But, in her interview she
    said it took one day, and the test results also set out the date of the
    test as being 16 October 2012.  As she had stated in her interview  and
    at the hearing, the appellant was aware that there was some wrong-doing
    at the test centre.   She said (in her witness statement) that when she
    went back to the college, they had given her two "papers",  whereas  in
    her oral evidence she stated that she was given  three  "papers".   The
    Judge held that her account had significant discrepancies  and  so  she
    had not provided a credible or plausible explanation.

14. The Judge went on to address Article 8 ECHR.  He found there was family
    life between the appellant and Mr Hassan.  He had suffered a stroke and
    it was not clear at the moment what his medical requirements were going
    to be; and whether or  not  these  could  be  met  elsewhere.   He  was
    therefore unable to conclude that the appellant was required to  remain
    in the UK to look after him. The Judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

Subsequent Developments

15. No application for permission to appeal was made within the time limit.
     Instead, her solicitors advised her to make further submissions to the
    Department for leave to remain, which was done on 27 July  2017.   But,
    the Department refused to treat them as a fresh claim and  so  rejected
    them on that basis.  This decision was communicated to the  appellant's
    solicitors on 8 November 2018.

16. The appellant instructed new solicitors, who made a formal complaint to
    her previous solicitors in a letter dated 5  December  2018,  which  Mr
    Mackenzie produced at my request, together with  the  response  to  the
    complaint.  The formal complaint asserted that the previous  solicitors
    had provided inadequate professional services by failing to  apply  for
    an adjournment of the hearing on 8 March 2017, and by failing to  apply
    for permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision to dismiss the appeal.

17. On 19 December 2018 Mr Mackenzie settled an application for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the  ground  that  the  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal were unfair because the  hearing  should
    have been adjourned after the appellant's husband had been admitted  to
    hospital.  He also sought an extension of time on the  basis  that  the
    appellant was wrongly advised by her then solicitors to  make  a  fresh
    application, instead of seeking permission to appeal.

18. On 8 January 2019, First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird gave her reasons  for
    extending time and granting permission to appeal.  She found  that  the
    delay in appealing  might  well  be  the  fault  of  her  former  legal
    representatives, who did not provide her with  the  right  advice.  She
    granted permission to appeal on the ground set  out  in  Paragraph  [1]
    above.

19. By letter dated 10 January  2019,  the  appellant's  former  solicitors
    responded to the complaint.  On the matter of seeking adjournment, they
    said that they were instructed by the  appellant  that  she  wished  to
    proceed with the hearing, in her own words,  "to  get  it  over  with".
    Also, on the day of the hearing, when asked how she felt, she said that
    she was fine as she did not believe that she had done  anything  wrong.
    Moreover, a solicitor was only allowed to seek an adjournment, where he
    did not have the consent of the lay client to do so, if  the  solicitor
    genuinely believed that the lay client lacked  capacity  to  act.   The
    appellant clearly had capacity at the time she instructed the  firm  to
    continue with the hearing.  A solicitor was also under a  duty  not  to
    mislead the Court in accordance with the Code of Conduct under the  SRA
    Guidance.

20. It would have clearly disadvantaged the appellant if they  had  advised
    her to seek an adjournment solely  based  upon  her  partner  having  a
    stroke - especially as there was no  update  on  the  severity  of  his
    stroke.  The chances of success would have been greatly  diminished  if
    her husband made a reasonable recovery or even died  from  his  stroke.
    The appellant would have failed the Article 8 aspect of  her  claim  if
    her partner had passed away, or if he had made a reasonable recovery by
    the time of the next hearing being listed.  Therefore,  to  state  that
    they had not served the appellant's best interests was nonsensical.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. At the outset of the hearing before me to determine whether an error of
    law was made out, Mr Mackenzie produced the complaint and the  response
    at my request.  After reviewing their contents, Mr Whitwell applied for
    an adjournment on the ground that  the  issue  of  procedural  fairness
    could  not  be  fairly  determined  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  until  an
    appropriate body had ruled on the  question  of  whether  the  previous
    solicitors had been negligent in failing to give the appellant  correct
    advice or in failing to seek an adjournment.   After  hearing  from  Mr
    Mackenzie, I ruled against the grant of an adjournment for two reasons.

22. Firstly, the grant of permission to appeal had not been contingent upon
    the  complaint  against  the  previous  solicitors  being  made   good.
    Secondly, Mr Mackenzie  clarified  that  he  was  not  relying  on  the
    asserted negligence of the  previous  solicitors  for  the  purpose  of
    making good the submission that, as he put it in the grounds of appeal,
    "[i]t is obvious from the face of the FtT judgment that the hearing was
    unfair."

23. In line  with  paragraph  17  of  the  pleaded  grounds,  Mr  Mackenzie
    submitted that there were three "obvious" reasons why Mr  Hassan's  ill
    health affected the proceedings, and hence why  the  hearing  ought  to
    have been adjourned.  The first was the obvious prospect that he  might
    need the appellant's care and attention in the UK following his stroke.
     Secondly, her concern for her husband would inevitably be uppermost in
    the appellant's mind and so had the potential at least  to  affect  the
    quality of her evidence.  Thirdly, Mr Hassan's evidence was capable  of
    corroborating  the  appellant's  account  on  the  factual  matters  in
    dispute, including whether she had used deception  as  alleged  by  the
    Department.

24. In support of the case that there had been no procedural unfairness, Mr
    Whitwell  produced  the  Presenting  Officer's  typed  record  of   the
    proceedings, which I arranged to have copied.   He  submitted  that  in
    circumstances where no adjournment had been requested, the Judge  would
    have been criticised for unilaterally  adjourning  the  appeal  for  an
    uncertain period, when there was no specific date for when the  husband
    would be fit to attend.  In any event, the husband's view of his wife's
    English language ability was irrelevant,  as  he  was  not  an  expert.
    Moreover, as shown by the case of MA (Nigeria), people used proxy test-
    takers even when they had the ability to pass the test.

Discussion

25. As submitted by Mr Mackenzie, fairness is an objective test, and it  is
    not to be determined solely on the basis of what  the  lower  court  or
    tribunal knew at any  given  time.  Also,  where  the  solicitors  make
    errors, the client in an immigration case  is  "not  necessarily  fixed
    with her or his solicitors' errors in seeking to  oppose  removal  from
    the United Kingdom, at least  when  the  client  has  been  in  no  way
    responsible for them": R v IAT ex parte Tofik [2003] EWCA Civ  1138  at
    [25].

26. In MM (Unfairness: E&R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC), which is one  of
    the authorities drawn to my attention by  Mr  Mackenzie,  the  Tribunal
    affirmed that a successful appeal is not dependent on the demonstration
    of some failing on the part of the FtT.  An error of law may  be  found
    to have occurred in circumstances where some material evidence, through
    no fault of the FtT, was not considered, with resulting unfairness. The
    authorities discussed in MM include E&R -v- SSHD [2004]  EWCA  Civ  49,
    and R -v- Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, Ex-parte A  [1999]  2AC
    330.  At paragraph [63] of E&R, Carnwath LJ said:

         "In our view, the CICB case points to the way to a separate  ground
         of review, based on the principle of fairness ...   the  unfairness
         arose from the combination of five factors:

                      i) An erroneous impression created by mistake as  to,
                         or ignorance of, a relevant fact (availability  of
                         reliable evidence to support her case);

                     ii) The fact was "established" in the sense  that,  it
                         attention had been drawn to the point, the correct
                         position could have been shown  by  objective  and
                         uncontentious evidence;

                    iii) The Claimant could not fairly be held  responsible
                         for the error;

                     iv) Although there was no duty on the Board itself, or
                         the police, to do the Claimant's work  of  proving
                         her  case,  all  the  participants  had  a  shared
                         interest in cooperating  to  achieve  the  correct
                         result;

                      v)  The mistaken impression played a material part in
                         the reasoning."

27. Mr Mackenzie does not put the case on an E&R basis, but the  principles
    developed in the E&R line of jurisprudence are helpful in  testing  the
    case as it is put in the grounds of appeal. On analysis, there are  two
    threads to it. The first thread is that behind the  scenes,  and  hence
    unknown to the Judge, the appellant was  inadequately  advised  by  her
    solicitors, with the consequence that an adjournment of the hearing was
    not sought, as it ought to have  been.  There  is  a  dispute  of  fact
    between the appellant and the solicitors as to  the  exchanges  between
    them which took place before the hearing. However, I am not required to
    attempt to resolve this dispute, as Mr Mackenzie does not rely on  this
    first thread as establishing that the hearing was unfair.

28.  The  second  thread  is  that,  irrespective  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's legal representatives did not  apply  for  an  adjournment,
    fairness demanded that the Judge should have adjourned the  hearing  on
    his own motion.

29. To make good this case, Mr Mackenzie does not  rely  on  any  evidence,
    whether contentious or uncontentious, which was not before  the  Judge,
    with the arguable exception of the appellant's evidence in her  witness
    statement that when giving evidence, "[m]y mind was of course  occupied
    with thoughts of my husband". But  even  this  is  said  to  have  been
    obviously foreseeable by the Judge, and hence one of  the  reasons  why
    fairness demanded that he adjourn the hearing of his own motion.

Whether material evidence not taken into account

30. Since the Judge did not exclude Mr Hassan's  evidence  on  the  grounds
    that his witness  statement  was  unsigned,  it  cannot  be  said  that
    material evidence relevant to the appeal  was  not  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge specifically stated that he  was  going
    to attach some weight to his  evidence,  and  there  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that he did not do so.  Mr Hassan did  not  condescend  to  any
    detail in his witness statement to the  circumstances  surrounding  his
    wife's  taking  of  the  test,  and  he  did  not  purport  to  comment
    specifically on her level of ability at the  time  when  the  test  was
    taken. Her evidence at interview was that she had not done any  English
    Language course preparatory to taking the TOEIC test, and Mr Hassan did
    not gainsay this in  his  witness  statement.   He  affirmed  that  the
    appellant was proficient in English and able to pass exams in  English.
    But objectively this added  nothing  to  what  was  apparent  from  the
    documents contained in the appellant's bundle, which  showed  that  the
    appellant had passed various exams in English some years later.

31. It is arguable that the Judge implicitly  placed  less  weight  on  the
    evidence of Mr Hassan than he would have done if Mr Hassan had attended
    in person, but objectively Mr Hassan's evidence on the  core  issue  of
    deception was of little inherent probative value.

Whether the quality of the appellant's evidence was affected

32. Mr Mackenzie submits that concern  for  her  husband  would  have  been
    uppermost in the appellant's mind and this had the potential  at  least
    to affect  the  quality  of  her  evidence.  However,  in  her  witness
    statement for the appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the appellant does  not
    actually claim that the discrepancies in her oral  evidence  identified
    by the Judge came about  because  she  was  not  concentrating  on  the
    questions which were being put to her.

33. In her witness statement for the hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the appellant had the opportunity to provide  a  clear  and  considered
    narrative of the precise chain of events that led up to her  submitting
    a TOEIC certificate in December 2012 as evidence  of  her  meeting  the
    English Language requirement, encompassing the details  which  she  had
    given in her interview and filling in any  gaps  that  her  answers  in
    interview had not covered.  But not only did the appellant not  purport
    to give any account at all of the taking of the  test  in  her  witness
    statement, even now she has not sought to give  a  clear  and  coherent
    account of the taking of the test and her subsequent dealings with  the
    test centre.

34. The consequence is that the appellant has not made out a case that  the
    quality of her oral evidence was affected  by  her  being  pre-occupied
    with thoughts of her husband; or that the Judge ought to have adjourned
    the hearing of his own motion in anticipation of such a problem.

Whether the husband's uncertain prognosis demanded an adjournment

35. It was not at all obvious that an adjournment was required in order  to
    obtain medical evidence as to Mr Hassan's prognosis in  the  medium  or
    long term.  On the medical evidence available to the Judge,  there  was
    (as the Judge acknowledged)  a  wide  spectrum  of  possible  outcomes,
    ranging from a complete recovery  to  the  possibility  that  he  might
    require the appellant's presence in the UK to look after him.  I do not
    consider that fairness demanded  that  the  Judge  should  adjourn  the
    appeal hearing of his own motion on the basis that the  issues  in  the
    appeal could not be fairly determined without it being established what
    the medium-term or long-term prognosis was.  In any event, since it  is
    not the appellant's case on appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  the
    medium-term or long-term prognosis is bleak, it is not shown  that  the
    Judge was mistaken in finding that  Mr  Hassan's  medical  requirements
    "can be met elsewhere" or that the appellant is not required to  remain
    in the UK in order to look after him.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 16 April 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

