
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01782/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2013                             |On 30 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                             niaz mohammad nipun

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M M Islam (London Law Associates)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 28 January 1991.

2.   The appellant was granted leave to enter the UK as a Tier 4 Student  on
    7 July 2009 until 31 January 2012.  It is the appellant's case that  he
    completed a level 5 Diploma in Business Management Studies in  December
    2011 and undertook a further  level  6  course.   He  applied,  on  his
    account, prior to the expiry of his leave at the end  of  January  2012
    for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.  This application  was
    returned as invalid by the respondent on 28 February 2012.  Sections of
    the form designated as mandatory had not been completed and photographs
    did not accompany the application form.

3.   The appellant re-submitted the application on 26 March 2012  satisfying
    all the requirements of the Rules.  He did not  send  his  latest  bank
    statements as he assumed that the matters would  be  considered  as  at
    January 2012.

4.   The Secretary of State refused the application on 25  October  2012  on
    maintenance  grounds  as  the  closing  date  of  the  bank  statements
    submitted in support of his application were dated 19 January 2012  and
    therefore were more than one month prior to his application date on  26
    March 2012.  As he had made his application on 26 March  2012  and  his
    leave had expired on 31 January 2012 he had no right of appeal  against
    the decision not having leave to remain at the relevant time.

5.   Undaunted, the appellant sought to appeal,  somewhat  belatedly  on  11
    January 2013 against this decision.  At that stage it was thought  that
    the initial application had been rejected as invalid because of the non-
    payment of a fee and the onus of proof lay on the Secretary of State to
    show that the correct fee was not paid: Basnet [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC).

6.   The matter came before a First-tier Judge on  9  April  2013.   It  was
    argued that the appellant  had  a  right  of  appeal,  given  that  his
    application had been made during the period of his  leave.   Among  the
    arguments relied upon was that the Home  Office  had  acknowledged  his
    earlier application on 5 February 2012 and had  advised  the  appellant
    that if there was any problem with  the  validity  of  the  application
    "such as missing documentation or omissions on the form" a case  worker
    would write to the appellant as soon as possible to advise what  action
    needed to be taken to rectify the problem.  He was told that  enquiries
    should not be made about the progress of  the  application  before  the
    appellant heard from the Home Office.  Reliance was placed on Rodriguez
    [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC).  It emerged at the hearing that the reason for
    the rejection of the initial application was not due to the non-payment
    of  fees  but  because  of  defects  in  the  application  form.    The
    appellant's representative only discovered  the  real  reason  for  the
    invalidity of the application on the day of the hearing.   Nevertheless
    the appellant's representative submitted that the appellant had a right
    of appeal as his initial application was made in time,  relying  on  JH
    (Zimbabwe) [2009] EWCA Civ 78 where it  had  been  held  that  a  later
    application was capable of being treated as a variation  of  the  first
    application.  Moreover  the  Home  Office  should  have  contacted  the
    appellant for further documents in the light of its policy as indicated
    in Rodriguez.  The Home Office was under a  public  law  duty  to  give
    effect to the policy.
7.   The judge did not find that the further application  could  be  treated
    as a variation.  It had been accepted that non-payment of fees was  not
    the basis  of  the  rejection  of  the  appellant's  application.   The
    appellant accordingly had no right of appeal.  There were doubts as  to
    whether the appellant was indeed studying at the  time  he  varied  his
    application.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted on  25  June  2013.   A  response  was
    filed on 15 July 2013 contending that the First-tier Judge had directed
    herself appropriately.

9.   At the hearing before me Mr Islam relied on paragraph  9  of  Rodriguez
    which referred to a validation stage being trialled whereby  applicants
    were contacted where mandatory  evidence  was  missing  and  given  the
    opportunity to provide it before their application was  rejected.   The
    Tribunal found that the policy was an  "unambiguous  statement  to  the
    effect that during a 'validation stage' applicants  will  be  contacted
    where evidence was missing from their applications and  will  be  given
    the opportunity to provide such evidence before  a  rejection  decision
    was made." The Tribunal was critical about the failure of  the  parties
    to produce evidence about the policy.  It considered that a Home Office
    letter "heralded unequivocally  the  introduction  of  a  new  practice
    whereby all applicants would be notified of the  absence  of  mandatory
    evidence from their applications and would be given the opportunity  to
    rectify the relevant shortcoming prior to rejection."

10.  Mr Islam also referred to the fact that the  appellant  had  been  sent
    the letter to which I have made reference on 5 February 2012 concerning
    any problems with the application  such  as  missing  documentation  or
    omissions on the form.  The appellant had not been contacted.  When the
    form had been returned it had  simply  been  re-sent.   Mr  Islam  also
    referred to Naved (student - fairness  -  notice  of  points)  Pakistan
    [2012] UKUT 00014 (IAC).  "Fairness required the Secretary of State  to
    give an applicant an opportunity to address grounds for refusal,  which
    he did not know and could not have known...".

11.  Ms Horsley submitted that it was for the appellant  to  show  that  the
    policy applied at the material time.  The application had been rejected
    as invalid because mandatory  information  had  not  been  included  in
    accordance  with  paragraph  34A  of  HC  395.   The  30  January  2012
    application  was  invalid  because  it  did   not   include   mandatory
    information.  The appellant had not made  out  his  case.   The  second
    application had been made out of time.  She acknowledged  that  if  the
    case of Rodriguez applied the matter would  have  to  go  back  to  the
    Secretary of State to reach a fresh decision.

12.  It is in my view, as I said at the hearing,  difficult  to  distinguish
    the circumstances from Rodriquez  where  the  appellant  had  made  her
    application on the same date as the appellant - 31 January 2012.   Just
    as in the case of the appellant she had  received  a  letter  from  the
    respondent saying that a case worker would write  to  her  as  soon  as
    possible if there was any problem with the validity of the  application
    such as missing documentation.  Unlike her case  that  letter  was  not
    produced although similar letters were produced.

13.  I do not see how  the  case  of  Rodriguez  can  be  distinguished  and
    insofar as there is an onus on the appellant to  bring  himself  within
    the ambit of the facts of that case in my view he  has  discharged  it.
    He was given a letter which appears to be evidence of the existence  of
    the policy and instead of him being contacted as the  letter  suggested
    the application was simply refused.  I appreciate  that  the  appellant
    was under the impression that the initial application had been  refused
    on a different basis but of course had the policy been complied with he
    would have been notified about the true basis for the failings  and  he
    would have been able to rectify them promptly and the application would
    have been treated as being continuous, made in  time,  and  carrying  a
    right of appeal.

14.  It appears clear that in  the  light  of  Rodriguez  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was unlawful and the application remained  outstanding
    - see paragraph 17 and 27 of Rodriguez

15.  The decision of the First-tier Judge was flawed by a material error  of
    law.  I re-make it.  The appeal is allowed as indicated.





Signed                                  Date 30 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
