
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01187/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 18 December 2018                 |On 9 January 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           mujeeb mohammed ismail
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 10 May 1977. He has  been
      given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Kimnell dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  decision
      to refuse his human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in March 2011 with  leave  to
      enter as a student valid until 28 June 2013. He  was  granted  further
      leave to remain as a student until 11 September 2014. On 31 March 2015
      he applied for leave to remain on private life grounds.

   3. The appellant's application was refused in a decision dated 29 January
      2016. The respondent considered that the appellant failed to meet  the
      suitability requirements in paragraph S-LTR.1.6 as his presence in the
      UK was not conducive to the public good because his  conduct  made  it
      undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK. The relevant conduct was
      fraudulently  obtaining  a  TOEIC  certificate  and   thus   willingly
      participating in an organised and serious attempt to defraud the  Home
      Office and  others.  The  respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  had
      submitted, with his application of 28 June 2013, a  TOEIC  certificate
      from the Educational Testing Service (ETS) in relation to  an  English
      language test taken  at  Stanfords  College  on  24  April  2013.  The
      respondent had been informed by ETS that a proxy test taker  had  been
      used and that they had declared the appellant's test result as invalid
      and cancelled it. The appellant  was  therefore  unable  to  meet  the
      requirements  in  paragraph  276ADE(1).  The   respondent   considered
      further, and in any event, that there were no significant obstacles to
      the  appellant's  integration  in  India  and  that  there   were   no
      exceptional circumstances justifying a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      immigration rules.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  on
      27  February  2018  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell.  He  was
      represented at the appeal by Mr Paramjorthy of Counsel. The judge  was
      satisfied that the appellant had sought to obtain leave  by  deception
      through the use of  a  fraudulently  obtained  English  language  test
      certificate provided  by  ETS,  but  did  not  accept  that  that  was
      sufficient in itself to justify the view that his presence in  the  UK
      was not conducive to the public good. The judge  considered  that  the
      appellant could not,  however,  meet  the  requirements  in  paragraph
      276ADE(1)  as  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
      integration in India. The judge went on to consider Article 8  outside
      the immigration rules, taking account at [36] of the  public  interest
      factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002. At  [37]  he  said  that  "as  Mr  Paramjorthy  was  obliged  to
      acknowledge, on the evidence there is little to  show  any  meaningful
      private life in the UK since the appellant has no home of his own here
      and not in employment, whereas he does have family in India  and....".
      The  judge  concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not   a
      disproportionate interference with the appellant's  Article  8  rights
      and he dismissed the appeal.

   5. An application was made on behalf of the appellant for  permission  to
      appeal the judge's decision to the Upper Tribunal, on  three  grounds.
      Firstly that it was procedurally wrong for the judge to make a finding
      against the appellant in regards to him having  engaged  in  deception
      when he was not questioned about the TOEIC test  owing  to  the  judge
      making it clear that the  respondent's  allegation  of  deception  was
      untenable in the absence of the specific evidence  demonstrating  that
      he had used a proxy test taker. Secondly that the judge had  erred  in
      law in finding that the respondent was  correct  in  noting  that  the
      appellant did not meet the suitability criterion and  that  the  judge
      failed adequately to engage with the insurmountable obstacles  to  the
      appellant returning to India.  Thirdly  that  the  judge  had  made  a
      material mistake of fact in that Counsel had  never  stated  that  the
      appellant had not developed a meaningful private life in the UK.

   6. Permission was initially refused in the First-tier  Tribunal  but  was
      then granted in the Upper Tribunal in light of  a  statement  from  Mr
      Paramjorthy. It was asserted in that statement that Judge Kimnell  had
      made an inadvertent procedural error as he had specifically stated  in
      open court that the  respondent  could  not  sensibly  rely  upon  his
      allegation of deception in the absence of specific evidence supporting
      the contention that the appellant had used deception and, furthermore,
      he had mispresented  Counsel's  submission  at  [37].  Permission  was
      granted on the basis that if Counsel was correct  and  the  judge  had
      misunderstood  his  submissions  making   the   concessions   on   the
      appellant's private life in the UK, then  it  was  arguable  that  the
      judge's procedural error in indicating that the respondent's  evidence
      did not show that the appellant had cheated in  his  English  test  so
      that Counsel did not ask  him  questions  about  the  test,  would  be
      material.

   7. Following the grant  of  permission,  Judge  Kimnell  was  invited  to
      comment on the grounds and he did so in a note dated 6 November 2018.

   8. At the hearing before me  it  was  agreed  by  the  parties  that  the
      Presenting  Officer's  note  of  the  proceedings  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was not  helpful  in  resolving  the  issue.  Mr  Paramjorthy
      accepted, in light  of  Judge  Kimnell's  comments  on  the  grant  of
      permission, that the judge  may  well  be  correct  and  he  therefore
      accepted that he (Counsel) may have been incorrect  in  his  assertion
      that the judge had misrepresented his submissions on  the  appellant's
      private life in the UK. He apologised for his error and accepted  that
      I may find, in the circumstances, that the other point  was  therefore
      not material.

   9. Having heard submissions from  Mr  Avery,  and  in  the  light  of  Mr
      Paramjorthy's comments, I advised  the  parties  that  I  intended  to
      uphold Judge Kimnell's decision.

  10. Judge Kimnell was plainly entitled to take account of Mr Paramjorthy's
      submissions on the appellant's private life in the UK, as  he  did  at
      [37], and to conclude that the appellant had failed to demonstrate any
      meaningful private life in the UK.  In  the  circumstances  any  issue
      taken as to whether the judge gave an  indication  which  led  to  the
      appellant  providing  no  oral  evidence  in  regard  to   the   TOEIC
      certificate is immaterial. On the evidence  before  the  Tribunal  the
      appellant plainly could not  succeed  on  Article  8  grounds,  either
      within or outside the immigration  rules,  in  any  event.  The  judge
      considered all relevant matters and had full regard to the appellant's
      circumstances in the UK and in India. He was fully entitled to dismiss
      the appeal on the basis that he did.

DECISION

  11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 19 December 2018
