

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/01799/2016



                                                         IA/01800/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                      |       Decision & Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 30th January 2018                      |       On 8th February 2018      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                        Mr dhaval narendrabbhai barot
                         mrs nikitaben dhaval barot
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  I shall refer to the parties as "the appellant"  and  "the  Respondent".
    This is an error of law hearing to consider whether or not there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    MPW Harris)("FTT") promulgated  on  30th October 2017 in which the  FTT
    dismissed the appellants appeal against a decision to refuse  to  grant
    their applications for leave to remain under Tier  4  (general  student
    migrant).

Background
2.  The appellants are citizens of India and are the parents of a child  who
    was born in the UK and who had not been  registered  as  a  citizen  of
    India.  They had another son who was aged 8 years of age and a  citizen
    of India.  The respondent relied on deception used by the appellant  to
    obtain his English Language certificate  with  reference  to  paragraph
    322(1A).  The appellants argued that their youngest  son  was  in  fact
    stateless and  was  eligible  for  British  citizenship,  which  was  a
    relevant factor in the proportionality assessment.

FTT decision
3.  The FTT proceeded on the basis that it was accepted that the  appellants
    could not succeed under the Rules as there was no valid CAS [15].   The
    FTT considered the appeal outside of the Rules under Article 8 ECHR and
    found  that  there  was  no  interference  with  family  life  as   the
    "stateless" child could be removed as part of the family unit [24]  and
    the Indian authorities would issue appropriate  travel  documents  [25-
    26].   The  FTT  found  that  private  life  was  engaged  and  in  the
    proportionality assessment  took  into  account  the  statutory  public
    interest factors under section 117B Nationality, Immigration  &  Asylum
    Act 2002 (as amended) [32].  The FTT found that section 117B(2) and (5)
    applied, and considered where the best interest of the children lay [41-
    47].  The FTT considered the issue of deception having regard to  SM  &
    Qadir [2016] UKUT (IAC) and Abbas [2017] EWHC 78 (Admin) and found that
    there was evidence to show that deception had  been  used  [63]  having
    regard to the burden of proof, and placed weight on  the  same  in  the
    proportionality assessment [64].

Application for permission to appeal
4.  In grounds it was contended that the FTT failed  to  determine  properly
    the issue of statelessness and/or placed no weight on that fact, failed
    to apply paragraph 276ADE Immigration Rules and   failed  to  correctly
    decide the deception issue under paragraph 322.

Permission grant
5. Permission was granted by FTJ Ford  who found that  there  were  arguable
    grounds that the FTT erred in finding that an application could be made
    to register the child  as  an  Indian  national  was  relevant  to  the
    proportionality assessment, whilst accepting that  no  application  had
    been made and the child was not a citizen of any country.  The FTT  may
    also have erred in its consideration of paragraph 276ADE.

Rule 24 Response
6.  The respondent opposed the application.

Submissions
7.  Mr Harris argued that the situation was similar to  that  in  MK  [2017]
    EWHC 1365 (Admin) (paragraph 37) and that the FTT ought to have treated
    the child as stateless in its proportionality assessment,  rather  than
    speculating as to the outcome of an application for Indian citizenship,
    in the absence of any evidence in support.   The fact  that  the  child
    was stateless and thus eligible for British citizenship was a  material
    fact  both  in  terms  of  the  assessment  of   best   interests   and
    proportionality.

8.  The FTT failed to consider paragraph 276ADE  when  counsel  argued  that
    the second appellant would meet  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(vi).   The  FTT
    failed to look at the specific issues relevant to the second  appellant
    and took a generalised view.

9.  The  FTT  misapplied  Abbas  as  regards  its  findings  in  respect  of
    Professor French's evidence.  The FTT considered the  generic  evidence
    only and there was no additional evidence to show the deception, unlike
    in Abbas.  It would have been  possible  to  conclude  that  the  legal
    burden had not been satisfied.  There was evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant had no reason to cheat  and  had  little  to  gain  from  the
    deception [63].

10.  Mr Martin argued that cumulatively the errors were  sufficient  to  set
    aside the decision.

11. Mr Nath responded that the decision was thorough and reasoned.  The  FTT
    properly found that the child could apply  for  citizenship  given  the
    nationality of his parents and given that his  parents  had  taken  the
    decision not the apply for registration of Indian  citizenship  in  the
    hope of obtaining British citizenship.  The FTT had identified and made
    it clear what issues were to be determined and the appeal  was  pursued
    outside of the Rules.  In any event  the  FTT  had  looked  at  factors
    relevant to paragraph 276ADE at [39].  The FTT properly considered  the
    burdens and standard of proof for deception and was entitled  to  adopt
    its view of Abbas in reaching the conclusion that it did.

Discussion and conclusion

12.  I have decided that individually and  cumulatively  the  appellant  has
    failed to make out the grounds of appeal.  In a  detailed  and  clearly
    reasoned decision the FTT identified and considered  all  the  relevant
    issues in its assessment of proportionality and the decision  made  was
    open to the FTT to make having regard to the evidence.

13.  In effect  the  FTT  had  treated  the  child  as  stateless  [24]  but
    concluded that there was no interference with family life  taking  into
    account the best interests of the children [44 & 45] and the fact  that
    the family would be removed as a unit, and in light of the interference
    with their private lives and  the  public  interest  applied  in  Patel
    [2013] UKSC 640 [38]  The fact of statelessness provided the child with
    eligibility for British citizenship and in respect of  which  no  steps
    had been taken and even if successful was not in all the  circumstances
    a trump card  in  the  proportionality  assessment.  Accordingly  I  am
    satisfied that there was no material  error  in  the  FTT  approach  to
    statelessness that was capable of altering the outcome of the decision.
    The child was very young indeed and his sibling had entered the  UK  in
    2016, and there was no  evidence  to  show  that  there  would  be  any
    difficulties to re-establishing family or private lives in India.   The
    FTT found no reliable evidence to support the  claim  that  the  second
    appellant would face discrimination and/or  violence  [39  &  46].   In
    effect the FTT considered the  factors  relevant  to  paragraph  276ADE
    (1)(vi). The FTT found that it was possible  for  the  family  to  take
    reasonable steps to obtain Indian citizenship for their child so as  to
    avoid any difficulty associated with  a  lack  of  registration  as  an
    Indian citizen [45] and with reference to MK [2017] EWHC  1365  (Admin)
    paras 9-14) [22] which set out the law and practice regarding the right
    of a child born outside  of  India  to  Indian  citizenship  and  which
    included the possibility of making such an application when  the  child
    came to live in India.  The findings and decision as to deception  used
    in the IELTS test was sustainable as was the FTT's view taken of  Abbas
    [59].  The FTT took into account all relevant  evidence  including  the
    appellant's qualifications and  standard  in  English  and  applied  MA
    (paragraph 57) as to the range of reasons why a person  may  engage  in
    TOEIC fraud [61- 63].  Having regard to all of the evidence before  the
    FTT I am satisfied that  the  FTT's  consideration  of  Article  8  was
    properly made and which involved no material error in law.


Decision
There is no material error of law disclosed  in  the  decision  which  shall
    stand.



                               Signed            Date 5.2.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                 Date 5.2.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


