
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01662/2015
                                                               IA/01663/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |1  March 2016                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                       Saneesh jose madasseriparambil
                        angelina thottathil parambath
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Legend
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Mr Saneesh Jose Madasseriparambil (hereinafter "the  appellant")  is  a
    citizen of India and his date of birth is  20  May  1983.  He  made  an
    application on 30 October 2014 to vary his leave to remain as a Tier  2
    (Minister of Religion) Migrant. His wife, Mrs Parambath is dependent on
    his application. She is also a citizen of India and her date  of  birth
    is 14 November 1988.  Their applications were refused  on  18  December
    2014. The reason for this was the appellant was not able to satisfy the
    requirement that the certificate of sponsorship must  show  the  period
    the role was advertised for which must include at least 28 days  during
    the six month period immediately before the date the  sponsor  assigned
    the certificate of sponsorship (in this case  27  October  2014).   The
    sponsor had confirmed by email on 10 December 2014 that the appellant's
    job was advertised from 6 October 2014 to 6 November 2014 and thus  the
    appellant could not satisfy the 28 day requirement.

2.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal A J M Baldwin on 21 July 2015.  In a decision promulgated
    on 5 August  2015  Judge  Baldwin  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  judge
    properly  identified  the  limited  issue,  namely  whether  the  first
    appellant's role had to be advertised for  a  period  of  14  days  (as
    asserted by the appellant and  in  which  case  his  appeal  should  be
    allowed) or 28 days (as asserted by the respondent and  in  which  case
    his appeal fell to be dismissed).  The judge took into account  a  code
    of practice which was submitted  by  Ms  Qureshi  who  represented  the
    appellants before the First-tier Tribunal.  It was produced on the  day
    of the hearing and Ms Qureshi submitted that it applied to applications
    that were made prior to 10 November 2014.  Paragraph  15  of  the  code
    reads as follows:

         "Sponsors may only  recruit  a  migrant  if  no  suitable  resident
         workers respond to the  advertisement.   Sponsors  much  allow  the
         advertisement to run for a minimum of two weeks from  the  date  of
         the publication before recruiting a migrant."

3.   After the hearing Judge Baldwin observed  that  the  code  of  practice
    which had been  submitted  did  not  contain  a  date.   Judge  Baldwin
    consulted the 9th edition of Phelan and concluded that  the  appellants
    could not meet the requirements of paragraph 92  A  (d)  (iii)  of  the
    Rules which stipulates a period of advertising of 28 days.   She  noted
    that it was accepted by the appellant that the period had changed  from
    14 to 28 days, but the issue is when this change took place.  The judge
    concluded that the change took place no  later  than  16  October  2014
    which was ten days after the advertising in this case  started  to  run
    and therefore it follows that by the time the  certificate  was  issued
    and by the time the application was submitted the relevant  period  had
    changed to 28 days and the judge concluded that it was  clear  that  28
    days had not passed by the time that the certificate was issued.

4.    At  the  hearing  before  me  I  heard   representations   from   both
    representatives.  Mr Tufan submitted the archived Rules which  make  it
    clear that the Rules at both the date of the application and  the  date
    of the decision required the role to be advertised for at least 28 days
    during the six month period immediately before  the  date  the  sponsor
    assigned the certificate of sponsorship to the applicant.   Mr  Bellara
    conceded this issue but submitted that the position in relation to  the
    guidance was less clear and he referred me to  the  document  that  had
    been submitted on the appellants' behalf.

5.   There was no further clarification of the code of  practice  before  me
    that would assist the appellant's case.  Mr Bellara made an application
    for an adjournment to enable his solicitors to obtain further  evidence
    about this.  His argued that  there  are  different  types  of  Tier  2
    migrants and that the code of practice refers specifically to religious
    workers whereas the Rules relied upon by Mr Tufan are more general.

6.   On the face of it the code of practice is not entirely consistent  with
    the relevant Immigration  Rule.  However,  Mr  Bellara  was  unable  to
    develop  the  argument  any  further  in  the  light  of  the  lack  of
    clarification  in  relation  to  the  undated  code  of  practice.    I
    considered Mr Bellara's application for a further adjournment to enable
    the appellant effectively to prepare his case.  However,  I  note  that
    permission was granted on 4 December 2015 (over two months ago) and the
    appellant's solicitors  have  had  ample  opportunity  to  prepare  for
    today's hearing.  A further adjournment was not  in  the  interests  of
    justice.  It is clear to me that the Rules at the date of the  decision
    on 18 December 2014 required the role to be advertised for at least  28
    days before the sponsor assigned the certificate of  sponsorship  (this
    point is conceded by the appellant) and therefore, by any account,  the
    appeal cannot succeed.

7.   The appellant has not established that the 28 day period did not  apply
    in his case.  The conclusion the judge reached was  inevitable  because
    the appellant could not meet the requirement of the Rules. There was no
    arguable unfairness.  It was not necessary for the judge  to  give  the
    appellant the opportunity to comment any further on the  unsatisfactory
    evidence that the appellant himself had submitted on  the  day  of  the
    hearing. It was incumbent on the appellant to establish that he met the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules at the relevant time.  Should  he
    wish to rely on a policy document/guidance or code of practice  it  was
    incumbent on him and his solicitors to establish that this  applied  to
    him, but they failed to do so.  In any event, the Rules take precedence
    over guidance of policy and if there is an error of law for the reasons
    asserted by the appellant, it is not material.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 25.02.16

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
