
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/01062/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |              Decision & Reasons      |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On January 2, 2018                  |              On January 4, 2018      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                          MR SYED IRTAZA ALI MEHTAB
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Plowright, Counsel, instructed by All Levene
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant is a Pakistani national.  The appellant was  given  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrant  on
    February 13, 2011. On February 18, 2013 he submitted an application  to
    extend that  leave  but  withdrew  it  on  March  4,  2014.  With  that
    application he provided a TOEIC certificate  from  Educational  Testing
    Service (ETS) dated September 18, 2012.

 3. On March 13, 2014 the appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a Tier 1 Migrant. The respondent refused his application  on
    February 19, 2016 under paragraphs 322(2) and 245DD(a) HC  395  on  the
    basis she believed the appellant had submitted a fraudulently  obtained
    TOEIC certificate.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  on  February  24,  2016  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Aujla  (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on March 6, 2017 and in a decision  promulgated  on
    March 13, 2017 the Judge refused his appeal finding the  appellant  had
    used a fraudulently obtained TOEIC certificate.

 5. The appellant appealed the decision on March 31,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer
    on September 28, 2017. The grounds were renewed and on November 1, 2017
    Upper Tribunal Rimmington found there were arguable grounds and granted
    permission to appeal.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Plowright submitted the Judge had  erred  when  she  considered  the
    appellant's explanation. She placed weight on  a  conviction  that  had
    been set aside  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  this  adverse  finding
    undermined her assessment of whether the appellant was an honest person
    who had taken the test. It affected the weight she gave to  the  wife's
    evidence about  the  appellant  and  led  the  Judge  to  make  adverse
    comments. Whilst the appellant had not given evidence, due to  illness,
    there was evidence that when he spoke to  the  doctor  he  could  speak
    English and the wife confirmed his ability as well. Whilst the Court of
    Appeal suggested the appellant may be guilty  of  another  offence  the
    appellant had never been convicted of such an  offence  and  the  Judge
    erred  firstly  using  the  acquittal  to  assess  credibility  of  the
    appellant and secondly to undermine the wife's evidence.  The  decision
    in R (on the application of Nawaz) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department (ETS: review standard/evidential basis)  [2017]  UKUT  00288
    (IAC) was a judicial review and  did  not  affect  the  facts  of  this
    decision.

 8. Mr Melvin submitted there was no error in law.  Case  law  demonstrated
    the respondent had satisfied the legal burden placed  on  her  and  the
    Judge, in this appeal, had a statement from a caseworker as well as the
    relevant results and table. There was no  evidence  before  the  Judge,
    apart from the grounds of appeal, that the appellant had  attended  the
    test or taken the test. The  Judge  was  hampered  by  the  appellant's
    inability to give evidence but it had been open  to  the  appellant  to
    adduce evidence demonstrating he had taken the  test  and  could  speak
    English in 2012. The wife's evidence did not assist the  Judge  on  the
    core issue because she did not know him  at  the  time.  The  Court  of
    Appeal, in allowing his appeal against conviction, made it  clear  that
    he may have been a party to a sham marriage but even if the  Judge  was
    wrong to place weight on this the appellant had failed to discharge the
    evidential burden placed on him. The Tribunal in Nawaz  made  it  clear
    "Evidence obtained by use of the Look-up Tool, and subject to the human
    verification procedure, is an  adequate  basis  for  the  Secretary  of
    State's deception finding in these cases,  in  the  light  of  Flynn  &
    another [2008] EWCA Crim 970 [24 - 27], and the  evidence  of  both  Dr
    Harrison and Professor French." The appellant  had  not  presented  any
    evidence to contradict the respondent's  claim  and  the  decision  was
    therefore open to the Judge.

 9. Having heard submissions I indicated to the parties that the main issue
    for me to consider was whether the Judge's findings on the  appellant's
    acquittal were inappropriate and if they  were,  did  they  infect  his
    decision on whether a fraudulent TOEIC was  submitted.  I  reserved  my
    decision.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

10. Paragraphs [57] and [58] of SM and Qadir c SSHD (ETS-Evidence-Burden of
    Proof) [2016] UKUT 000229 (IAC) set out the correct  approach  to  take
    when considering cases of this nature. The approach  was  confirmed  by
    the Court of Appeal in SM and Qadir and SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1167.

11. The Administrative Courts have also considered the correct approach  to
    take when looking at ETS cases and one of  the  latest  authorities  on
    this issue is R (on the application of Nawaz) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department (ETS: review standard/evidential basis) [2017] UKUT
    00288  (IAC).  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  made  clear  that  when
    considering such a case the following should be borne in mind-


      a) Dr Harrison sets what might be called the  gold  standard  for  the
         kind of independent expert analysis of  voice  comparison  evidence
         which would ideally be required in a criminal case ... where one or
         a relatively small number of speakers will be under consideration.
      b) Professor French confirms, from the point of view of  an  at  least
         equally recognized expert, that natural ability, training, even  of
         a fairly basic kind, and experience all play a valuable part.  With
         the hindsight provided by his evidence, as well as  Dr  Harrison's,
         into the system of ASR, together with human verification,  operated
         by ETS, I do not think the respondent can  be  regarded  as  having
         acted unfairly, in this and very many other cases of the same kind,
         in taking it as the basis for findings of deception.
      c) While the lack of visible note-taking means that direct independent
         checking of results obtained in an individual case is not  possible
         ... applicant(s) ... were offered the chance to get copies  of  the
         recordings made, so (t)he(y) could have them analysed... The system
         as a whole is not unfair, in the context in  which  it  had  to  be
         operated.
      d) Deception in ETS cases is not a question of precedent fact,  except
         in particular circumstances, for example those in Abbas [2017] EWHC
         78 (Admin).
      e) Oral or other evidence of an applicant's English-language skills or
         attainments is unlikely to have any  decisive  effect  in  judicial
         review proceedings on the fairness of the decision under challenge,
         for the reasons given in Habib (JR/1260/2016) [20],  and  those  at
         [21].
      f) Evidence obtained by use of the Look-up Tool, and  subject  to  the
         human  verification  procedure,  is  an  adequate  basis  for   the
         Secretary of State's deception finding in these cases, in the light
         of Flynn & another [2008] EWCA Crim 970 [24 - 27], and the evidence
         of both Dr Harrison and Professor French.


12. The Courts have made clear that  the  respondent  cleared  the  initial
    legal burden of demonstrating the test may be fraudulent. Nothing  that
    was submitted to the Judge in the FTT supported a submission that  this
    burden was not met by the respondent.


13. What has often been described as the "evidential burden" is the  burden
    the appellant has to rebut by presenting evidence. At paragraph [47] of
    Nawaz the Tribunal stated-


         "While the state of the evidence in Qadir made it possible for  the
         appellants to satisfy the Tribunal, on their own evidence and those
         of their expert, that the respondent had not  satisfied  the  legal
         burden of proving deceit, the evidence which she  has  put  forward
         since has invariably satisfied both courts and this  Tribunal  that
         evidence  obtained  through  the  ETS  Look-up  Tool   entitled   a
         reasonable decision-maker to refuse an application  made  in  these
         circumstances. It is certainly a pity that this  evidence  was  not
         assembled in the first place; but its effect is very clear."

14. Mr Plowright has submitted that the decision is flawed because  of  the
    Judge's approach to the  appellant's  conviction/acquittal.  The  Judge
    summarised the correct approach to be  taken  to  the  issue  that  was
    before her at [39]. She noted there was no evidence from the  appellant
    to rebut the presumption and that was  because  (a)  he  did  not  give
    evidence about the events of 2012 and (b) his wife did not know him  at
    that time. The findings in [40] are fatal to the appellant's appeal and
    these finding are made regardless of the  Judge's  concerns  about  the
    conviction/acquittal.

15. I accept the Judge does place weight on the Court of Appeal's  decision
    as demonstrated by her approach at [41] of her decision but she went on
    to find there may have been evidence that the appellant was knowingly a
    party to a sham marriage and that there was no evidence to support  the
    appellant's wife's view that she was "pretty sure  he  has  given  this
    test honestly."

16. As the Rule 24 response and the  grounds  of  appeal  (see  4.1)  quite
    properly point out the issue is not  whether  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of an offence but whether he produced sufficient evidence  to
    satisfy the burden placed on him.

17. The Judge noted that despite arriving here in early 2011 there  was  no
    evidence the appellant attended  any  genuine  college  or  passed  any
    formal examinations. She also made a finding, which was  open  to  her,
    that marrying on July 6, 2011 raised questions as  to  his  motives  in
    coming here in the first place.

18. The Judge gave reasons for refusing the appellant's appeal.  Whilst  it
    is arguable the Judge may have placed too much weight on what the Court
    of Appeal had stated the fact remains the appellant failed to rebut the
    evidence presented in respect of the "test".  The  appeal  was  refused
    because the appellant failed to do this.

19. The Judge correctly, in light of Nawaz, made it clear the  respondent's
    evidence demonstrated the appellant's use of fraud and nothing that was
    presented to the  Judge  suggested  the  appellant  had  rebutted  that
    presumption. The adverse findings made about the  appellant's  wife  do
    not alter the evidence or lack of it.

    DECISION

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     02/01/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.

Signed                              Date     11.12.2017


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





