
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01173/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th August 2014                             |On 22nd August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                          Rakkel Kaunapawa Shiweda

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Reed  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd April 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Namibia born on 2nd  February  1979.  She
    made an application for leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
    Migrant which was refused on 6th December 2013 on maintenance grounds.

 3. The Appellant appealed against the  decision  and,  in  response  to  a
    Section 120 notice, raised in her grounds of appeal, the fact that  she
    was entitled to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  ten  years'  lawful
    residence.

 4. It appears to have been argued before the judge that  there  had  never
    been any application for leave under the long residence provisions, and
    the ground should not be considered as part of the  appeal.  The  judge
    disagreed and accepted that he did have jurisdiction to deal  with  the
    issue because a One-Stop Notice had been served upon the Appellant.  He
    also accepted that there could be  no  issue  that  the  Appellant  had
    accrued ten years' lawful residence.

 5. However, he applied Section 85A of the 2002 Act against the  Appellant,
    considering that because there were only  limited  circumstances  in  a
    points-based application when evidence not submitted with the  original
    application can be relied upon by an Appellant, he could not take  into
    account the fact that she had accrued ten years' lawful residence.   He
    dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  Article  8
    grounds.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Appellant argued that Section  85A  has  no  application  where  an
    alternative ground of appeal  is  raised  under  Section  120  and  the
    substance of that ground does not relate to  the  points-based  system.
    The purpose of Section 85A is to reinforce the requirement that  it  is
    mandatory for Appellants under the points-based system  to  submit  all
    relevant evidence required to support the application as at that  date,
    and reliance on new evidence at appeal is not  permitted.  However,  to
    suggest that Section 85A prevents reliance on evidence  to  support  an
    argument raised as an additional ground in an  appeal,  conflicts  with
    the requirement of Section 120 which requires an Appellant to state all
    additional grounds.

 7. As the Appellant was issued with a One-Stop Warning by the  Respondent,
    and the long residence modern policy guidance specifically acknowledges
    that an Appellant can reach ten years' long residence whilst on Section
    3C leave, Section 85A cannot prevent reliance  on  new  evidence.   The
    Appellant relies on AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD & Anor [2009] EWCA Civ 1076
    and submits that the Appellant is clearly entitled to raise alternative
    arguments in an appeal under Section 120 where a One-Stop  Warning  has
    been issued.

 8. The grounds also challenge the judge's finding that the  Appellant  was
    not able to succeed in her application for further leave to remain as a
    student under Tier 4.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge De Haney on 17th June 2014.

10.  On  1st  July  2014  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

11. Mrs Rogers relied on her principle  grounds,  but  not  the  additional
    challenge to the Tier 4 decision, and Mr McVeety did not seek to  argue
    against them.

Findings and Conclusions

12. The Secretary of State was not bound to issue a Section 120 notice but,
    since she decided to do so in this  case,  the  Appellant  was  plainly
    entitled and indeed obliged to raise all grounds upon which she  sought
    to rely in support of her contention that her appeal should be  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules.

13. The restrictions on evidence in points-based  applications  imposed  by
    Section 85A is not relevant in situations where, as here,  an  entirely
    different ground of appeal has been raised under Section 120.

14. As the Court of Appeal stated in AS (Afghanistan):

      i) "There would be little point in requiring a person to  put  forward
         all the grounds on which he says he should be allowed to  enter  or
         remain in this country if he were not able to add to those on which
         he had previously relied.   The  whole  tenor  of  the  legislation
         points to the conclusion that the purpose  of  Section  120  is  to
         flush out all the grounds on which the applicant may seek  to  rely
         so that they can be considered at the same time."

15. There is no argument that she could not rely on  Section  3C  leave  as
    lawful residence for the purpose of the ten year Rule, and, by the time
    that she submitted her grounds, it is not challenged that  she  had  in
    fact been in the UK lawfully for ten years.

16. On the findings of the judge the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  succeed
    under  the  Immigration  Rules.    Furthermore,   plainly,   in   these
    circumstances, any decision that  removal  was  proportionate  must  be
    plainly wrong.

17. On the evidence before the judge she met the requirements of the  Rules
    and the appeal should have been allowed on that basis.

Decision

18. The original judge erred in law and his decision is set aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
