
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01554/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 May 2016                            |On 13 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              KWABENA NTI (+4)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Praisoody, Counsel, instructed by Shan & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant)  is  a  national  of  Ghana.
    Although he is the sole claimant, his partner and their three  children
    are dependants in his appeal.  In a determination sent  on  23  October
    2015 First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Morgan  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds the claimant's appeal against a decision made by the  appellant
    (hereafter the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  or  SSHD)
    refusing his human rights claim and deciding to remove him.  The  judge
    noted that it was not in dispute that the appellant could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules  (see  para  6),  but  concluded  that  the
    refusal decision was a disproportionate breach of the  appellant's  and
    his family's human rights, placing  particular  reliance  on  the  best
    interests of the child. At para 17 the judge stated:

         "There are other factors that weigh in  the family's favour in  the
         balancing exercise  that I must undertake in respect of Article  8.
         However I am not persuaded that these factors, without the  lengthy
         residence of the British born daughter, would necessarily  outweigh
         the legitimate rights to  exercise effective immigration control. I
         have given considerable weight to the respondent's legitimate right
         to exercise immigration control.  However on the particular factors
         of this case I find that this does not outweigh the best  interests
         of the British born child. I find  that  the  couple's  immigration
         history weighs against them in the balancing exercise that must  be
         performed in respect of Article 8.  However, I find that the weight
         given to their immigration history is sufficient to   outweigh  the
         best interests of the daughter which  I  find  clearly  favour  her
         remaining in  the  United  Kingdom.   I  note  in  particular   and
         reiterate that a child must not be blamed for matters for which  he
         is not responsible such as the actions of his parents.  In  summary
         having considered all of the factors in  the  round,  I  find  that
         expecting the appellants to return  to  Ghana  is  disproportionate
         because the daughter was not only born in the  United  Kingdom  but
         has now spent her early and significant, formative early  childhood
         education in the United Kingdom and that it would not be reasonable
         to expect her to return to Ghana.  Whilst the  immigration  history
         of the parents clearly weighs against the family in  the  balancing
         exercise the fact remains that  the  British  born  child  is  well
         integrated into the United  Kingdom  and  in  particular  into  the
         educational system. It is this factor that cases the balance within
         proportionality  assessment to fall in favour of the  British  born
         child."

2.   The appellant's family comprises his partner, their two children and  a
    stepdaughter. The appellant arrived in the UK in 2000 on a student visa
    but became an overstayer in January  2001.   The  appellant's  partner,
    Miss Mensah, claims to have entered the UK using a false  passport   on
    18 June 2008.

3.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal advanced the following main grounds:  that
    the judge failed to afford sufficient weight to the public interest  as
    expressed in the Immigration Rules, contrary to the guidance  given  by
    the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387; that  the  judge
    failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the  best
    interests of the elder daughter could only be served  by  remaining  in
    the UK; and wrongly relied on an irrelevant consideration  by  treating
    as a factor in favour of the appellant the delay on  the  part  of  the
    respondent in failing to remove him when he first came to the attention
    of  the Home Office as an overstayer in 2010.

4.   I consider that the SSHD's grounds are  made out.

5.   Despite stating that he had given "considerable weight  to  the  public
    interest question (para 15) the judge nowhere treated  the  failure  of
    the claimant to meet the requirements  of the Immigration  Rules  as  a
    relevant factor in assessing the public interest;  and  indeed  in  the
    same paragraph, appeared to  suggested  that  the  7  year  requirement
    relating to children set out in the Rules was merely "an administrative
    cut-off point".

6.   A  further  difficulty  with  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  public
    interest question was that he himself acknowledged in paragraph 15 that
    "[m]ost of  the  factors  within  117  [ss117A-D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002]  weigh  against  the  family".  Those
    factors include of  course  s.117B(4)(b)  which  mandates  a  court  or
    tribunal to attach "little weight to" "a  relationship  formed  with  a
    qualifying partner, that is established by a person at a time when  the
    person  is  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully".   Given   that   the
    appellant's partner was a dependant in this appeal,  that  should  have
    meant that the judge by analogy (the partner  not  being  a  qualifying
    person) attached little weigh to the relationship between  the  couple.
    Even outwith the scope of s.117B4)(b), it is an  established  principle
    of Article 8 jurisprudence that a relationship formed when  a  person's
    immigration  status  is  precarious  carries  les   weight   than   one
    established when immigration status is lawful: see Rajendran (s./117B -
    family life) [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC).

7.   Despite noting the considerable public interest he  professed  to  have
    weighed  against  the  claimant  and  the  family's  "poor  immigration
    history" (paragraph 15),  the  judge  effectively  declined  to  attach
    significant weight to this factor  because  of  the  view  he  took  at
    paragraph 16:

         "On the particular facts of this case  the  respondent  bears  some
         responsibility for the circumstances in which the  appellants  find
         themselves. If the respondent had sought to remove the appellant in
         2010, when he first came to the attention of the Home Office as  an
         overstayer, the daughter would have still been very young and would
         not be attending school.  The  respondent  chose  not  to  exercise
         removal thereby also depriving the appellant of the right to appeal
         the initial decision in 2011. The delay in this  case  has  enabled
         the appellants to present a very  different  set  of  circumstances
         than those in which they found themselves back in  2010/2011.   The
         daughter  has  now  been  at  school  for  several  years  and   is
         progressing extremely well.  I  note in particular  the end of year
         report, which can be found at page 20 of  the  appellant's  bundle.
         Her critical formative years  of  childhood  education  have  taken
         place in the United Kingdom. I  accept  the  appellant's   evidence
         that  his stepdaughter  would face difficulty in  adapting to  life
         in Ghana given that all the ties to date  and  her  critical  early
         childhood development has taken place in the United Kingdom. It  is
         these factors and these factors alone that enable  a  finding  that
         the decision to remove the family  is  disproportionate  given  the
         formative years spent by the daughter in the United Kingdom."

8.   This assessment plainly failed to  take  into  account:  (i)  that  the
    appellant had failed to leave the UK once his student leave expired  in
    2001 and made no contact with the  immigration  authorities  thereafter
    until 2010; (ii) that when eventually served  with  an  IS.151A  as  an
    overstayer in July 2010 (when arrested  for  a  motoring  offence)  the
    claimant made an application for LTR outside the Rules  and  then  when
    this was refused, lodged a reconsideration request  on  5  March  2013,
    lodging a Pre-action Protocol which  took  up  a  further  year  to  be
    concluded (27 June 2013 - 19 July 2014).  In short,  the  judge  failed
    take into account that for a significant portion of the  period between
    June 2010 and the date of decision in December 2014, the respondent was
    properly occupied with responding to the  claimant's  own  application.
    Certainly there was no rational basis for treating the period of  delay
    attributable as being significant.

9.   An equally fundamental error afflicts the judge's approach to the  best
    interests of the child. Despite citing established  cases  such  as  MK
    (Best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 000475  (IAC)  and  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC 74, the judge failed to show that  his  assessment  of  the
    best interests of the child took into  account  all  relevant  factors.
    For the judge the only relevant factor appeared  to  be  that  (a)  the
    claimant's stepdaughter born on 10 June 2009 was "well settled into the
    UK education system" and "is progressing extremely well", her "critical
    years of  childhood  education  hav[ing]  taken  place  in  the  United
    Kingdom"; and (b) "all  her  ties  to  date  and  her   critical  early
    childhood development has taken place in the United Kingdom" (para 16).
     This assessment failed to take into account the judge's own finding at
    para 13 that "the best interests of the daughter are to live  with  and
    be brought up by her mother and stepfather with her two half-siblings".
     It also failed to take into account that there was no evidence  before
    the judge to show that the stepdaughter did not through her mother  and
    the claimant have a knowledge of Ghanaian culture and traditions if not
    also of local language. Despite citing E-A (Article 8 - best  interests
    of the child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC) and Azimi-Moayed and Others
    (Decisions affecting children; onward appeals) Iran  [2013]  the  judge
    appears to have overlooked the importance attached in their decision to
    the fact that children over the  age  of  10-11  can  form  significant
    social ties outside their own family.  The stepdaughter  in  this  case
    was only aged 6.

10.  For the above  reason  the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  and  his
    decision must be set aside.

11.  Mr Praisoody urged that I adjourn the case for it  to  be  remitted  or
    reheard by the Upper Tribunal but he agreed that the claimant  had  not
    produced any evidence updating the materials  relied  upon  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, notwithstanding clear notice  to  them  that
    they were required to do so in advance of the hearing before me.

12.  Accordingly I proceed  to  remake  the  decision  without  further  ado
    without the need to hear  or receive further evidence.

13.  The claimant advances no challenge to  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    best interests of the stepdaughter lie with remaining with her  parents
    and in any event I consider that such a finding is  inevitable  on  the
    basis of  the  evidence  before  me.   Given  the  young  ages  of  the
    stepdaughter and her two younger half-siblings, I am not able to accept
    that they had  established  any  significant  ties  outside  their  own
    family.  The evidence does not establish that they  lack  understanding
    of Ghanaian culture and traditions and in any event I am satisfied that
    it would not take them long at all to integrate into Ghanaian  society.
    It would be reasonable to expect them to do so.   They  have  no  known
    health  problems  of  any  significance.  None  of  them  has   British
    citizenship. They are nationals of Ghana.

14.  As regards the  claimant  and  his  partner,  they,  ipso  facto,  have
    knowledge of the culture and traditions  first-hand  and  the  evidence
    does not demonstrate  that they would be unable on return the  Tribunal
    find work  and rely in support if need be from family members there.

15.  In short the family life of the  family  could   be  preserved  without
    undue hardship by them  going to Ghana as a family unit.

16.  As regards  private  life,  the  claimant  and  his  partner  have  not
    demonstrated that they have significant private life ties in the UK and
    in any event I am required by s.117B(5)  of  the  2002  Act  to  attach
    little weight to such ties, given their precarious immigration status.

17.  As regards the public interest factors relevant in their case, they  do
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules; they  each  have  a
    poor immigration history, one being an overstayer since 2001, the other
    being an illegal entrant since 2008; as already noted they entered into
    a relationship at a time when their immigration status was  precarious;
    their failure by a considerable margin to demonstrate any compelling or
    exceptional circumstances; the delay attributable to the respondent  in
    falling to enforce their removal earlier is  of  small  magnitude;  the
    judge found (and there is no evidence to the contrary) that none of the
    children is a British citizen and that in any  event  the  stepdaughter
    has no contact with her natural father (para 18). In short  the  family
    and private life of this family,  even  if  it  is  accepted  that  the
    refusal decision constituted an interference with it, is not  one  that
    has been  the subject of disproportionate interference.

Notice of Decision

18.  For the  above  reasons  I  re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 12 July 2016

                 [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                  Date: 12 July 2016


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
