

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01247/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 15 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                          MOHAMED FAZLI ABDUL FUARD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. G Saunders, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal the
    decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Prior in which he allowed the
    appeal of the appellant under the Immigration Rules.
2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 17 September 1983.
    On 2 February 2013 he applied for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4
    (General) Student under the Points Based System.  The application was
    refused on 7 December 2013 because he failed to comply with a condition
    attached to the grant of leave to enter which was granted on 27 August
    2010.  The condition was that Section 50 of the Borders, Citizenship &
    Immigration Act 2009 prohibited him from study other than at the
    institution that the Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies Checking
    Services records as the student sponsor.   In this case the appellant
    had switched his study with Oxford College International, which was the
    institution for which he had been granted entry clearance to the
    Britannic International College without informing the Secretary of
    State.

3.   The judge allowed the appellant's appeal for the reasons set out at
    paragraph 10 as follows:

              Section 50 of the 2009 Borders Act is no more than an
    enabling provision which empowers the imposition, by the Respondent,
    upon leaves to remain in the United Kingdom of conditions restricting
    studies.  The Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000
    governs generally the mechanics whereby conditions are imposed and
    reads as follows (paragraph 5): "An entry clearance shall have effect
    as leave to enter subject to any conditions, being conditions of a kind
    that may be imposed on leave to enter given under Section 3 of the Act,
    to which the entry clearance is subject and which are endorsed on it."
    The Act referred to is the Immigration Act 1971 into which there was
    inserted (in Section 3) the enabling provision of Section 50 of the
    Borders Act that I have referred to.  Paragraph 5 of the Immigration
    Order 2000 provides that conditions imposed on leave to enter are to be
    imposed by endorsement on the entry clearance which shall have effect
    as leave to enter.  The only evidence before me of the relevant entry
    clearance granted to the appellant was the UK entry clearance stamp,
    referred to above, in the appellant's extract from his passport.  The
    Refusal Letter made no reference to any other form of entry clearance,
    that is to say any standard letter or document issued to the appellant
    and constituting itself as "An entry clearance."  It was therefore my
    conclusion that there was a single form of entry clearance granted to
    the appellant and that that entry clearance contained no reference to a
    condition governing the appellant's studies in the United Kingdom with
    the consequence that, in law, no such condition was imposed on the
    appellant's leave to enter so accordingly there could be no breach by
    the appellant of the condition to which he was not, in law, subject.
    It follows that I was not satisfied that there was any breach of
    condition by the appellant in the terms of paragraph 322(3) of the
    Rules.

4.   At the hearing Mr. Saunders relied on the decision of the
    Administrative Court in Afzaal, R (on the application of) SSHD [2014]
    EWHC 2215 (Admin), paragraph 46 where Mr. Robin Purchas QC, sitting as
    a Deputy Judge of the High Court held

              In the context of the relevant grant of entry clearance in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules that was a clear indication on
    the face of the vignette that the conditions include, as required under
    the Rules, limitation to the particular identified sponsor body.  No
    doubt the reference could be made more clearly, not least by the
    description of the endorsements as conditions rather than under the
    rubric observations.  However, that does not, in my judgement, lead to
    a conclusion that the endorsement was ineffective for the purpose of
    the 2000 Order.

5.   The decision put Ms Heybroek in some difficulty.

6.   In light of this judgement, I find that the judge's decision is
flawed.

6.   The judge's decision allowing the appellant's decision cannot stand.
    I remake it and dismiss the appellant's appeal.









Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
