
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01065/2014
     IA/01073/2014
     IA/01078/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 December 2014                            |On 16 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                mr Obemeata Friday Aigbefoh (first Appellant)
              mrs Moyosore Omobola Aigbefoh (second Appellant)
              master Gift Osieghale Aigbefoh (third Appellant)
                          (nO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Kadiri, Mitchell Simmonds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of  Nigeria.   Obemeata  Friday  Aigbefoh's
    date of birth is 25 June 1971.  He and the appellant, Moyosore  Omobola
    Aigbefoh are married. Her date of birth is 8 August 1976.  Their child,
    the appellant, Gift Osieghale Aigbefoh's date  of  birth  is  24  April
    2005.There is a second child of the family who  is  not  an  appellant,
    Elijah Eronmosele Oluwatosin Aigbefoh who was born  in  the  UK  on  13
    December 2011.  I shall refer to Mr Obemeata Friday  Aigbefoh  as  the
    appellant in this decision.  He came to the UK in 2006  as  a  student.
    He was joined by his wife and their eldest child in 2011.

2.   The Secretary of State refused the application in a  decision  dated  3
    December 2013.  The application was refused under the Immigration Rules
    in relation to the three appellants.  There was no consideration of the
    application outside the Immigration Rules and the  decision  maker  did
    not consider his or her duty under Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizen
    and Immigration Act 2009 (the 2009 Act).

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and the appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Russell in a determination that  was  promulgated  on  8  October  2014
    following an oral hearing at Taylor House on 23 September  2014.   The
    appeal was dismissed under  Article  8.   The  appellant  appealed  and
    permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge R  A  Cox
    in a decision of 30 August 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The Judge made a number of findings, including the following:-

    12.  I agree that the appellants cannot succeed under  Appendix  FM  or
         para.276ADE,  for  the  reasons  given  by  the   Home   Secretary.
         Nonetheless, in MF (Article 8-new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT  00393
         (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  gave  guidance  on  dealing  with  cases
         covered by the new immigration rules introduced by HC 194 on 9 July
         2012.  The Tribunal noted that the new immigration rules set out  a
         number of mandatory requirements relating to article 8 cases, which
         make clear that if these requirements are not met,  the  article  8
         claim under the immigration rules must be  refused.   However,  the
         new immigration rules only covered article 8 claims  brought  under
         some, not all, parts of the Rules.  Even if a decision to refuse an
         article 8 claim under the new immigration  rules  is  found  to  be
         correct, judges must still consider whether the  decision  complies
         with Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998  and,  in  automatic
         deportation cases, whether removal would breach a  person's  rights
         under the ECHR (Section 33(2) UK Borders Act).  Thus, the two stage
         approach  to  assessing  Article  8  claims  in  the   context   of
         deportation and removal remains imperative as the  new  immigration
         rules do not encapsulate the guidance in Maslov v Austria-  1683/03
         [2008] ECHR 546, endorsed by the higher courts in the UK (see  also
         Izuazu (Article 8-new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC)).


    14.  The appellants assert compelling and  compassionate  reasons  mean
         that they should stay in the United Kingdom. I agree that there may
         be arguable good grounds for granting leave outside the rules and I
         go on to consider their matter in relation to article 8


    19.  I start my enquiry as to whether  the  appellants'  removal  would
         engage the obligations of this country  under  article  8  ECHR  by
         looking at the appellant's own evidence. The  first  appellant  has
         been in the UK since 2006, with leave as a student, during which he
         can   have   had   no   expectation   of   permanent    settlement,
         notwithstanding his evidence that he never intended  to  return  to
         Nigeria. The second and third appellants have been here only  since
         2011,  again  with  no  expectation  of  being  allowed  to  remain
         permanently.


    20.  I reject as without foundation the claim that the appellants  have
         no family or friends in Nigeria. They are citizens of that  country
         and the second and third appellants were living there  as  recently
         as 2011.


    21.  I reject as without foundation the  existence  of  a  family  life
         between the first appellant and his sister in the UK over and above
         the normal ties of family. Both of them  have  formed  families  of
         their own and there is no evidence of  emotional  or  other  mutual
         dependence beyond normal familial ties.


    22.  There is no suggestion that the removal of  the  appellants  would
         entail a splitting of the family; they would be removed as a  unit.
         I find that the decision of the Home Secretary does not, therefore,
         represent an interference with their right to family life.


    23.  There is little evidence of attachment to the wider  community  in
         the UK. There are letters of support  from  the  first  appellant's
         sister and some letters from the church.  The appellant appears  to
         be working here but there is little evidence of his contribution to
         the economy in the form of tax  and  NI  contributions  or  unusual
         value to a company. There is no further evidence of  attachment  in
         the form of letters from neighbours, friends, academic  references,
         work references or membership  of  clubs,  societies  or  voluntary
         work. I note that the appellants have accessed health care for  the
         birth of their second child and have incurred further costs to  the
         NHS.

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

5.   The grounds of appeal seeking  permission  to  appeal  argue  that  the
    Judge, having found that there may be  arguable  grounds  for  granting
    leave outside the Rules, did not then go on to consider Article 8 as he
    should. The Judge did  not  take  into  consideration  the  appellant's
    evidence in relation to difficulties  in  returning  to  Nigeria.   The
    Judge was wrong not  to  place  reliance  on  the  evidence  of  Angela
    Johnson, the appellant's sister.  There is  disagreement  expressed  in
    the grounds to the Article 8 balancing exercise conducted by the Judge.
    I heard oral submissions from both Mr Kadiri and Mr Melvin.

Error of Law

6.   The grounds seeking leave to appeal are unimpressive,  but  my  concern
    is that the decision maker and the Judge did not properly consider  the
    duty under Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  The appellant raised issues  in
    relation to his business and threats to his wife and family  on  return
    to Nigeria  in  a  letter  to  the  respondent  which  accompanied  his
    application.  However, the decision maker did not engage with this  and
    neither did the Judge.  There were references (albeit they were lacking
    in sufficient detail)  to  the  difficulties  on  return  in  both  the
    appellant and his wife's witness statements.  The Judge did not make  a
    finding in relation to this aspect of the appellant's evidence  and  he
    did not make a finding  in  relation  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  The two matters are obviously connected.

7.   It appears to me that the information submitted to the  respondent  and
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was not properly considered
    and there is no analysis  of  the  best  interests  of  either  of  the
    children in the decision letter or in the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal should have concluded that the  decision  maker
    had failed to discharge the duties imposed by Section 55  of  the  2009
    Act and to have regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare
    of children concerned and to have regard to the statutory guidance  and
    it did not do so.  This is a material error of law.

9.   I set aside the decision  under  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and I remake the decision in accordance
    with Section 12(2)(b)(ii).  The decision of the Secretary of State  was
    not in accordance with the law, for the  reasons  elaborated  above,  I
    allow the appeal.

10.  It is now incumbent on the Secretary of State to  remake  the  decision
    in accordance with this judgment.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 15 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


