
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01533/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th June 2013                               |On 9th July 2013           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                kashif hayat
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs L Turnbull of Counsel instructed by Ali Sinclair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Heynes
    made on the papers at Manchester on 1st May 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who arrived in the  UK  on  20th
    February 2011 with leave to enter until  26th  August  2012.   On  21st
    December 2012 a decision was made to refuse to vary his leave to remain
    in the UK and to remove him by way of directions under  Section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The Appellant had made a combined application for leave  to  remain  on
    25th August 2012 as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-
    based system.  He was refused because he could not  show  that  he  was
    intending to study a course which represented academic progression from
    his previous  studies,  and  because  his  Sponsor  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules as set out at paragraph 13 of Appendix C.

 4. The Judge, in a very brief determination, stated that  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal conceded that the course which the Appellant wished to study was
    at a lower level  than  his  previous  course  of  study  and  made  no
    reference to the financial Sponsor. He dismissed the appeal  under  the
    Rules and stated that Article 8 was pleaded but had no relevance  since
    it was not the function of Article 8 to enable applicants to circumvent
    the requirements of the Rules.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to provide any proper basis for his decision.  He  had  made
    no reference to any of the evidence submitted by either party, had made
    no clear findings of fact and had failed to direct  himself  about  the
    proper approach to consideration of Article 8.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Frances
    for the reasons stated in the grounds on 21st May 2013.

 7. On 6th June 2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  stating  that  she
    continued to oppose the Appellant's appeal but  considered  that  there
    was potential merit in the grounds of challenge.  The Respondent  could
    only agree that the Article 8 consideration in  the  determination  was
    inadequate but this would only be material if it  could  be  identified
    why  the  circumstances  both  engage  Article  8(1)   and   entail   a
    disproportionate interference with protected rights.

The Hearing

 8. Mrs Turnbull relied on her grounds,  essentially  submitting  that  the
    determination was not an adequate consideration of the  facts  of  this
    case.  She said that it was the Appellant's  contention  that  the  new
    course did represent a progression in his studies because it was a  new
    subject area and he would be acquiring new skills.  He had a legitimate
    expectation that the college would not have advised  him  to  undertake
    the course and to take his  fees  if  it  did  not  represent  academic
    progression.  She relied on the case of CDS (PBS available  Article  8)
    Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 which held that Article 8 could be relevant in
    student cases and submitted that the Judge's treatment of the issue was
    plainly wrong.

 9. Mr Nath accepted that the determination was overly brief but  submitted
    that since the Appellant could  not  succeed  under  the  Rules  or  in
    relation to Article 8 any error was immaterial.

Findings and Conclusions

10. The Judge ought to have engaged with the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  his
    comment that the function of Article 8 is not to enable an applicant to
    circumvent the requirements of the Rules is not an  accurate  statement
    of the law.  To that extent he erred.

11. However  the  fact  is  that  this  Appellant  cannot  succeed  in  his
    application.  With respect to progression in study, he sought leave  to
    undertake an extended diploma in management at NVQ level 5 but  he  was
    previously issued leave to study on a CAT/ACCA course at NQF  level  6.
    In his Grounds of Appeal he states that the institution advised him  to
    submit an application for further leave after assessing his ability and
    academic  progression  and  the  courses   are   from   two   different
    disciplines.  That does not answer the point.  Acting  on  advice  does
    not mean that he is in a position  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules. He was intending to study at a lower  level  than  his  previous
    course, and the fact that the second course is in another discipline is
    irrelevant.

12. With respect to the maintenance requirements, the Appellant  says  that
    he had the required funds in his bank  accounts  continuously  for  the
    prescribed period and provided bank statements to confirm that  he  met
    the maintenance criteria of the Rules.  According  to  the  information
    before the Respondent the Appellant was relying on funding provided  by
    a Mr Mohammed  Afzal,  a  family  friend  who  confirmed  that  he  had
    sufficient funds in his bank account to maintain  and  accommodate  the
    Appellant.  However under paragraph 13 of Appendix C of the Immigration
    Rules, an applicant has to show that  funds  are  held  by  either  the
    applicant or his parents or legal guardian  or  an  official  financial
    Sponsor.  Mr Afzal therefore does not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules with regard to the status of financial Sponsors.

13. With respect to Article 8, Mrs Turnbull confirmed  that  no  particular
    facts were relied on save that the Appellant was studying in the UK.

14. He has been here for a brief period of time, only two years,  and  will
    have developed some private life as a  consequence  of  having  studied
    here.  However he has spent almost all of his  life  in  Pakistan  and,
    when he came to the UK, it was for a temporary purpose.  Whilst in some
    cases Article 8 can be  engaged  in  student  cases,  as  held  by  the
    Tribunal in CDS (Brazil), this is not such a case.   The  Appellant  is
    not a person who has been admitted to follow a course which has not yet
    ended and has adduced no evidence to  show  that  he  has  built  up  a
    private life deserving of respect.





Decision

15. The Judge's decision stands.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
