
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01171/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 15th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            sumathy ramachandran
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford of Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Geraint Jones QC of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 29th July 2013.

 2. The Appellant is a female Sri Lankan citizen born 28th June 1968.   She
    had leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 11th October 2014,  and
    on 3rd October 2014 applied for further leave to remain.

 3. The application was made using Form FLR(FP), the  Appellant  indicating
    in that form that she relied  upon  her  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom in order to be granted further leave.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on 12th December 2014, making  a
    combined decision to refuse to vary  leave  to  remain,  and  making  a
    decision to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

 5. The Respondent issued a reasons for refusal letter dated 12th  December
    2014  indicating  that  the  application  had  been  considered   under
    paragraph 276ADE(1),  but  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    satisfied the requirements of any of the provisions contained  therein.
    The Respondent also indicated that consideration had been given  as  to
    whether there were any exceptional circumstances  justifying  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules, and it had been  considered  that
    there were not.

 6. The Respondent also noted that the Appellant in her claim,  had  stated
    that she cared for her elderly  parents,  and  consideration  had  been
    given to this, but it was noted that the Appellant had siblings present
    and settled in the United Kingdom, who could offer the care her elderly
    parents required.

 7. The Appellant appealed, and the FtT heard the appeal on 15th July 2015.
     The FtT rejected a submission made by the  Appellant's  Counsel,  that
    the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  as  the
    Respondent had failed to consider her own guidance on carers.  The  FtT
    after hearing evidence from the Appellant, her mother, and her brother,
    decided that the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  could  not  be
    satisfied, and that the appeal could  not  succeed  with  reference  to
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention) outside the Immigration Rules.  The  appeal  was  dismissed
    both under the Immigration Rules, and on human rights grounds.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon three grounds which may be summarised as follows.

 9. Firstly it was submitted that the FtT had erred in law  by  failing  to
    decide that the Respondent's decision was unlawful, on the  basis  that
    the Respondent had failed  to  consider  her  own  policy  guidance  on
    carers.

10. Secondly it was submitted that the FtT had erred in law by  failing  to
    properly apply the authorities as to what constitutes family life.

11. Thirdly it was submitted that the FtT had erred in law  by  failing  to
    consider and apply Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL  39  to  the  facts  of  the
    Appellant's case.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge J M Holmes of the FtT in  the
    following terms;
         "3.  Arguably the Judge fell into error  in  his  approach  to  the
             issue of whether the Appellant was a carer for her two elderly
             and infirm  parents.   Whilst  she  had  not  claimed  in  her
             application form to be in receipt of  carer's  allowance,  she
             had identified that she and her adult brother lived with their
             parents.   In  the  solicitor's   covering   letter   to   the
             application [ApBp21] she did claim to be  the  carer  for  her
             parents.  Contrary to the claim in the grounds the  Respondent
             did not explicitly accept that  to  be  true  in  the  refusal
             decision, but it was arguably  always  one  of  the  principal
             planks  to  her  application  for  leave.   As  such,  if  she
             established the primary facts relied  upon,  it  was  arguably
             always open to the Appellant to argue that  the  decision  was
             not in accordance with the law, because the Respondent had not
             applied her own policy on carers  (subject  to  any  issue  of
             fairness that might arise - and the Respondent appears to have
             raised none).  What is not clear to me from this  application,
             which does not provide the policy relied upon, or identify the
             relevant passages, is whether if  the  Tribunal  had  accepted
             that she was a carer for her parents (and there is no  finding
             upon the issue)  the  Appellant  could  demonstrate  that  the
             relevant policy was not followed.
         4.   There appears to be little merit in grounds 2 and 3, save that
             there were arguably no clear findings upon who  provides  care
             to the  Appellant's  parents,  and  thus  an  arguably  flawed
             approach to what the consequences would be  for  them  in  the
             event of the Appellant's removal."

13. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the FtT had not  erred  in  law
    and was entitled to reject the argument that the Respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with the law.  In addition the  FtT  had  made  a
    finding that the Appellant did not have  any  ties  with  her  parents,
    beyond normal emotional ties, and from this it could be  inferred  that
    the FtT had accepted that the  Appellant  was  not  a  carer.   It  was
    contended that the FtT had given adequate reasons for  the  conclusions
    reached.

14. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

15. Mr Gaisford relied and expanded upon the grounds contained  within  the
    application  for  permission  to  appeal.   In  brief  summary  it  was
    contended in relation to  the  first  ground,  that  it  was  'Robinson
    obvious' that the Appellant had been  requesting  leave  to  remain  to
    continue  to  care  for  a  sick  relative.   This  had  in  fact  been
    acknowledged  in  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter.   Therefore   the
    Respondent was obliged to apply her own policy contained  in  the  IDIs
    contained at chapter 17 section 2.   It  was  submitted  that  the  IDI
    contained no requirement that the  carer's  policy  must  be  expressly
    referred to, and there was no particular application form to be used to
    make an application for leave to remain as a carer.

16. It was submitted that the  FtT  had  erred  in  law  by  rejecting  the
    submission that the Respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law, and should have allowed the appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
    decision remained outstanding before the Respondent.

17. In relation to the second ground, Mr Gaisford referred to the case  law
    that is set out in the application.  It was submitted that the FtT  had
    not taken into  account  evidence  provided  by  the  Appellant,  which
    disclosed  dependency  between  herself  and  her  parents,  and  which
    indicated that she had consistently cohabited with her  parents  except
    for a short period of time.

18. In relation to the third ground it was submitted that the FtT  had  not
    taken into account the effect of the Appellant's proposed removal  from
    the United Kingdom upon her aged and infirm parents, which should  have
    been an extremely important factor in the balancing exercise.

The Respondent's Submissions

19. Mr Kandola relied upon the rule 24 response  and  in  relation  to  the
    first Ground of Appeal, submitted  that  it  was  not  clear  that  the
    Appellant had made an application for leave to remain as a  carer.   Mr
    Kandola questioned whether  in  any  event,  taking  into  account  the
    changes brought about by the Immigration Act 2014, which abolished  the
    ground of appeal in relation to finding a decision  not  in  accordance
    with the law, whether it would have been open to the FtT to make such a
    finding.  Mr Kandola raised this point but acknowledged that he was not
    in a position to make submissions upon it one way or the other.

20. In relation to the second ground Mr  Kandola  noted  that  no  specific
    submissions were made to the FtT that family life existed  between  the
    Appellant and her parents, taking  into  account  that  they  were  all
    adults.  The FtT was entitled to make the finding at paragraph 21, that
    family life did not exist between the Appellant and her parents,  which
    would engage Article 8.

21. In relation to the third  ground,  Mr  Kandola  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant had adult siblings in the United Kingdom who would be able to
    care for her parents, and  that  the  private  life  built  up  by  the
    Appellant since she arrived in the United Kingdom  in  2008,  had  been
    built when she had a precarious immigration status.   I  was  asked  to
    find no material error of law.

The Appellant's Response

22. Mr Gaisford repeated that there was no requirement  that  a  particular
    application form should be used when applying for leave to remain as  a
    carer.  In relation to the point  raised  for  the  first  time  by  Mr
    Kandola, as to whether the FtT had jurisdiction to find a decision  not
    in accordance with the law, Mr Gaisford not surprisingly had no  direct
    authority on this point.  He indicated that his view was  that  because
    the application had been made prior to the appeal rights being  amended
    by  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  the  FtT  did  in  fact   have   such
    jurisdiction.

23. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. I am persuaded that the FtT erred in law  as  contended  in  the  first
    ground of appeal.  I find that the error is material for the  following
    reasons.

25. The application for leave to remain was not made solely on the basis of
    leave to remain as a carer.  However the  IDIs  do  not  indicate  that
    applying for leave as a carer must be the only application made.

26. I accept the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant that there  is
    no particular form to be used for making an application  for  leave  to
    remain as a carer.  The Appellant did refer to her private life in  her
    application form at section 2.  There was  however  no  section  within
    that application form that specifically applied to an  application  for
    leave to remain as a carer.

27. The FtT found that the Appellant's application was not put on the basis
    that she is a carer for any given individual, noting an absence of  any
    reference to an application as a carer in  the  application  form,  and
    only  a  passing  reference  made  in  the  covering  letter  from  the
    Appellant's  solicitors.   There  was  no  specific  request  for   the
    application to be considered under a carer's concession.  In  addition,
    the grounds of appeal to the FtT did  not  make  any  reference  to  an
    application for leave to remain as a  carer,  or  the  failure  of  the
    Respondent to apply her own policy.  Moreover, there was no application
    in writing to amend the grounds of appeal,  and  the  oral  application
    made at the hearing was referred to as an unspecified amendment to  the
    grounds, the FtT finding that an unspecific  proposed  amendment  could
    not have any real prospect of success, as the initial  application  had
    not been made with reference to the carer's policy.  The  FtT  did  not
    accept it was 'Robinson obvious' that the Appellant was  seeking  leave
    to remain as the carer of her parents.  The application made on  behalf
    of the Appellant, was in my view, not as clear as it should have  been.
    However there was, as noted by the FtT, a reference in the  solicitor's
    covering letter dated 3rd October 2014 to the Appellant and her brother
    living with her parents, and the following was stated;
         "Client's mother Mrs Vigneswary Ramachandran is a heart patient and
         had a stroke in June 2011 due to a block in her coronary  arteries.
         This has been treated by fixing a stent in her arteries.  Therefore
         both of client's parents are looked after by client."

28. Enclosed with the covering letter was medical evidence in  relation  to
    the Appellant's parents.  What was not noted by the FtT were references
    to the Appellant caring for her parents, in a letter from  the  parents
    dated 12th September 2014 in the following terms;
         "My husband is a disability patient.  His leg  has  been  amputated
         and he is unable to move without the support.  Both of us are heart
         patients as well.  We always require attendance of our daughter who
         looks after us.  We need her physical, moral and emotional support.
          We are attaching our medical letters for your reference."

29. In addition there was a letter from the Appellant's brother dated  19th
    September 2014 which stated the following;
         "Also, my sister needs to take care of our elderly  parents.   They
         are dependent and need someone watching  over  them.   Since  I  am
         employed here, I need to have my sister  nearby  to  help  them  if
         there is an emergency in the forthcoming days."

30. Further  there  was  a  letter  dated  14th  September  2014  from  the
    Appellant's sister who stated the following;
         "My parents also very happy at present because of  all  our  family
         members here and spending time with them and she is there  to  help
         my sick parents whenever they needed."

31. The letters referred to above were submitted to the Respondent with the
    solicitor's covering letter and the medical evidence,  therefore  there
    is evidence that the Appellant cares for her  parents,  which  was  not
    considered by the FtT.

32. In addition what was not considered by the FtT is  the  acknowledgement
    by the Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter dated 12th December
    2014 in the following terms;
         "In support of your claim you state that you care for your  elderly
         parents.  This has been carefully considered however, it  is  noted
         that you have a brother and sister who are present and  settled  in
         the UK and therefore  can  offer  the  care  your  elderly  parents
         require."

33. I find this acknowledgement by  the  Respondent  significant.   It  was
    therefore clear to the Respondent that the Appellant  claimed  to  care
    for her elderly parents.

34. It appears that the FtT did not consider the terms of the  Respondent's
    policy on carers set out at chapter 17, section 2 of the IDIs.   I  set
    out below 17.4 in part;
         "17.4 Requests for further leave to remain
         Where an application is received requesting  a  further  period  of
         leave to continue to care for a sick  relative  or  friend  further
         detailed enquiries must be made to establish the full facts of  the
         case."

35. These further enquiries entail requesting the applicant  for  leave  to
    remain as a carer, to produce documentation  from  an  NHS  consultant,
    social services if they are involved, and  any  further  evidence  that
    alternative arrangements have been or are being actively explored.   In
    addition full details of the patient's family  in  the  United  Kingdom
    should be supplied and details of the applicant's circumstances in  her
    home country and  evidence  that  sufficient  funds  are  available  to
    maintain and accommodate without working or recourse to public funds.

36. It is evident the Respondent was  put  on  notice  that  the  Appellant
    claimed to care for her parents, and acknowledged this,  but  then  did
    not carry out any further enquiries as required by 17.4 of the policy.

37. I find that the  FtT  materially  erred  in  not  considering  relevant
    evidence which  indicated  that  the  Respondent  was  aware  from  the
    contents of the application, that the Appellant claimed  to  be  caring
    for her parents.

38. I find that the FtT erred  in  stating  that  the  Appellant's  Counsel
    applied at the hearing for an unspecified amendment to the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The amendment was specific, in that the request was  to  amend
    the grounds to contend  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, because the Respondent's policy on carers  had
    not been considered.  The FtT had the power to amend the  grounds,  and
    that would not cause prejudice to the  Respondent,  as  an  adjournment
    could  have  been  applied  for  by  the  Respondent  to  consider  the
    application raised at the hearing by the Appellant.

39. The conclusion therefore is that the FtT erred in law in rejecting  the
    submission that the Respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law as the  policy  on  carers  had  not  been  considered.   I  am
    satisfied that because the  Respondent's  decision  was  made  on  12th
    December 2014, the power to find a decision not in accordance with  the
    law was still open to the FtT, although that may not be the case  after
    the provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 have been fully implemented.

40. In those circumstances, because the FtT decision was made following  an
    unlawful decision, I see no useful purpose in going on to consider  the
    second and third grounds of appeal.

41. I conclude that the FtT decision must be set  aside  with  no  findings
    preserved.  I re-make the decision by allowing the  Appellant's  appeal
    to the  limited  extent  that  the  Respondent's  decision  is  not  in
    accordance with the law, and therefore remains outstanding  before  the
    Respondent for a lawful decision to be made, and so that the policy  in
    relation to carers as set out in chapter 17, section 2 of the IDIs  can
    be considered.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the Respondent's  decision  is  not
in accordance with the  law,  therefore  the  decision  remains  outstanding
before the Respondent.

Anonymity

The FtT made no anonymity direction.  There  has  been  no  request  to  the
Upper Tribunal for anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.


Signed   Date: 1st February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed to a limited extent.  In those  circumstances  I
do not find it appropriate to make a fee award.


Signed   Date: 1st February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
