
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01615/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 August 2014                             |On 26 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                            miss benedicta idowu

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Evans, Legal Representative, instructed by
Templeton Legal
     Services
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


               DETERMINATION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW HEARING


1.   On 12 December 2013, the Secretary of State made  decisions  to  refuse
    to vary the appellant's leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom,  as  a
    Tier 4 Student, and to remove her by way of directions under section 47
    of the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006.   Her  appeal
    against those decisions came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Napthine
    ("the judge") on 28 April 2014.  In a determination promulgated  on  14
    May this year, the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  adverse
    decisions.

2.   The judge found that the  appellant's  application  for  further  leave
    fell to be refused as the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  ("the
    rules") were not met in three respects.   First,  the  certificate  she
    relied upon as showing her abilities in the  English  language  expired
    before her application was  made.   Second,  the  bank  statements  she
    submitted with her application showed that she held the necessary funds
    for a period of 27 days, one day short of the 28 days required.  Third,
    the judge found that the appellant had not shown that  the  course  she
    wished to pursue was other than an NQF level 4 course (the Secretary of
    State  made  a  similar  finding)  so  she  could  not  show  that  the
    requirement of paragraph 245ZX(h) of the rules was met as pursuing  her
    course would result in her having spent more than three  years  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student on courses not  consisting
    of at least degree level study.

3.   The judge went on to make an Article 8 assessment, in the light of  the
    submission made by the appellant's Counsel that a refusal to allow  her
    to  continue  with  her  studies  would  amount   to   an   unjustified
    interference with her right to respect for her private life.   In  this
    context, the judge considered that the level of  the  proposed  course,
    which he found did not meet the requirements of  the  rules,  was  more
    fundamental than the other  defects  in  the  application  for  further
    leave.  He noted that the  appellant  had  spent  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom with limited leave as a student, in accordance with the  rules.
    He found that it was not unreasonable or excessive of the Secretary  of
    State to require her to leave the United Kingdom in the  light  of  the
    failure to meet the requirements of the rules and that it would be open
    to her to make a further application, if  necessary  from  outside  the
    United Kingdom, for entry  clearance  to  return  as  a  student.   The
    determination shows that the judge accepted that Article 8 was  engaged
    but concluded that the adverse decisions amounted  to  a  proportionate
    response.

4.   An application was made for permission to  appeal.   It  was  contended
    that the judge's decision was vitiated by a perverse finding  regarding
    the level of  course  being  undertaken  by  the  appellant.   Evidence
    contained in the appellant's bundle showed that the level of her course
    was equivalent to a bachelor's degree and so met  the  requirements  of
    the rules.  The judge had accepted that even if the requirements of the
    rules were not met, a case could be advanced in reliance upon Article 8
    but the adverse findings he made regarding studying below degree  level
    had a clear impact on his assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    adverse decisions.  The judge also erred in failing to properly weigh a
    letter from the appellant's mother and a supporting document  from  the
    appellant's college in the Article 8 context, having  found  that  this
    evidence could not be taken into account  in  the  points-based  system
    context, in the light of section 85A of the 2002 Act.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 20 June 2014.  The  judge  granting
    permission noted that the judge gave clear reasons  why  the  appellant
    failed to meet the requirements of the rules but it was  arguable  that
    he erred in finding against the  appellant  in  relation  to  paragraph
    245ZX(h).  It was arguable that  the  judge  erred  in  his  Article  8
    assessment, having given weight to  the  appellant's  apparent  failure
    regarding the level of her course.

6.   In a brief rule 24 response from the Secretary of State, dated  7  July
    2014, it was submitted that the judge did not materially  err  in  law.
    In the light of the judgment of the Supreme Court  in  Patel  &  Others
    [2013] UKSC 72, any  error  regarding  the  level  of  course  was  not
    material.  There were several reasons why the requirements of the rules
    were not met and Article 8 was not a general dispensing power and could
    not be used to mitigate a near-miss.

7.   In directions made by the Principal Resident Judge,  the  parties  were
    advised that they should prepare for the  forthcoming  hearing  on  the
    basis that any  further  evidence  that  might  be  required  could  be
    considered at that hearing.

Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Mr Evans  submitted  a  written  skeleton  argument,  setting  out  the
    appellant's circumstances and drawing attention to a number  of  cases,
    including GOO & Others [2008] EWCA Civ 747.

9.   The appellant's witness statement and grounds of appeal  put  in  issue
    the level of the course she proposed to study.  This was the equivalent
    of level 6 and so met the requirements of the rules.  It  was  accepted
    that the application, nonetheless,  contained  deficiencies.   However,
    the margin by which the appellant failed to meet  the  requirements  of
    the rules was narrow, although Mr Evans accepted that  demonstrating  a
    "near-miss" was  not  sufficient.   The  appellant  had  established  a
    private  life  here  and  the   proportionality   assessment   required
    consideration of her relative ability to  pursue  her  studies  in  the
    United Kingdom, rather than Nigeria, and the impact  upon  her  of  the
    adverse decisions.  Mr Evans submitted that  this  was  so  substantial
    that  it  amounted  to  a  disproportionate   interference   with   the
    appellant's Article 8 rights, in the private life context.

10.  Although Patel suggested that the right to pursue education  would  not
    generally fall within scope of a person's private life, the ability  to
    express one's hopes and dreams clearly was relevant  in  that  context.
    The appellant had made excellent progress in her studies and was  in  a
    different position from students who  were  unable  to  show  any  real
    improvement.  There  was  a  clear  public  interest  in  keeping  good
    students within the United  Kingdom.   Sedley  LJ  emphasised  this  in
    paragraph 4 of his judgment in GOO.  More recent authorities, including
    MF, Isuazu, and Nagre showed that even where the  requirements  of  the
    rules  were  not  met,  there  would  be  cases  in  which  exceptional
    circumstances could  be  shown  and  which  required  assessment  under
    Article 8.  This was the appropriate course in  the  appellant's  case.
    The judge had acknowledged that her case could  be  put  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The key was paragraph 23 of the determination where he  found
    that the level of course and the likely length of  studies  here  below
    degree level was a fundamental issue.  This clearly coloured  the  rest
    of the assessment.  If the finding that  this  factor  was  fundamental
    were removed, the error would be demonstrated.

11.  Mr Tufan said that the rule 24 response referred to  the  immateriality
    of the level of qualification in the overall assessment.  Even  if  the
    judge did err in that regard, there were  two  other  reasons  why  the
    requirements of the rules were not met  and  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed by showing that there had been  a  "near-miss".   The  guidance
    given in Patel fell to be applied.  GOO & Others was a case from an era
    that preceded the introduction of the points-based system.   Article  8
    was certainly capable of being engaged but students could not,  on  the
    whole, simply overcome deficiencies in applications  in  reliance  upon
    it.  Further guidance appeared in the second of the decisions in Nazim,
    where the Upper Tribunal  considered  several  student  cases  and  the
    correct approach to Article 8.

12.  There were no material errors in the determination.  The appellant  had
    a remedy available to her as she could apply again for leave  or  entry
    clearance, from abroad.

13.  Mr Evans said in a brief response that GOO was relevant in the  overall
    context and the reasons why the  United  Kingdom  had  an  interest  in
    allowing students to study here.  There was nothing in Patel preventing
    Article 8 from being engaged and relied upon where the requirements  of
    the rules were not met.

Conclusion on Error of Law

14.  The determination shows that the judge accepted a  submission  made  on
    the appellant's behalf that  an  Article  8  assessment  was  required,
    notwithstanding a failure to show that the requirements  of  the  rules
    were met.  The assessment begins at paragraph 21 of  the  determination
    and continues until paragraph 31.   It  has  not  been  argued  by  the
    Secretary of State that the judge's adverse finding regarding the level
    of course and paragraph 245ZX(h) of the rules was correct.  However, as
    Mr Tufan submitted, and as appears in the rule 24 response, there  were
    two other reasons why the judge found that the  requirements  were  not
    met.  These  concerned  the  validity  of  the  IELTS  certificate  the
    appellant relied upon and her failure to show that she held  sufficient
    funds for the required minimum period of 28 days.  Even  if  the  judge
    did err in relation to the level  of  course  to  be  pursued,  he  was
    entitled to find that the requirements of the rules were not met.

15.  It is correct,  as  Mr  Evans  submitted,  that  paragraph  23  of  the
    determination shows that the judge gave  more  weight  to  the  failure
    regarding paragraph 245ZX(h) than he did  to  the  other  two  aspects.
    Nonetheless, in proceeding to make his Article 8 assessment, he clearly
    did have regard to the salient features of the  case.   These  included
    the time the appellant has spent here  with  leave  as  a  student,  in
    accordance with the rules and the time, effort and  funds  invested  in
    her studies to date.  I find  that  the  judge  did  not  exclude  from
    consideration the supporting letters from her mother and  her  college.
    His Article 8 assessment is rather general but sufficient to show  that
    he had the appellant's case clearly in mind.

16.  The Secretary of State made an appropriate reference to  Patel  in  her
    rule 24 response and Mr Tufan developed the point in  his  submissions.
    The Upper Tribunal observed in Nazim [2014] UKUT 25  that  the  Supreme
    Court's judgment has refocused attention on the private and family life
    ties a person may have established here  and  the  importance  of  Lord
    Carnwath's judgment, at paragraphs 55 to 57, cannot be overlooked.   Mr
    Evans is again correct in submitting that students  are  not  prevented
    from relying upon Article 8 but the loss of an  opportunity  to  pursue
    further studies,  the  primary  consequence  of  failing  to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules in an application  for  further  leave  as  a
    student, is a factor of only modest weight in the Article 8 context.

17.  There is no reason to doubt that the appellant has been anything  other
    than a successful and accomplished student but the evidence before  the
    judge showed that she has established only  modest  private  life  ties
    since her arrival in the United Kingdom relatively recently in  October
    2011.  In the witness statement which was before  the  judge,  made  in
    April 2014, she drew attention to her studies and to the investment  of
    funds.  There is no detail  regarding  any  particular  friendships  or
    associations although it is, of course, very likely that the  appellant
    will have made friends during her studies here.   The  judge's  overall
    conclusion, in the light of this evidence, that the  adverse  decisions
    were proportionate was one which was open to him, even  accepting  that
    he erred in relation to the level of course the appellant  proposed  to
    take.

18.   The  determination  shows  that  the  judge  weighed   the   competing
    interests, as he was required to.  Taking into account the judgment  in
    Patel and the guidance given in Nazim, his conclusion was open  to  him
    on the basis of the appellant's failure to show that  the  requirements
    of the rules were met.  The margin of failure  was  slight  but  it  is
    clear from Patel that a "near-miss" principle has no application in the
    points-based system (and indeed the judge included in his determination
    parts of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Rodriguez  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 2 where the same point is made).

19.  I conclude, therefore, that even accepting  that  the  judge  erred  in
    relation to the level of the course the appellant wished to pursue, the
    error was not material and so the decision shall stand.

20.  The appellant's case was well put by Mr  Evans  and,  as  noted  above,
    there is no  reason  to  doubt  that  she  is  anything  other  than  a
    successful and industrious student.  She was advised in the  notice  of
    decision that she could make a fresh application.  Whether she does  so
    or not is entirely a matter for her.  The appellant may also apply  for
    entry clearance from abroad,  to  return  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    further studies and if she is able to show that all the requirements of
    the rules are met, she  may  reasonably  expect  a  favourable  outcome
    although the decision will be one for the Entry Clearance Officer.

DECISION

21.  The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  no  material
    error of law and shall stand.






Signed:                                 Dated:


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.




Signed:                                 Dated:


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



