
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01727/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24th November 2014                    |On 29th December 2014             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           MS PEACE JANE AZUBUIKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss O Momoh (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Beg promulgated on 9th September 2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 21st August 2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Peace Jane  Azubuike.   The  Appellant  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, who  was  born  on  8th  January
    1975.  She appealed against the decision of the Respondent  dated  10th
    December 2013, refusing her application for leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of a breach of her human rights, having lived  in  the  UK
    for very many years, and having had a child born here.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that, although her visit visa expired on  13th
    September 2003, she has lived in the UK  for  ten  years,  albeit  that
    period has been unlawfully spent here.  She has been working in the UK,
    although this has been done on the basis of her use of a fake passport.
     However, she had a daughter born  to  her  on  10th  June  2007.   The
    daughter's father is Eze Amadi and he is a Nigerian  national,  and  is
    now married and living in Nigeria.  The daughter herself, Angel  Adaeze
    Amadi, is at school, has five cousins who visit her  every  two  weeks,
    and is suffering from asthma and has treatment (see paragraph 8).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered  that  the  facts  were  essentially  against  the
    Appellant as far as her immigration history  was  concerned.   She  had
    arrived in the UK on 26th May 2003 and had overstayed by more than  ten
    years.  She  had  worked  illegally  until  she  was  encountered  when
    enforcement proceedings were made on 15th May 2013.   She  had  used  a
    counterfeit passport to gain employment.  The judge had regard  to  the
    relevant authorities under Article 8 in this case (see paragraphs 16 to
    18) and observed that although the child was suffering from asthma, and
    attended King's College Hospital, the drugs that she  was  on  involved
    using an inhaler for her asthma, a double base gel in relation  to  her
    dry skin and a tablet (see paragraph 18).   The  judge  concluded  that
    this was treatment that the Appellant's  child  could  receive  equally
    well in Nigeria which has a number of large hospitals (paragraph 19).

 5. Finally, the judge had to consider the public interests question, under
    the latest Rule changes and focussed upon Section 117B which makes  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control now to be  in  the  public
    interest.   Employing  the  language  in  that  provision,  the   judge
    concluded that "little weight" should be given to a private  life  that
    was established at a time when the applicant's immigration  status  was
    "precarious."  She had a relationship in the United Kingdom and  had  a
    child in full knowledge that the child had no right to  be  here.   She
    had  shown  little  regard  for  the  laws  of  the   United   Kingdom.
    Accordingly, she could not succeed (paragraph 28).

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the Appellant  was  unrepresented
    at  the  hearing  and  had  submitted   her   grounds   without   legal
    representation.  The judge had erred in law by  failing  to  take  into
    account the evidence of the Appellant's child who had been resident  in
    the UK for seven years.  The judge failed to give proper  consideration
    to Article 8.  She also failed to consider Section 35 of the BCIA 2009.



 7. On 17th October  2014,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   It  was
    observed that, "the judge recorded that the child  was  age  7  and  in
    those circumstances she should arguably also have considered the effect
    of Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002."

Submissions

 8. In her submissions before me, Ms Momoh stated that she would rely  upon
    the grant of permission by Judge Pooler.  She  relied  upon  the  cases
    therein set out, namely, ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4,  Azimi-Moayed
    [2003] UKUT 00197; and MK (Best Interests of the  Child)  India  [2011]
    UKUT 00475.  She submitted that the child was in school and doing  well
    there.  She referred to the latest bundle from Equity  Law  Solicitors,
    dated  12th  November  2014,  which  she  stated  reflected   all   the
    documentation that the Appellant herself  had  taken  to  the  Tribunal
    before Judge Beg, although she herself could not vouch for  this.   The
    latest bundle was properly paginated and she asked that the court  take
    this into account.  Mr Whitwell objected stating that he did  not  have
    the original bundle before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and one  could
    not be sure that the latest bundle from Equity Law Solicitors  did  not
    also have additional documents, given that this could not  be  checked.
    I decided that I would look at the original bundle that  I  had  in  my
    file for the purposes of  the  determination  of  the  question  as  to
    whether there had been an error of law.

 9. For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that this was nothing more  than  a
    disagreement with the outcome of the decision.  The mother  was  caught
    working illegally.  At the date of the application her child was  under
    7 years of age.  This was the relevant time.  If one looked  at  Phelan
    (at page 1051) it was clear that  Rule  E-LTRPT.2.2  states  that  "has
    lived in the UK continuously for at least the seven  years  immediately
    preceding the date of application and  paragraph  EX.1  applies."   The
    judge was right that the child was under 7 years of age at the date  of
    the application.  Second, even if the child was now  7  years  of  age,
    this did not matter because in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, the age  of  the
    children was 7 years, 4 years, and 5  months'  respectively.   In  that
    case, as in the instant case before this Tribunal,  the  children  were
    not British citizens, and did  not  have  the  right  to  remain  here.
    Subject to these submissions, Mr  Whitwell  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response of the Secretary of State.

10. In her reply Ms Momoh submitted that the age of 7 years was recorded at
    paragraph 23 of the  determination  and  the  judge  should  have  made
    specific Article 8 findings on this basis, which was not done.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision.   In  what  is
    otherwise a comprehensive and detailed determination, the judge at  the
    end of the determination, whilst dealing  with  the  question  of  Rule
    117B(6) does not (see paragraph 27) then proceed to  consider  how  the
    child's  interests  are  to  be  analysed.   At  paragraph  28  of  the
    determination, there is a reliance upon the  fact  that  little  weight
    should be given to private life that was established  when  immigration
    status was precarious.  There is an analysis of  the  failings  of  the
    Appellant herself in overstaying and working illegally in this country.



12. However,  the  child's  interests,  both  with  respect  to  her  "best
    interests" and also with respect to Section 55 of the  BCIA  2009,  are
    not evaluated.  Still less, is there an analysis of the application  of
    Article 8 to the facts in relation to the child, especially in relation
    to how she is doing at school, and the level of her integration.

13. Whereas the case law, in the way set out by the judge, and in  the  way
    explicated by Mr Whitwell before me, is now to the effect that  removal
    of an offending parent is feasible even where there are young  children
    born in the UK, there is still a need to make a careful analysis of the
    facts in relation to the child.  The failure to make  any  findings  in
    this context is an error of law.

14. The omission in this regard, may well be understandable, given that the
    Appellant herself was not represented  before  Judge  Beg,  and  proper
    submissions were not made,  apart  from  her  giving  evidence  on  her
    behalf.  Since this was the case, I remit this matter now back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal under Practice Statement 7.2,  to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than  Judge  Beg,  so  that  the  Appellant  may  have  the
    opportunity to have the child's interests considered in the context  of
    her own immigration failings.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This matter is remitted back to a judge other than
    Judge Beg to be heard de  novo  for  proper  findings  to  be  made  in
    relation to the child.  The appeal is  allowed  only  to  this  limited
    extent.

16. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014
