


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/01086/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 March 2018                          |On 20 March 2018                       |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                            SAMSON OLUSOJI OLODAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          No appearance
For the Respondent:      Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge G A Black promulgated on 27 June 2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal to vary leave to  remain
in the UK.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 07 July 1979 and is a national of  Nigeria.  On
15 February 2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's  application
to vary leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  tier  2  migrant.  The  appellant
entered the UK in April 2007 as a student.  Leave  to  remain  was  extended
until 1 March 2015. The appellant applied in time to vary leave  under  tier
2 as a minister of religion.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge G A Black ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 24 January  2018  Judge  Holingworth
granted  permission to appeal, stating

      It is arguable that the Judge has fallen into error  in  the  approach
      taken to  the  further  evidence  produced  by  the  respondent.  This
      evidence did not reach the Judge prior to  the  start  of  the  appeal
      hearing. Whilst the evidence had been provided on 19 June  it  was  in
      breach of directions. Clear directions were given by the  Tribunal  on
      form IA37 sent out on  21  December  2016.  It  was  arguable  in  the
      circumstances that procedural unfairness has  arisen.  The  permission
      application makes it clear that the further evidence played no part at
      the hearing. It is arguable that the Judge has set out an insufficient
      analysis or any analysis at all in  relation  to  the  extent  of  the
      evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  in  relation  to  an  innocent
      explanation. The permission application refers to paragraphs 6  to  13
      of the appellant's witness statement. In that  witness  statement  the
      appellant has described the circumstances appertaining to  taking  the
      examinations. At paragraph 7 of the decision the Judge found  that  no
      innocent explanation was relied on. It is arguable that the Judge  has
      failed to take into account the appellant's witness statement in  this
      regard. It is arguable that the Judge  has  set  out  an  insufficient
      analysis in relation to the matrix of factors relied upon in  relation
      to the issue of  the  appellant  being  sponsored  as  a  minister  of
      religion. It is arguable that the Judge should  have  dealt  with  the
      question of whether the appellant had completed  10  years  continuous
      lawful residence in the United Kingdom. That amended ground of  appeal
      set forward this point. The Judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  has
      established a private life as a result of his 10  years  residence  in
      the UK. It is arguable that  the  Judge  should  have  considered  the
      immigration rules in this context. The Judge referred to paragraph 276
      ADE (1) (i) & (vi). It is arguable that the Judge should have set  out
      a  full  analysis  in  relation  to  the  question  of  whether   very
      significant obstacles existed taking into account the  extent  of  the
      available evidence in this regard.

The hearing

6. The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was  he  represented  at  the
appeal. I am satisfied that due notice of the appeal  was  served  upon  the
Appellant at the address the appellant has given. I am  therefore  satisfied
that having been served notice of the hearing and not attended it is in  the
interests of  justice  to  proceed  with  the  hearing  in  the  Appellant's
absence, relying on paragraph 38 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.

7. The grounds of appeal for the appellant were  framed  by  counsel.  There
are four grounds of appeal. The first is that the Judge erred in the  weight
attributed to the evidence that the appellant is a Minister of religion,  so
that his finding that the appellant is a musician rather than a minister  of
religion is unsafe. The second is that the Judge's conclusion  at  paragraph
7 in relation to the immigration rules is made in error and is  inadequately
reasoned. The third ground of appeal is that the Judge  failed  to  consider
paragraph 276B of the immigration rules. The  fourth  ground  of  appeal  is
that the Judge's consideration of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the  rules  is
inadequately reasoned.

8.(a)  For the respondent, Mr Clarke told me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law. He told me that, because both the  decision  and  the
application predate April 2015, the appellant enjoys rights of appeal  which
include appeals under the immigration rules. He took me to  the  appellant's
application, in  which  the  appellant  specified  that  his  job  title  is
"Minister of religion". He referred me to rule 245HG and reminded  me  that,
in terms of appendix 1 to the rules (as they were at the date  of  decision)
the appellant needed 50 points to succeed, and  that  the  award  of  points
would be governed by the CoS. The CoS relied on by the  appellant  describes
his job title as "instrumentalist". That description  places  the  appellant
within SoC code description  3415, so  that  the  appellant  cannot  succeed
under the immigration rules.

(b) Mr Clarke told me that the second ground of appeal is an  allegation  of
procedural unfairness. He referred me  specifically  to  the  terms  of  the
grounds of appeal where (at paragraph 9(i)) counsel for the  appellant  says
that the respondent's supplementary bundle was received

      ... The day before the hearing, and therefore far too late to  respond
to it.

(c) Mr Clarke told me that the appellant did not  seek  an  adjournment  and
did not make submissions in relation to the  supplementary  bundle.  Counsel
for the appellant did not object to the receipt of  the  evidence,  although
late. The Judge records, at [3] of the decision, that she  took  account  of
the further bundle of evidence. He told me that  in  the  circumstances  the
Judge was perfectly entitled to do so.  He  told  me  that  the  grounds  of
appeal make it clear that the appellant had  fair  notice  of  the  evidence
produced by the respondent and made no attempt to object to  that  evidence.
He  said  that,  in  those  circumstances,  there   cannot   be   procedural
unfairness.

(d) Mr Clarke told me that the appellant has not made an  application  under
paragraph 276B of the immigration rules. The decision  appealed  against  is
not a consideration of paragraph 276B of the rules so that if the Judge  had
considered paragraph 276B of the rules that would  have  been  an  error  of
law. In any event the Judge's decision is that the  appellant  has  employed
deception so that paragraph 322 of the  immigration  rules  is  engaged.  He
told me that finding means that (in any event)  the  appellant  cannot  meet
the requirements of paragraph 276B(iii) of the rules.

(e) Mr Clarke took me to [9] of the Judge's decision and told  me  that  the
final sentences there provide adequate reasoning  for  the  Judge's  finding
that paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) of the rules is not met and that there are  no
significant obstacles to the appellants reintegration into Nigeria.



Analysis

9. Notwithstanding what was said  by  Mr  Clarke,  in  this  case  the  only
competent ground of appeal is on ECHR grounds. The  appellant's  application
was made on 1  April  2015.  Under  the  pre-Immigration  Act  2014  appeals
regime, rights of appeal existed against the refusal of an application:

      (i) where entry clearance was refused, although the available  grounds
      of appeal are limited for some cases by section 88A

       (ii) where a certificate of entitlement  to  a  right  of  abode  was
      refused

      (iii) where a decision was taken to refuse to vary a person's leave to
      enter or remain in the UK if the result of the  refusal  is  that  the
      person has no leave

Those appeal rights continue to exist for  decisions  made  on  or  after  6
April 2015, but only where an application was made before 2 March  2015  for
leave to remain as a Tier 1 migrant, Tier 2 migrant or  Tier  5  migrant  or
their family member

10. The appellant's application was an application for leave to remain as  a
tier 2 (Minister of religion) Migrant and was made on  1  April  2015.  Even
though the decision notice sets out the rights of appeal  which  could  only
apply if the appellant's application was submitted before 2 March 2015,  the
only competent ground of appeal is on article 8 ECHR grounds. The fact  that
the respondent made an error and appears to offer grounds  of  appeal  which
are not available does not create competent grounds of appeal.

11. As a result the third ground of appeal is incompetent.

12. The first ground of appeal relates to the weight that the Judge gave  to
certain evidence, and the Judge's finding that the appellant is a  musician,
not a Minister of  religion.  Mr  Clarke's  submission  about  the  evidence
produced is entirely correct. The CoS details which the appellant relies  on
clearly identifies the appellant as an  instrumentalist.  It  describes  the
appellant's job title as "instrumentalist". It describes  the  job  type  as
"3415 musicians". The summary of job description provided dwells on  musical
accompaniment. That is the  evidence  that  the    appellant  relied  on  to
support his application, so it is difficult to  see  what  other  conclusion
the Judge could have come to.

13. At [6] of the decision the Judge analyses the appellant's  evidence  and
the evidence of his witnesses. In reality, ground one is a  complaint  about
the weight that the Judge attached to various strands of evidence. In  Green
(Article 8 - new rules)  [2013]  UKUT  254  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  said  that
"Giving weight to a factor one way  or  another  is  for  the  fact  finding
Tribunal and the assignment of weight will rarely give rise to an  error  of
law".  There is no merit to the first ground of appeal.

14. The second ground of appeal goes straight [7] of the decision  and  says
that procedural unfairness tainted the Judge's conclusions  in  relation  to
paragraphs 322(5)  and  245HD(a)  of  the  immigration  rules.  The  grounds
concede that the respondent's supplementary  bundle  was  received  the  day
before the hearing (albeit after close of business) and complains  that  the
appellant was deprived of the opportunity to respond.

15. No application was made to  adjourn.  No  objection  was  taken  to  the
receipt of the evidence, although late. The  appellant  was  represented  by
counsel at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Counsel  had  the
opportunity to oppose the admission of that  evidence.  The  respondent  was
not represented before the First-tier. Counsel did not take the  opportunity
to either seek an adjournment or to object to the admission of evidence.  In
those circumstances there cannot be  procedural  unfairness.  The  appellant
had notice of the case to be argued for the respondent  before  the  hearing
commenced. That notice came late, but if  it  made  any  difference  to  the
appellants case then Counsel representing the  appellant  would  have  taken
the opportunity to object to the admission of the evidence, and to  seek  an
adjournment if the evidence was admitted. Those  are  the  safeguards  which
provide for procedural fairness. The appellant was represented  by  counsel.
Counsel chose to proceed with the hearing.

16. The second  ground  of  appeal  argues  that  the  burden  of  proof  is
incorrectly applied and that the principles in SM and Qadir (ETS -  Evidence
- Burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229 IAC were ignored by the Judge.

17.  In   R   (on   the   application   of   Nawaz)   v   SSHD   (ETS:review
standard/evidential basis) [2017] UKUT 00288 it was held that  the  standard
in ETS cases is on ordinary judicial review principles and deception is  not
a question of precedent fact except in particular  circumstances.   Evidence
of an applicant's English language skills is unlikely to have  any  decisive
effect in judicial review proceedings on the fairness of the decision  under
challenge.  Evidence obtained by the use of the Look-up Tool and subject  to
the human verification procedure,  is  an  adequate  basis  for  the  SSHD's
deception finding in these cases bearing in mind the case  of  Flynn  [2008]
EWCA Crim 970 [24 - 27] and  the  evidence  of  Dr  Harrison  and  Professor
French.  The lack of visible note-taking by the  human  verifiers  does  not
provide  any  ground  of  challenge  to  the  decision   as   insufficiently
transparent, where there has been an offer  (whether  accepted  or  not)  to
provide a copy of a voice recording for analysis.

18. In Shehzad and Chowdhury  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615  it  was  held  that  a
decision under paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules required  material  justifying
a conclusion that the individual under consideration had lied  or  submitted
false documents. The  initial  evidential  burden  of  furnishing  proof  of
deception was on the Secretary  of  State.  Where  the  Secretary  of  State
provided prima facie evidence of deception,  the  burden  shifted  onto  the
individual  to  provide  a  plausible  innocent  explanation,  and  if   the
individual did so the burden shifted back to  the  Secretary  of  State.  In
effect it was held that a screenshot of the results which stated  that  that
was the position and included the "ETS Lookup Tool" which showed  the  tests
that were  categorised  as  "invalid"  sufficed  to  discharge  the  initial
burden.

19. At [7] of the decision the Judge explains why  she  places  reliance  on
the respondent's evidence  and  why  the  burden  of  proof  shifts  to  the
appellant. In the grounds of appeal the appellant complains that  paragraphs
6 to 13 of his witness statement have been ignored.  Paragraph 6  to  13  of
the appellant's witness  statement  gives  an  account  of  the  appellant's
journey to Elizabeth College to take the TOIEC  exam.  The  evidence  simply
amounts to an assertion that the appellant  travelled  to  the  College  and
took the exam himself. It does  not  offer  an  innocent  explanation  which
would meaningfully challenge the  evidence  contained  in  the  respondent's
supplementary bundle. The Judge's finds that the appellant does not give  an
explanation capable of displacing the respondent's evidence  that  his  test
results were found to be invalid. That is a finding which was  available  to
the Judge on the evidence presented. A description of a journey to and  from
college and a description of the component parts of a TOIEC  exam  does  not
offer an  innocent  explanation  capable  of  explaining  away  prima  facie
evidence that a proxy test taker had been used.

20. As I  have  already  indicated,  the  third  ground  of  appeal  is  not
competent because the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to
consider an appeal under the immigration  rules.  In  any  event  the  third
ground of appeal makes little sense because the appellant's application  was
not made under paragraph 276B of the immigration rules. Even if I  am  wrong
in each of those points, because the Judge finds that the  appellant  relies
on a fraudulently obtained English language test certificate  the  Judge  is
correct to find that the appellant falls foul of paragraphs 322(2) & (5)  of
the rules. That finding means that paragraph 276B(iii)  of  the  rules  must
operate against the appellant, so  that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed
under paragraph 276B of the immigration rules.

21. At [9] of the decision the Judge finds that there are  very  significant
obstacles to the appellants reintegration in Nigeria do not exist,  so  that
the appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
the rules.  The  fourth  ground  of  appeal  argues  that  that  finding  is
inadequately reasoned. There is no merit in the  fourth  ground  of  appeal.
[9] of the decision contains  a  comprehensive  consideration  of  paragraph
276ADE of the rules in its entirety. The Judge's proportionality  assessment
of article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal contains the same  considerations  which
are required by paragraph 276ADE of the rules. The  second  and  third  last
sentences of [9] are succinct findings of fact  which  indicate  that  there
are no obstacles to the appellants reintegration in Nigeria. It  would  have
done no harm  if  those  two  sentences  occurred  earlier  in  [9]  of  the
decision, but that is  a  question  of  style.  The  substance  of  the  two
sentences is contained in the decision. There  are  clearly  findings  which
apply to the article 8 assessment both in terms of paragraph 276 ADE of  the
rules and in terms of a freestanding article 8 assessment.

22.  In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

23. There is nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  In
reality the appellant's appeal amounts to little more  than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as she found them  to  be.  The
respondent might not like the conclusion that the Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result of the correctly applied legal  equation.  The
correct test in law has been  applied.  The  decision  does  not  contain  a
material error of law.

24.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.

25.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

26.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 27 June 2017, stands.


Signed        Paul Doyle
  Date: 19 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle




