
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01419/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields Upper Tribunal           |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 December 2012 and 19 August 2013          |On 4 December 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               farid belmihoub
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Rasoul, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Rackstraw, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Farid Belmihoub, was born on 29 August  1979  and  is  a
    male citizen of Algeria.  By a decision dated 10 December 2012,  I  set
    aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  27
    February 2012.  My reasons for doing so are set out below:

         CNL insert reasons for error

 2. At the resumed hearing at North Shields on 19 August 2012,  Ms  Rasoul,
    for the appellant, explained that, despite enquiries having  been  made
    by her  instructing  solicitors  to  Brook  House  no  further  records
    regarding the appellant's time in that  institution  could  be  located
    and, as a consequence, there was no  further  evidence  concerning  the
    alleged attempted suicide of the appellant in June 2009 (see  paragraph
    8 above).

 3. It is unfortunate that no further evidence regarding that incident  has
    been forthcoming.  As it stands, there was little to take the  evidence
    beyond what the appellant himself  had  said  about  the  incident  and
    Professor Katona's note of  the  appellant  allegedly  sought  to  hurt
    himself.

 4. The appellant  attended  the  resumed  hearing  and  gave  evidence  in
    English.  He was mildly intoxicated but I am satisfied that he was able
    to understand the questions put to him and  his  answers  were  largely
    coherent.  No application was made for the proceedings to be adjourned.
     The appellant said that he remained in touch with his sister who lives
    in France.  He is not in touch with his  family  in  Algeria.   He  was
    asked about the incident in June 2009 and explained that he  had  split
    with his "girlfriend" in about 2005.  He explained that  he  had  "lost
    [my  girlfriend],  lost  my  house  and   had   to   go   into   hostel
    accommodation".  At about this time, that he had begun smoking  "heroin
    crack".  He took an overdose in 2006 because he hated his life.  By the
    incident in 2009, the appellant said that he had "had enough",  he  did
    not like what he was doing in this country and the life he was leading,
    smoking crack cocaine and achieving nothing.  He missed his parents and
    complained that his brother had been shot.  When asked  about  what  he
    feared in Algeria, the appellant replied, "the country  is  run  by  Al
    Queda".  He said that if he returned to Algeria now he  would  have  to
    "watch my back".

 5. The six-stage test  that  the  Tribunal  should  adopt  in  considering
    whether the appellant is at risk of committing suicide is  set  out  in
    paragraphs 26-31 (inclusive) of J [2005] EWCA Civ 629:

    CNL to insert 26-31 of J.

 6. I am not persuaded that the appellant faces any ill-treatment should he
    return to Algeria.  Successive Tribunals have found that the  appellant
    is at no risk whatsoever either from the State  authorities,  terrorist
    groups or other individuals or groups within Algeria.  His fear has  no
    objective basis.  That fact was underlined by the oral  evidence  which
    the appellant gave at the resumed hearing.  When asked to explain  what
    he feared in Algeria, he could only say that he was  unhappy  that  the
    country was, in his opinion, run by Islamist extremists,  an  assertion
    which is not borne out  by  the  background  evidence.   He  could  not
    explain why extremists within Algeria would wish to target him.  I have
    to say that I was struck by the clear insight which this appellant has,
    despite his mental difficulties and, on the day  of  the  hearing,  his
    intoxication.  He gave the impression of "thinking on  his  feet"  when
    asked questions in cross-examination I find that his response referring
    to Al Queda was an example of that.  I find that the appellant not only
    lacks any objective well-founded reason for fearing persecution or ill-
    treatment in Algeria .............. he is also himself  aware  of  that
    fact.  I do not find that he is labouring under a misapprehension  that
    he will be ill-treated in Algeria.  Further, when given the opportunity
    to describe the 2009 incident (which the appellant had previously  said
    was connected with the outcome of an appeal concerning  an  immigration
    status) he made no reference to immigration matters but  instead  spoke
    of the self-disgust which he was feeling at  that  time  having  become
    addicted  to  crack  cocaine.   I  have  considered  all  the  evidence
    carefully and in particular having regard to the  oral  evidence  which
    the appellant gave at the resumed hearing, I am not satisfied that,  if
    an incident of self-harm did occur in June 2009,  it  was  directly  or
    indirectly related to the appellant's fear of being removed to Algeria.
     I find that, by the appellant's own admission, any incident which  did
    occur is effectively the  culmination  of  a  downward  spiral  in  the
    appellant's mental health which had been initiated by breaking up  with
    his girlfriend and losing his home.

 7. The findings which I have made above  have  been  reached  following  a
    careful consideration of all the evidence including the reports  of  Dr
    Katona and the statement of Miss McKinney.  I  have  reached  the  very
    firm conclusion that  the  appellant,  who  has  suffered  from  mental
    illness from a relatively young age, tends to harm himself for  reasons
    largely unconnected with the fear  of  being  returned  to  Algeria,  a
    country where, as the appellant himself is aware, he need not fear harm
    at the hands of any group or individual.  I find that it is  reasonably
    likely that the appellant, upon returning to Algeria,  will  experience
    the "highs and lows" which have characterised his time  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst I accept that the "lows" might lead the  appellant  to
    seek to harm himself, he has failed to produce any evidence which would
    indicate that he could not access drug or other therapy  (albeit  at  a
    cost) to ameliorate his condition.  Whilst he  remains  in  the  United
    Kingdom (and whilst he is in transit from this country  to  Algeria)  I
    find that adequate steps can be taken by those charged  with  his  care
    and conduct to ensure that he does not harm himself.

 8. I have considered  what  Professor  Katona  has  said  in  his  report,
    including the conclusion which I have quoted above.  In  the  preceding
    paragraph, Professor Katona wrote:

    Mr Belmihoub has spent most of his adult life in the  UK.   He  has  no
    close family left in Algeria.  He appeared unshakably convinced that if
    he were forced to return to Algeria "I'd  be  dead.   I'd  be  tortured
    first."  He added that I'd hang myself rather than go to Algeria.

 9. As I have noted  above,  I  do  not  find  that  the  appellant  has  a
    subjective fear of  returning  to  Algeria.   He  may  have  given  the
    appearance of being "unshakably convinced" that he would be tortured in
    Algeria, but not only is that assertion completely  unfounded  from  an
    objective point of view, I also do not find that the appellant actually
    believes that he would be ill-treated.  Professor  Katona's  conclusion
    that the appellant is at high risk of  suicide  if  he  faces  imminent
    removal to Algeria is founded upon his acceptance for the appellant  as
    a powerful, subjective fear of returning to Algeria.  To  that  extent,
    Professor Katona's conclusion is based on a misapprehension.

10. In the same paragraph, Professor Katona goes on to express  his  belief
    that the appellant would have a restricted capacity to work and support
    himself if he were forced to return to  Algeria.   Without  support  or
    income from work, the appellant would resume his abuse of  opiates  and
    alcohol and subsequently "revert  to  a  life  of  crime  to  fund  his
    substance dependence".  I  consider  it  likely  that  the  appellant's
    material circumstances will suffer if he returns to Algeria but, as the
    Court of Appeal noted in J, as this is a "foreign case" the "Article  3
    ECHR" threshold is set particularly  high.   The  threshold  is  raised
    further by reason of the fact that the appellant is not  at  risk  from
    ill-treatment inflicted by the  public  authorities  of  the  receiving
    State.  If the appellant remained in the United Kingdom, I consider  it
    likely, having regard to the medical evidence  and  his  past  history,
    that he would drift in and out of periods of mental  illness  and  drug
    dependency.  The fact that his life might follow a similar  pattern  in
    Algeria is not, however, sufficient grounds  for  allowing  his  appeal
    under Article 3 ECHR.

11. In the circumstances, I find that the appellant has failed to establish
    that Article 3 ECHR would be breached if he  were  to  be  returned  to
    Algeria.  I find that the appellant has sought to exaggerate his likely
    reaction to being required to return to Algeria.  I find that Professor
    Katona, no doubt had the appellant's best interests  in  mind  when  he
    prepared his report, has placed too much reliance upon the  appellant's
    claimed fears of returning  to  Algeria.   Whilst  I  accept  that  the
    appellant has attempted to harm himself in  the  past,  none  of  those
    attempts have been shown to be related to his fear of removal  and  the
    evidence concerning the 2009 incident, in particular, remains vague.  I
    accept that the appellant has spent a lengthy period of time living  in
    the United Kingdom but he has not shown  that  the  particular  private
    life ties which he has  established  here  may  not  be  replicated  in
    Algeria, the country of his nationality.  In all the  circumstances,  I
    find that his appeal should be dismissed.

DECISION

12. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

