
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01827/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 January 2015                            |On 3 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                         Mr Memusi Leshinka Naigoyek
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Iqbal, Solicitor of Wainwright & Cummins
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant,  a  national  of  Kenya,  appealed  against  a  decision
    refusing to issue him with  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006  Regulations).
    Although  he  had  earlier  been  married  to  an  Irish  citizen   the
    application and appeal were concerned with  the  appellant's  unmarried
    partnership with a German citizen.  The application was refused on  the
    basis that the appellant had not established that the relationship  was
    durable, as required by the 2006 Regulations.

2.   Following a hearing at  Hatton  Cross  in  June  2014  the  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hunter,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on  8  July  2014.   Permission  to  appeal  was  initially
    refused, but on renewed application to the Upper Tribunal permission to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Allen.   The  first  ground
    challenging the judge's approach had been concerned with the  reasoning
    process leading to the judge's conclusion that the  appellant  and  his
    claimed partner were in fact friends, rather than partners.  The second
    ground concerned the judge's failure to consider Article 8.  The  Upper
    Tribunal Judge granting permission indicated that he  saw  no  arguable
    merit in the first ground, but that the second was arguable.

3.   At the error of law hearing on 18 December  2014  I  indicated  to  the
    parties that it was my view, having read the papers and spoken to Upper
    Tribunal Judge Allen, that both grounds could  be  argued.   The  first
    ground had not been refused.  In any event a consideration in isolation
    of Article  8  would  be  an  academic  exercise.   Having  given  that
    indication I then  agreed,  at  the  request  of  Mr  Melvin,  who  was
    representing the Secretary of State, to adjourn the hearing.  This  was
    on the basis that Mr Melvin had arrived  prepared  only  to  argue  the
    second ground.

4.   On 29 January 2015 I heard submissions from both sides as to whether  a
    material error of law had been shown  on  the  first  ground.   It  was
    agreed between the parties that this ground could be considered  first,
    with any submissions in relation to the second ground  being  made,  if
    necessary, dependent on the success or otherwise of the first ground.

Error of Law

5.   Having listened to the submissions by  both  sides  I  decided,  on  an
    analysis of paragraphs 48 to 57  of  the  judge's  determination,  that
    there was a material  error  of  law  established,  for  the  following
    reasons.

6.   The judge accepted a number of significant points.   First  of  all  it
    was accepted that there was  a  relationship  as  friends  between  the
    appellant and his claimed partner.  It was also accepted that there was
    significant financial support from her to him; and it was also accepted
    that the couple were living together  from  April  2014  onwards.   The
    difference therefore between those findings and the finding of  durable
    relationship was not a large one.

7.   I have  considered  the  submissions  made  by  both  sides  about  the
    contested December 2010 date.  My view of that  is  that  the  December
    2010 date that appears from paragraph 48 of  the  determination  is  an
    error as to the start of the relationship; but I accept what Mr Avery's
    submission that it is not an error that is of any significance. This is
    the case because I cannot see a clear connection between that error and
    the  actual  adverse  findings  in  paragraphs  54   to   57   of   the
    determination.

8.   Looking at those findings, however, they rest on  two  adverse  points.
    The first point is that there was no mention of the relationship at the
    2013 appeal; and the second point is that the letters of  support  were
    rejected for the reasons given at paragraph 54 of the decision.  I have
    looked at both of those points and it seems to me  that  both  rest  on
    factual errors as to the evidence and also fail to  take  into  account
    the appellant's health at the time that he appeared as an unrepresented
    appellant.

9.   On the first point about the 2013 appeal it seems to me that there  was
    an incorrect assumption made by the  judge  about  the  nature  of  the
    consideration of Article 8 in that appeal.  From the  determination  of
    the 2013 appeal it is clear that there  was  a  preliminary  discussion
    where the judge made clear  to  the  appellant,  who,  as  I  say,  was
    unrepresented, that there was not going  to  be  any  consideration  of
    Article 8.  This was partly on the basis that no removal  decision  had
    been taken.  It therefore appears that the consideration of  Article  8
    that occurred in the written  determination  was  one  that  the  judge
    embarked on after the hearing; and the assumption made  therefore  that
    was central to Judge Hunter's adverse findings rested on  an  incorrect
    assumption that there  had  been  evidence  about  Article  8  at  that
    hearing.

10.  Turning to the second point, which refers to the  letters,  these  were
    in essence rejected because of the evidence about the inability of  the
    appellant to manage the stairs at the  address.   The  difficulty  here
    that does appear to me to be a mistake in relation to the  evidence  is
    that the evidence on that point concerned his  ability  to  manage  the
    stairs alone rather than his ability to manage the stairs at all.  Once
    that is appreciated the logic of the adverse reasoning is undermined.

11.  The letters are rejected at paragraph 56  as  not  being  credible  for
    reasons that the judge  had  set  out  and  that  must  refer  back  to
    paragraph 54; but paragraph 54 does not mention the other five  letters
    of support.   This  raises  another  point  which  is  that  there  was
    significant evidence relevant to the durable relationship  issue,  that
    was either not considered or, if it was  considered,  no  reasons  were
    given for rejecting it.  My  view  as  a  result  is  that  there  were
    mistakes of fact as to the evidence and  a  combination  of  inadequate
    reasoning and a failure to consider relevant evidence in the  reasoning
    process leading to the adverse finding that the  couple  were  in  fact
    nothing more than friends.  This  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    adverse finding  on  durable  relationship  is  not  one  that  can  be
    sustained, resting on these legal errors, and I therefore set it aside.



12.  Having indicated to  the  parties  at  the  hearing  my  error  of  law
    decision in relation to the first ground, and that I was minded to  set
    aside the finding on durable relationship, I invited  submissions  from
    the parties as to the process  of  remaking  the  decision.   After  an
    opportunity to take instructions Ms Iqbal, for the appellant, agreed to
    withdraw the Article  8  ground.   It  was  also  agreed  that  certain
    findings could be preserved from the judge's decision.  These were  the
    findings of significant financial support, and also  the  finding  that
    the couple were living together from April 2014 onwards.  On this basis
    the matter proceeded to an immediate remaking hearing  on  the  durable
    relationship issue.   Evidence  was  called  from  the  appellant,  his
    claimed partner, and a friend of the couple.

Re-making

13.  In order to understand the issues  a  brief  overview  of  the  factual
    scenario is required.  Most aspects of the statements by the  appellant
    and the sponsor were not in dispute.  The outline of the key points  is
    as follows.  The appellant married an Irish citizen in Kenya  in  2000,
    and subsequently moved to Germany where he lived with her.  It  was  at
    this time that he first met the sponsor.  The appellant  and  his  then
    wife moved to the UK in 2003.  He was given a series of residence cards
    as  her  spouse.   In  2009,  on  a  trip  to  Kenya,  the  appellant's
    relationship with the  sponsor  started,  and  shortly  afterwards  the
    appellant separated from his wife.  Although this was not the case when
    the appeal was initially heard the  appellant  and  his  wife  are  now
    divorced.  A document from the Family Court at Pontypridd was  produced
    showing decree absolute on 8 December 2014.

14.  The appellant's circumstances were changed  dramatically  by  a  stroke
    that he suffered in October 2010.  He was hospitalised for a number  of
    weeks, and this was followed by rehabilitative care.  He  continues  to
    suffer the affects of the  stroke,  as  was  evident  at  the  hearing,
    particularly in relation to his mobility.  After  various  applications
    for permanent residence based on his residence as the family member  of
    his ex-wife, and an appeal in  2013,  the  current  application  for  a
    residence card was made in  September  2013.   The  appellant  and  the
    sponsor were not able to live together  until  April  2014  because  of
    difficulties connected with the appellant's stroke and  its  aftermath,
    but the sponsor remained closely involved in supporting and caring  for
    the appellant throughout.

15.  The appellant and the sponsor were cross-examined about  how  they  had
    spent Christmas and New Year, and also about their interests and  other
    matters.  The friend had also been present at New Year's Eve, and  gave
    evidence about her view of the nature of the relationship.

16.  At the end of the oral evidence both representatives made  submissions.
     Mr Avery, for the respondent, accepted that the oral evidence had been
    broadly consistent, although not entirely.  He relied  on  the  refusal
    letter, although he acknowledged that the reasoning in it  was  limited
    on the central contested issue.

Findings on Durable Relationship

17.  Having considered all of the evidence as a whole my finding is that  it
    is more likely than not that the nature of the relationship between the
    appellant and the sponsor is as they  have  claimed.   Nothing  in  the
    evidence appears to me to justify the conclusion that they are  nothing
    more than friends.  The only points relied on  in  the  refusal  letter
    were that the couple were not living together, and that  the  appellant
    was still married  to  his  wife.   Both  of  these  points  have  been
    addressed and explained at length in the statements.  There is also the
    preserved finding that the couple were living together from April  2014
    onwards.  By the time of the hearing before me the  appellant  and  his
    first wife were divorced.

18.  It is also the case that the  author  of  the  refusal  letter  had  to
    consider the matter on the basis of documentary  evidence  alone.   The
    statements provide a considerable  amount  of  detail,  giving  a  full
    explanation of the circumstances in  which  the  relationship  started.
    There was no dispute about any of  the  medical  evidence  showing  the
    nature of the stroke that  the  appellant  suffered,  and  the  serious
    consequences of it that he continues to live with.  Nothing in the oral
    evidence pointed in any way to any conclusion other than that this  was
    a genuine loving relationship.  The factual picture,  particularly  the
    extensive practical and financial support that the  sponsor  has  given
    the appellant since his stroke, and  their  cohabitation,  all  suggest
    that they are a couple.  The reactions  of  all  three  witnesses  gave
    every indication  of  a  loving  relationship.   The  nature  of  their
    relationship was supported by various letters  from  friends.   Nothing
    that emerged in the oral evidence about the  couple's  activities  over
    Christmas and New Year gave any indication that they were not a genuine
    couple in a durable relationship.

19.  My finding, therefore, is that the appellant has  established  that  he
    is in a durable relationship with the sponsor.

20.  As an unmarried partner of an EEA national the appellant  falls  within
    the category of an extended family member rather than a family  member.
    As a result there is no automatic entitlement to a residence card.  The
    Secretary of State has a discretion as to whether such a card should be
    issued.  This discretion is to be exercised under Regulation  17(4)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  On the basis of the documentary evidence  before
    me there do not appear to  be  any  adverse  matters  relevant  to  the
    exercise of that discretion, but nevertheless the  discretion  has  not
    been exercised, because the refusal letter stopped at the point of  not
    accepting that there was sufficient evidence to establish  the  durable
    relationship.

21.  On this basis it was agreed at the  hearing  that  a  remaking  of  the
    decision should be limited to the outcome of the decision not being  in
    accordance with the law, in order to allow for the Secretary  of  State
    to exercise the discretion under Regulation 17(4).

22.  It was not suggested by  either  side  that  there  was  any  need  for
    anonymity in this appeal, and I make no such direction.  The outcome of
    the appeal rested on evidence not submitted with the  application,  and
    as a result, despite the outcome, I see no reason to make a fee award.

23.  Having decided  that  the  adverse  findings  on  durable  relationship
    rested on material errors of law I  set  that  aspect  of  the  judge's
    decision aside.  In remaking the decision I allow  the  appeal  to  the
    limited extent that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

24.  It was agreed that there was no need for me to consider Article 8.

Notice of Decision

25.  In remaking the decision the appeal is allowed to the extent  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and the application remains
    outstanding awaiting the exercise of discretion under Regulation 17  of
    the 2006 Regulations.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Despite having allowed the appeal I have  decided,  for  the  reasons  given
above, not to make any fee award.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

