
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01883/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 March 2016                             |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                         Mrs NABILA BANU ABDULGAFAR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dixon, Counsel instructed by David Williams
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  dated  22  September
    2015. The appeal relates to a decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  C
    Burns sitting at Sheldon  Court,  Birmingham  whereby  a  Decision  and
    Reasons was promulgated on 29 June 2015.   The Judge at the  First-tier
    Tribunal had dismissed the appeal on all grounds  in  respect  of  this
    Appellant and  three  other  Appellants.  As  noted  in  the  grant  of
    permission, only this Appellant has appealed against that decision.

2.    The grounds of appeal contend that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the devastating effect of the Respondent's removal  directions.
    The family would be "torn apart" because the Appellant would be removed
    to Kenya  whereas  her  husband  and  children  would  be  returned  to
    Pakistan. It would not be in the best interests of the children for the
    children to be separated from their mother and a breach of  section  55
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.


3.    At the hearing before me Mr Dixon said that  this  was  an  Article  8
    case. It was a case outside of the Rules concerning a decision of Judge
    Burns. He said it was  a  relatively  unusual  case.  The  Respondent's
    decision would mean removal to two different countries; the  mother  to
    Kenya and the husband and sons to Pakistan. The Judge had not  analysed
    or considered properly or at all that conundrum. Mr Dixon said  it  was
    more serious because the father had never lived in Pakistan. He has  no
    immediate connection to Pakistan. The mother's position  is  not  quite
    the same. She left as a late teenager. It adds context to the  problem.
    That was the core of the challenge  and  it  was  submitted  it  was  a
    material error of law.

4.    The Judge does have in mind Pakistan or Kenya and at paragraph  46  he
    came close to considering these issues. If they were to live  in  India
    then there was no consideration of whether the father could  reasonably
    live in  Kenya.  Mr  Dixon  said  maybe  there  would  be  a  residence
    requirement. Alternatively in  respect  of  Pakistan,  the  Judge  does
    envisage a split there. There was  no  rigorous  consideration  of  the
    effect of splitting. It is the removal which engages Article 8. But for
    the removal there is  no  Article  8  question.  Here  the  removal  is
    inherently one of splitting. The point is made  good  when  looking  at
    Zoumbas.

5.    In his submissions Mr Richards said that he  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    Reply. This is a case with parents of different nationalities. It would
    not have been appropriate to give removal directions to  Kenya  if  the
    party is not of that country. It does not mean that there is a split in
    the family. It is for the family to decide whatever  arrangements  they
    seek to make.  The  Judge  clearly  did  have  in  mind  the  different
    countries  of  nationality  and  he  dealt  with  the  same  more  than
    adequately at paragraphs 46 and 47 of his decision. There was simply no
    error of law and the decision ought to stand.

6.    In reply Mr Dixon said  that  in  principle  the  Secretary  of  State
    cannot give  Removal  Directions  to  a  country  where  she  does  not
    reasonably consider there can be removal to. He agreed that  there  was
    only one Appellant before me and that the other  three  Appellants  had
    not appealed.

7.    As for whether there was any evidence put before the  Judge  that  the
    husband/children could not live in Kenya, Mr Dixon said he  would  need
    to take instructions. Having done so he said that in terms  of  whether
    the father could legally enter and reside in  Kenya,  his  instructions
    were that this was not expressly canvassed by the Appellant before  the
    Judge. Mr Dixon said that  the  best  interests  factors  in  terms  of
    splitting and removing was essentially related to  education.  He  said
    that again Zoumbas was really important.

8.    Mr Dixon said indirect contact is generally not feasible.  It  depends
    on the extent of the contact. There was nothing in the determination to
    say that the relationship with the grandparents was  not  close.  Beoku
    Betts is still relevant. Those  two  taken  together  do  amount  to  a
    material  error  of  law.  In  any  event  there  was   no   sufficient
    consideration as to the extent to which these parents  have  meaningful
    ties to their respective countries. In  response  to  the  case  of  EV
    (Philippines) the issue is not just that they are over  stayers.  There
    cannot be a best interests analysis in this way. They cannot even speak
    the language of their parents. They speak English. The matter  for  the
    children is that they be  removed  only  to  a  country  where  there's
    reasonable communication. There is also the issue of the  other  family
    members. I was invited to allow the appeal.

9.    I had reserved my decision.

10.   It is worth highlighting that at paragraphs 12 and 13 of  the  Judge's
    decision it was conceded that the Immigration Rules could not  be  met.
    This  was  therefore  an   appeal   solely   related   to   Article   8
    considerations. The basis upon which that was put before the  Judge  is
    set out at paragraph 10 of the  Judge's  decision.  The  decision  also
    makes it clear that this Appellant knew she  had  no  leave  to  remain
    between 2002 and 2014 albeit she had asked someone in her younger years
    to seek to resolve this. As for the husband, he  had  no  legal  status
    since 2009. Therefore the children, born in the United Kingdom, had  no
    legal status either. The children are aged 6 and 4.

11.   The Judge said he found both witnesses to be credible  but  that  they
    knew that they had no legal basis upon which to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The couple had entered into an Islamic  form  of  marriage  in
    October 2007. The Judge did not accept the  Appellant's  evidence  that
    she would not be able to find work in Kenya. That finding has not  been
    appealed. The Appellant has epilepsy but  that  is  being  treated.  It
    would also  be  treatable  in  Pakistan  or  Kenya.   There  are  other
    relatives in the United Kingdom. The  husband  works.  The  couple  get
    assistance from his mother. She is British. She rents out a property in
    Dorset and gives that money to the husband so he can take care  of  his
    family. There is no evidence that this could not continue.

12.   The  Judge  referred  to  the  correct  authorities  when  considering
    Article 8 outside of the Rules over several paragraphs at 37 to 47. The
    Judge rightly said that the burden of proof was on the Appellants.

13.   It is a feature of this case that only this Appellant has appealed.  I
    do not know why that is so. In one sense it restricts the way in  which
    the appeal can be pursued, but I have decided to consider  the  broader
    question of the family as a whole. Even doing so, it  does  not  lessen
    the impact of the burden of proof. As I indicated during the hearing to
    Mr Dixon, the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  MK  (section  55-Tribunal
    options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00023 (IAC) makes it clear that it is
    for an applicant to bring matters to the attention of the Secretary  of
    State. That includes in respect of section 55 Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 matters. Indeed that is clear from the first  part
    of the headnote in MK,

            "(i) Where it is contended that either of the  duties  enshrined
    in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  has
    been breached, the onus rests on the appellant and the  civil  standard
    of the balance of probabilities  applies.  There  is  no  onus  on  the
    Secretary of State."

14.   What this means is that I am unable to accept Mr  Dixon's  submissions
    that somehow even though there was apparently no  evidence  put  before
    the Judge as to why the husband and children could not live in Kenya as
    residents and to attend school/work, that it was nonetheless a material
    error of law for the Judge not to consider this. In my judgment  it  is
    clear that it was for  this  Appellant  and  the  others  to  have  put
    evidence before the Judge to show that it would  not  be  possible  for
    that to occur. Indeed the Judge went further to  explain  that  he  had
    considered the Country of Information evidence which had been  provided
    which showed that there  was  sufficient  opportunities  for  work  and
    education in Kenya. The important aspect being  that  it  was  for  the
    family, including this Appellant, to decide whether they  would  decide
    to live in Kenya, Pakistan or elsewhere.

16.   It is manifestly not an error of  law  to  fail  to  consider  factors
    which were not put before the Judge.

17.   Looking at the case in the broadest since and perhaps well beyond  the
    basis of the appeal which this Appellant brings, the argument  is  that
    the educational system that the two children have experienced  in  this
    country ought to enable them to remain within that system. That too was
    clearly and fully dealt with by the Judge. He  noted  at  paragraph  43
    that these were young children at the time of the hearing  before  him.
    They being at very early stages  of  education.  At  paragraph  41  the
    Judge's rejection of the submission that the children  were  entrenched
    in education in this country has not been appealed. In any  event  that
    is correct because the children are so young.

18.   The Court of Appeal's decision in  EV  (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ was mentioned during  the
    hearing. Lewison LJ made it clear that,
                  "60.     That is a long way from the facts of our case. In
      our case none of the family is a British citizen. None has the right
      to remain in this country. If the mother is removed, the father has no
      independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
      entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As the
      immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests to
      remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question of
      fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being
      educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the
      children of remaining with their parents. Just as we cannot provide
      medical treatment for the world, so we cannot educate the world.
      61.     In fact the immigration judge weighed the best interests of
      the children as a primary consideration, and set against it the
      economic well-being of the country. As Maurice Kay LJ pointed out in
      AE (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
      Civ 653 at [9] in conducting that exercise it would have been
      appropriate to consider the cost to the public purse in providing
      education to these children. In fact that was not something that the
      immigration judge explicitly considered. If anything, therefore, the
      immigration judge adopted an approach too favourable to the
      appellant."

19.   In this case both parents are over stayers  and  have  been  for  very
    many years. They have open to them the option of apparently being  able
    to live in Kenya or Pakistan. The children have the benefit of  parents
    who can work if they  wish.  Alternatively  they  have  the  option  of
    funding via the husband's  mother  who  has  been  providing  financial
    assistance via  her  property  in  Dorset.  The  children  can  receive
    education in Kenya or  Pakistan.  Medical  treatment  for  epilepsy  is
    available in either  country  too.  The  Supreme  Court's  decision  in
    Zoumbas [2013[UKSC 74 does not strengthen the Appellant's case  in  any
    way. This too is a case in which the family unit can  remain  a  family
    unit. They have  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  choose  from  two
    different countries. It  is  for  them  to  decide  which  of  the  two
    countries they wish to live in. I reject the  submission  that  because
    there had to be the setting of Removal Directions that that means there
    will be a splitting of the family. There will be no such thing  because
    Removal Directions are set for the country of nationality. It does  not
    mean that the person removed  is  prohibited  from  going  to  a  third
    country. I note too that the children in  ZH  (Tanzania),  the  leading
    case in respect of the  best  interests  of  children,  the  Court  was
    dealing with British children. That is not so in this case  which  does
    not assist the Appellant's contentions.

20.   It is obvious that the Appellant would prefer to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and so would her husband  and  their  children.  Similarly  the
    extended family members and friends, other worshippers  at  the  Mosque
    that the husband attends and perhaps his  work  colleagues  would  also
    like for the family to remain in the United Kingdom. None of  that  was
    sufficient to engage Beoku Betts in a way in which there can  be  shown
    to be an error of law in the Judge's decision. In  the  end  the  Huang
    requirements and the Razgar proportionality assessment led the Judge to
    a decision which was adverse to the Appellant and her family,  but  not
    one which shows a material error of law.

21.   In my judgment there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision. He has fully dealt with all matters that were  placed  before
    him and has applied the correct law.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain a material error of  law
and therefore stands.

The appeal remains dismissed (for  the  avoidance  of  doubt  there  was  no
appeal by the other three family members  originally  before  the  Judge  so
their appeals also remain dismissed).

No anonymity order is made.





Signed                                             Date 30 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

