
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01595/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 June 2013                                 |On 11 July 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                                  master KG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     His father Mr AG
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a minor  child  and  is  a  national  of  Antigua  and
    Barbuda.  It appears that he entered the  United  Kingdom  on  a  valid
    entry visa on 26 June 2011.  An application was then made on 14 October
    2011 to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  child  of
    his father who is  present  and  settled  here.   The  application  was
    refused by the respondent on 21 December 2012  because  the  respondent
    was satisfied that the appellant's removal would not breach his  rights
    in respect of his private and family life under  paragraph  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as amended.   In  fact  the  judge
    decided that paragraph 276ADE (requirements to be met by  an  applicant
    for leave to remain on the grounds of a private  life)  did  not  apply
    because the date of application was long before  the  Rules  came  into
    force.  Whether the judge is right about that or not was not raised  in
    the Rule 24 response or before me.  The judge did, however, proceed  to
    consider the appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights but dismissed the appeal.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision.  In essence he
    states through his father (hereafter referred to as "Mr  AG")  that  he
    provided all documents requested by the Home Office to his  lawyer  who
    then forwarded them to the Home Office.  Those  documents  included  Mr
    AG's British passport.  The initial  application  was  refused  on  the
    basis that Mr AG did not have indefinite leave to remain but  this  was
    incorrect.  He has had such leave since 2003.  This error  was  pointed
    out in a letter which was sent with the  appeal  form  when  the  first
    application was refused.  It was because the Secretary of State pointed
    out that Mr AG did  not  have  indefinite  leave  to  remain  that  the
    decision was adverse to the appellant.

 3. The grounds seeking leave to appeal state  that  the  appeal  has  been
    refused based on the lack  of  sufficient  evidence  but  this  totally
    ignores the Secretary of State's error.  The appellant was never  asked
    to submit any financial evidence or  proof  of  his  (the  appellant's)
    grandmother's illness.  There was also  other  evidence  to  which  the
    appellant could have referred including that he does not know where his
    mother is and that he has not heard from her either.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted. The judge granting  permission  noted
    that the Secretary of State not only refused to  vary  the  appellant's
    leave as a visitor but within the  same  notice  stated  that  she  had
    decided to remove the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  That decision to remove was made other  than  in  accordance
    with the law.  The judge granting permission then went on to state that
    as there was no valid decision to remove the appellant from the  United
    Kingdom Article 8 was not engaged and  it  was  therefore  an  arguable
    error of law that the First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with  the  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.

 5. In the Rule 24 response the respondent's position  is  that  the  judge
    granting permission was in error because as explained by the  Court  of
    Appeal in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 the Tribunal  is  empowered
    to consider an assertion that removal in consequence of the decision to
    refuse to vary leave  breaches  protected  human  rights.   No  removal
    decision is required.

 6. I agree with that submission.  As was said in the case referred to  the
    short, but important, position is that once a  human  rights  point  is
    properly before the Tribunal the Tribunal is obliged to deal with it.

 7. At this juncture I make the further point that the Secretary  of  State
    accepts that the decision to remove the appellant is  an  unlawful  one
    and it will be for the respondent to decide if and when to make such  a
    removal decision.

The Hearing before me

 8. I explained to Mr AG the purpose of the hearing.  I  read  to  him  the
    grounds seeking permission to  appeal  and  the  respondent's  Rule  24
    response.  I told him that although the  point  that  he  raised  about
    being a British citizen was a valid one in that part  of  the  decision
    refusing the application was on the basis  that  Mr  AG  did  not  have
    indefinite leave to remain, that was not the main  reason  for  refusal
    and did not feature as one of the reasons given as to  why  the  appeal
    was dismissed.  The judge in paragraph 16 was perfectly aware  that  Mr
    AG is a British citizen.

 9. I informed Mr AG that I found that the judge has  considered  all  that
    was required of him in what is effectively  an  Article  8  claim.  The
    judge took into account that the appellant is a child and that the best
    interests of the child must be a primary consideration - see  paragraph
    15 of the determination.  This was an appeal  that  was  heard  on  the
    papers and there was very little  information  before  the  judge  that
    might have persuaded him to  view  differently  such  evidence  as  was
    before him.  The lack of evidence is referred to in paragraph 16 of the
    determination.  The judge notes that it is said  that  the  appellant's
    grandmother  is  extremely  ill  and  can  no  longer  look  after  the
    appellant.  There is no  evidence  as  to  what  has  happened  to  the
    appellant's sister or evidence in support of the  contention  that  the
    appellant's mother has left home.  Neither was there any evidence  that
    the appellant has been solely financially dependent on his father while
    living in Antigua.  If further and better evidence had been before  the
    judge there is little doubt that he would have considered it, and if in
    fact he did not he would have been in error.

10. I pointed out to Mr AG that it was not appropriate for me  to  look  at
    any further evidence that he might be able to produce now as this was a
    hearing to decide whether or not the judge made  legal  errors  on  the
    information and evidence that  was  before  him  at  the  time  of  the
    original hearing.

11. I noted also that Mr AG blamed his lawyers for failing to provide  what
    was required.  The original application was made on form  FLR  (O)  for
    limited leave outside the Rules and not for settlement under  paragraph
    298 of the Immigration Rules.

Decision

12. On what was before the judge I can see no error  such  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal should revisit  the  decision.   In  those  circumstances  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

13. The appellant is a minor and  an  anonymity  direction  has  been  made
    previously. In the circumstances it is to  continue.  Therefore  unless
    and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
    granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
