
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01846/2016
                                                               IA/26297/2015
                                                               IA/23951/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 January 2017                       |On 30 January 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                              SANDEEP KAUR (1)
                              SANDEEP SINGH (2)
                              GUNJOT SINGH (3)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr A. Arayn, instructed by Farani-Javid-Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The first appellant (hereinafter "the appellant") is a citizen of
      India born on 10 December 1988. She is the wife and mother of the
      other appellants.

   2. On 30 May 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK as
      a Tier 4 (General) student. On 19 March 2015 the respondent sent her a
      letter stating that her Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS)
      was not valid and giving her sixty days to find a new sponsor and
      obtain a valid CAS.

   3. On 28 May 2015 the appellant's application was refused on the basis
      she had failed to obtain a valid CAS. She appealed against that
      decision.

   4. On 26 May 2016 the appellant's representatives wrote to the First-tier
      Tribunal ("FtT") requesting that the appeal be determined on the
      papers only. On 27 May 2016 her representatives sent the FtT further
      submissions and a witness statement by the appellant. The appellant's
      core argument was that the respondent had failed to send her a
      certified copy of her passport which meant that she was unable to
      obtain a new CAS.

   5. The appeal was considered without an oral hearing by FtT Judge Maxwell
      on 14 July 2016. By his decision promulgated on 22 July 2016, the
      judge dismissed the appeal.  At paragraph [10] of the decision, the
      judge stated:

         "There is no evidence before me to suggest that the first appellant
         made any application to potential Sponsors nor is there any
         evidence that such potential Sponsors would require a certified
         copy of her passport and if they did, there is no evidence before
         me to suggest that the first appellant made any effort to obtain a
         certified copy from the respondent."

   6. The grounds of appeal argue that the judge failed to have regard to
      the documents submitted by the appellant on 27 May 2016 which
      addressed the matters raised by the judge at paragraph [10] of the
      decision and failed to consider the fairness issue arising from the
      respondent's failure to provide her with a certified copy of her
      passport.

   7. At the error of law hearing Mr Clarke acknowledged that the appellant
      would need a certified copy of her passport to obtain a new CAS and
      that it is the respondent's policy to provide this to applicants.
      Accordingly, he accepted the judge's reasoning at paragraph [10] was
      deficient and that the appellant should be afforded sixty days in line
      with the respondent's policy.


Consideration


   8. The respondent has a policy whereby she will grant foreign students
      sixty days to obtain a new CAS. This policy is intended to give effect
      to the principle of common law fairness.

   9. As a practical matter, to obtain a CAS an applicant will need, inter
      alia, a certified copy of her passport. Where an applicant's passport
      is held by the respondent, fairness requires both that the respondent
      send the applicant her passport (or a certified copy) and that the
      applicant is given reasonable time, after receiving the passport (or
      certified copy), to obtain a new CAS.

  10. In this case, the appellant never received a copy of her certified
      passport. Without this, she was not in a position to obtain a new CAS.
      The judge made a material error of law by finding that it was not
      unfair for the appellant's application to be refused even if the
      respondent was holding her passport and had not sent her a certified
      copy.

  11. It follows from the forgoing analysis that the appellant's appeal
      against the respondent's decision should be allowed to the extent that
      she should be given a reasonable period of time whilst in possession
      of the documentation necessary to obtain a CAS to locate a sponsor and
      obtain a new CAS.

Decision

A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

B.  I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.




|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 27 January 2017               |

