
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-fh-nl-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01227/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2017                   |On 27 February 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                               Emmanuela Yusuf
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Adams instructed by Andy D Legal & Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Ms Yusuf against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Judge who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 10 December 2014.

2.   The matter can be dealt  with  fairly  swiftly  today.   There  was  no
    appearance by Ms Yusuf or her representatives at the hearing before the
    judge.  The solicitors were telephoned, there was no response  and  the
    telephone answering machine was on.  The  judge  went  ahead  with  the
    hearing and dismissed the appeal.

3.   In the  grounds  of  appeal  it  is  said  that  neither  she  nor  the
    solicitors ever received the notice of  hearing.   At  that  stage  her
    address was care of those solicitors so it is not as though there  were
    as it were two opportunities for a notice of hearing to go to different
    addresses, they would both have gone to the same address and  Mr  Adams
    makes the point which I think is also made  in  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant had attended previously a For Mention hearing and a CMR.

4.   So there was no indication of a lack of  enthusiasm  for  pursuing  the
    claim and the submission today is that in the circumstances there is  a
    lack  of  fairness  in  the  appeal  having   proceeded   without   her
    involvement.  Mr Tufan on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  does  not
    disagree that the appropriate course of action is for the matter to  be
    sent back for a full hearing in the First-tier and  I  agree  with  the
    effectively joint submissions that have been made in this case.   There
    is procedural unfairness in that we do not know  why  and  we  probably
    never will know why the notice of hearing was not received, but  it  is
    clear now that that problem is resolved to the extent that we now  have
    the appellant's home address, she has different representatives, notice
    of hearing has gone to both those addresses for today and both of  them
    have turned up.  So that difficulty goes away but in the  circumstances
    I think it is right that the appeal should be  allowed  to  the  extent
    that it is remitted for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  and
    so that is the outcome of the case.

5.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

