

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Numbers: IA/01297/2016

                                                      IA/01497/2016

                                                      IA/01496/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th December 2017,                      | On 29th January 2018            |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                             RUTH RAFAEL GARCIA
                            David Jr Braga Garcia
                         Davidsan Ross Rafael Garcia
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Murphy, instructed by Juris Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are nationals of the Philippines  and  are  respectively
    the mother, who was born on 25th October 1962,  her  husband,  who  was
    born on 3rd August 1960, and their adult son,  who  was  born  on  26th
    October 1996.  They appealed against the decisions of  the  respondents
    taken on 27th February 2016, refusing their applications for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  Their appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robinson at Hatton Cross on 24th February 2016.


2.   The first-named appellant's immigration history  is  that  she  entered
    the United Kingdom with entry clearance granted as a student valid from
    14th September 2009 to 28th  February  2012.   On  16th  May  2011  she
    submitted an application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student  which
    was granted  until  29th  January  2013.   On  28th  January  2013  she
    submitted an application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student  which
    was again granted until 30th October 2014.  On 30th June 2014 leave was
    curtailed  on  1st  September,  2014.   The  appellant   made   further
    application for leave to remain on 1st  September  2014  but  this  was
    refused on 16th December 2014.  The second and third appellants entered
    the United Kingdom  together  on  8th  July  2011  as  the  first-named
    appellant's dependants and were granted  leave  and  further  leave  to
    remain for the same period as the first-named appellant.


3.   The appellants' appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  took  place  on
    24th February 2017 before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robinson.   The
    judge dismissed the appellants' appeal based on their Article 8 rights,
    but in doing so the appellants assert that he made errors of law.

4.   There are three grounds are set out in the grounds of  appeal  and  two
    of these were very helpfully expanded upon by  Mr  Murphy.   Mr  Murphy
    explained that at paragraph 32 the  judge  directed  himself  that  for
    family life to exist  in  Article  8  terms,  there  must  be  what  he
    described as being "emotional dependence" between  family  members  but
    that of course is a clear error of law.

5.   The second challenge was in respect  of  the  judge's  misdirection  by
    applying the Tribunal decision in Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640.  As the grounds point  out,  Gulshan
    was wrongly decided and has since been overturned.  Mr Murphy  told  me
    that they were his two best  challenges  although  there  was  a  third
    ground, but the third ground was, he believed, otiose and  he  said  he
    had difficulty in understanding it, but, essentially it complained that
    the judge had failed to perform a proper proportionality exercise.

6.   I enquired of Mr Murphy how the first two  errors  could  be  material.
    He told me that  they  were  material,  because  the  appellants  could
    succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  under  paragraph  276ADE.   He
    suggested also that he would like the matter  to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier, because he wished to  obtain  and  submit  reports  on  the
    likely effect on the  first-named  appellant's  niece,  with  whom  the
    appellants live, in the event  of  the  appellants'  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom.  There is, he submitted, a dependency in that the child
    is looked after by the appellants when the child's mother  is  working.
    I pointed out that the purpose of the hearing was to correct errors  in
    the determination and if this could be done without  the  matter  being
    referred back to the First-tier Tribunal  then  that  is  how  I  would
    proceed.  He told me he would  like  an  opportunity  to  call  further
    evidence and applied for an adjournment.  His  further  evidence  would
    be, he said, a report into the likely effect on the  appellant's  niece
    were the appellants to be removed from the United Kingdom,  given  that
    the appellant's niece has known them all her life and lived  with  them
    all her life.  I pointed out to Mr Murphy that this was something  that
    was dealt with by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  has  not  been
    challenged.  Any such evidence could and should have been presented  to
    the First Tier Tribunal Judge.  In the circumstances I was  not  minded
    to grant his application.

7.   Mr Tarlow indicated that the first two errors of law were  accepted  by
    the Secretary of State, but they are not material to the outcome of the
    appeal.  At paragraphs 36 to 40 of the determination, while  the  judge
    does not use the word 'proportionality', it is clear that there he  has
    undertaken  the  proportionality  exercise  and  concluded   that   the
    appellants' removal would be proportionate.

8.   Mr Murphy suggested that the appellants could not be removed  from  the
    United Kingdom, because to remove them would cause difficulties for the
    first-named appellant and her husband in obtaining a job.   He  has  no
    job in the United Kingdom because he is  not  permitted  to  work,  but
    having been out of the Philippines since 2009, he would  find  it  very
    difficult to obtain a job were he now to return to the Philippines.   I
    reserved my determination,

9.   I am satisfied that the determination does contain  errors  of  law  as
    identified in the first two grounds.  However, I  have  concluded  that
    they are  not  material  errors  of  law.   The  judge  considered  the
    appellants'  relationship  with  the  appellant's  aunt  and  with  her
    children.

10.  Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge the  three  appellants  each  gave
    oral evidence as did the first-named appellant's sister.  She confirmed
    that the appellants were living with her rent-free.  There  appears  to
    have been little or no mention at all of the reliance the sister places
    on the first-named appellant to look after her child.  It is  certainly
    not mentioned in any of  the  appellants'  witness  statements,  but  I
    accept that if the appellants live  with  the  first-named  appellant's
    sister  and  family  members  any  infant  child  of  the   first-named
    appellant's sister will have become used to the three appellants  being
    part of the family and on their removal from the United  Kingdom  there
    will inevitably be distress on the child's part.  However, the  child's
    mother, and here I am referring to the first-named appellant's  sister,
    gave  evidence  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  she   visits   the
    Philippines every two years and so there is presumably no reason why on
    a visit to the Philippines the first-named appellant's sister and child
    could not visit the appellants.  No evidence  was  adduced  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal to suggest  that  the  appellant's  sister's  child
    would in any way be seriously harmed or psychologically damaged by  the
    appellants' removal.

11.  So far as paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  is  concerned  Mr  Murphy  suggested
    that the appellants would find it  difficult  to  obtain  jobs  in  the
    Philippines, but that is precisely the point he raised before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The first-named appellant came to the United Kingdom to
    study and has undertaken those studies.  She completed her Level 3  NVQ
    in Health and Social Care.  The second-named appellant  has  undertaken
    part-time employment in the United Kingdom with AXA Insurance,  with  a
    building  contractor  and  with  the  NHS.   He   has   completed   his
    construction qualification and undertaken  a  first  aid  course.   The
    third-named appellant has been educated at [............. School] where
    he undertook his GCSEs and did a one year A level  course.   He  is  an
    otherwise fit young man aged 21 and I do not accept that  any  of  them
    will  have  any  particular  difficulty  obtaining  employment  in  the
    Philippines should they wish to and  there  is  no  credible  objective
    evidence before me to the contrary.

12.  As the First-tier Tribunal Judge pointed out, the  appellants  have  no
    health difficulties and they are all adults.  The third  appellant  has
    been educated in the United Kingdom at school  and  at  college  level.
    What the judge said at paragraphs 36 and 37 of  his  determination  has
    not been challenged.  He said this:

         "36. Integration requires some ability by a person to recognise and
             adapt to his or  her  surroundings.   The  appellant  and  her
             husband have managed to support themselves in the  UK  at  the
             time  they  had  leave  to  remain.   They  now  rely  on  the
             generosity of the appellant's sister for  their  accommodation
             and day-to-day living needs.  They are both  capable  of  work
             and have a variety of skills.  They claimed  that  they  would
             not be able to find work in the care sector in the Philippines
             because there  is  no  such  provision  there.   The  national
             culture involves families caring for elderly relatives at home
             and not in institutions.  Although I recognise that  this  may
             be the case I do not accept that it would  be  impossible  for
             the appellants to find employment  in  the  Philippines.   All
             three have qualifications obtained in the  UK.   They  have  a
             variety of skills and are not of an age where they would  need
             financial help from other family members  if  they  relocated.
             Their  present  problems  exist  because  they  do  not   have
             permission to work in the UK.  When they  last  lived  in  the
             Philippines they lived in rented accommodation and I find that
             there would be no undue problems in  their  moving  to  rented
             accommodation again.  They  are  familiar  with  the  culture,
             language and customs in their country of  nationality  and  it
             would be open to them to apply for  entry  clearance  if  they
             wished to further their studies in the UK.   I  conclude  that
             they do not meet the requirement of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


         37.  I have considered the appellants' private life under paragraph
             117B of the 2002 Act.  The need to give weight to  the  public
             interest considerations in all  cases  is  emphasised  in  the
             wording of Section  117B  and  this  includes  the  overriding
             principle that effective immigration control is in the  public
             interest.  It is also  important  that  immigration  decisions
             should be consistent and logical and based  on  all  available
             facts."

13.  The judge went on to  note  that  the  appellants  are  able  to  speak
    English  fluently  and   have   undertaken   courses   at   educational
    institutions  here  and   have   been   able   to   obtain   meaningful
    qualifications.  They are not financially  independent  and  they  live
    with the appellant's sister on a temporary basis.

14.  I have concluded that the appellants cannot meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  I have  carefully  examined  the  documentation
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal and have read the determination of
    the judge to see whether there might be anything about  the  appellants
    or their circumstances which would justify my allowing their appeal  on
    the basis of their Article 8  rights  outwith  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Given the very considerable weight that I am required to  give  to  the
    interests of the wider public in the maintenance of immigration control
    I have concluded that there is nothing that would justify  my  allowing
    their appeal outwith the Immigration Rules.

15.  The making of the decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge  P  J  Robinson
    did involve the making of errors of law but no such error was  material
    to the outcome of the appeal and the determination shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

