









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01799/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 7 April 2016                    |on 11 May 2016                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                              Mr Asif Muhammad
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms C H Bexson, counsel, instructed by Hussain Haider
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 1 November  1977.  He
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge who dismissed his appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
      and on human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 30 July 2015.




   2. The Judge set out the appellant's immigration history. He entered  the
      UK on 17 March  2002  and  claimed  asylum.  His  appeal  against  the
      respondent's refusal was dismissed and removal directions were  served
      on him in March 2003. He did not leave the UK.


   3. In August 2013, he made an application for  leave  to  remain  as  the
      husband of a person with indefinite leave to remain in the UK,  namely
      Ms Dinah Acham, a national of Uganda.


   4.  His  application  was  refused.   Following   his   judicial   review
      application, the respondent agreed to reconsider the application, and,
      if it were refused, to make a removal decision  with  an  accompanying
      right of appeal. That led to  the  decision  dated  17  December  2014
      refusing his application and to remove him from  the  UK  pursuant  to
      s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   It  was  against  those
      decisions that he appealed [4].


   5. In refusing his application, the respondent accepted that although the
      appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a  settled
      partner, who had spent most of her life in the UK and  had  employment
      here, this does  not  mean  that  they  could  not  live  together  in
      Pakistan. There  was  no  evidence  that  there  were  'insurmountable
      obstacles' to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK,
      as set out in EX.1(b), albeit it that it was acknowledged  that  there
      was a degree of hardship for the settled partner in doing so [6].


   6. The appellant moreover did not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
      276ADE (vi) of the Rules as he would not  encounter  very  significant
      obstacles to re-integration into Pakistan society. Nor were there  any
      exceptional circumstances  requiring  a  consideration  of  his  human
      rights claim outside the rules.


   7. The respondent was not represented at the hearing  before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal on 8 July 2015.  The  Judge  clarified  matters  at  the
      outset with counsel who represented the  appellant  (not  Ms  Bexson).
      Counsel could not say when the application was made, although  it  was
      after the changes to the Rules in July 2012. Counsel is said  to  have
      'resisted  the  need   for  his  solicitors   to  provide  a  copy  of
      application to show the date when it was made, because he would pursue
      only an Article 8 EHCR argument' [11].


   8. After hearing evidence from the appellant and his wife, Ms Achan,  the
      Judge accepted that she would suffer insurmountable hurdles in  living
      in Pakistan. She has two children in the UK, has  lived  here  for  27
      years and has not lived in Pakistan and does not  speak  Urdu  or  any
      other mainstream language used  there,  apart  from  English.  She  is
      Christian and is black; he did not consider that it is  realistic  for
      her, with the combination of these factors, to  be  able  to  live  in
      Pakistan, and to be integrated into society there. He found that  even
      returning with the appellant, a Pakistani  national,  she  would  face
      insurmountable obstacles in living there [34].


   9. The Judge also rejected his claim that he could not return to Pakistan
      alone for reasons concerning his safety [35].


  10. He found that the appellant could not meet the Rules [37-38].  Counsel
      is said to have conceded that the appellant 'could not  now  meet  the
      Rules' [38].


  11.  The  Judge  then  considered  whether  there  were  any  identifiably
      "exceptional circumstances" outside the rules [39]. He noted that  the
      Rules presuppose that there is a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
      with a settled person.


  12. The Judge considered s.117B(4)(b) of the 2002 Act and noted  that  the
      appellant's wife confirmed that she knew her husband was unlawfully in
      the UK when they met [42]. In the circumstances, he was not  satisfied
      that the requirement to make  entry  clearance  from  abroad  for  the
      couple to be reunited  in  the  UK  could  give  rise  to  a  need  to
      separately consider the Article 8 ECHR claim [43].  He  dismissed  the
      claim under the Rules.


  13. He found that even if he were wrong in this regard, and that the claim
      should be considered under Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention,
      he would find that the appellant had a family and private life in  the
      UK.


  14. In terms of the proportionality of the proposed return, he  noted  his
      genuine relationship with a settled person and her adult daughters. He
      has been here for 13 years. On  the  other  hand,  he  had  been  here
      unlawfully throughout; their relationship was entered into  with  both
      parties being fully aware that he may be required to  leave  and  that
      she would be unable to return to Pakistan with him [47].


  15. The Judge had regard to s.117B which requires that  little  weight  be
      given to this relationship and to the  private  life  relied  on.  His
      departure would not result in family life 'tumbling' [47]. He was  not
      satisfied that the interference caused to their family life by removal
      would be disproportionate to the need  for  immigration  control.   He
      dismissed the appeal [47-48].


  16. On  15  February  2016,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. It was  arguable  that,  having  found
      that there would be insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant's  wife
      living in Pakistan [34],  the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider
      whether the appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  of
      Appendix FM, notwithstanding the concession made by his representative
      (arguably wrongly made in the light of the Judge's findings).


  17. Ms Bexson relied on the grounds of appeal. She referred to the reasons
      for refusal, summarised by the First-tier Judge at [6].


  18. She submitted that it was therefore evident that  the  only  objection
      raised by the respondent  was  in  respect  of9  the  failure  of  the
      appellant to prove insurmountable obstacles  to  his  family  life  in
      Pakistan. She submitted that the Judge erred in dismissing the  appeal
      despite having accepted that the appellant cannot continue his  family
      life along with his wife in Pakistan [34]. He expressly found that his
      wife would, if she returned with the  appellant,  face  insurmountable
      obstacles in living there.


  19. This is all the more so in the light of the earlier finding  that  the
      appellant is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife, a
      settled person. From those findings, it was evident that the appellant
      met the requirements set out in paragraph EX.1(b) of the rules and was
      entitled to be granted leave to remain in the UK under  the  ten  year
      partner rules.


  20. In the Rule 24 response, it was submitted that it  had  been  conceded
      that the appellant would not meet the requirements of  the  rules  and
      that it cannot now be "reasonably argued" that the Judge erred in  law
      by not considering certain sections of the Rules. The Judge  correctly
      proceeded to consider Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


  21. Mr Walker submitted that the alleged "concession" referred to has  had
      the effect of 'muddying the waters'. He very fairly accepted  that  it
      is open to a Judge to decline to accept a  concession  if  it  is  not
      considered that it was properly made in the circumstances. This was  a
      case where the appellant's claim under the exceptions to the  relevant
      eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a partner, should have
      been dealt with and considered by the Judge. This is  particularly  so
      in the light  of  the  finding  that  there  would  be  insurmountable
      obstacles to the appellant's wife living in Pakistan.


  22. Mr Walker accordingly accepted that the decision should be  set  aside
      and re-made on the basis of the Rules.


     Assessment


  23. I find that the concession made by Mr Walker was  properly  made.  The
      First-tier Judge was not bound by counsel's asserted "concession."


  24. In the reasons for refusal, the respondent was not satisfied that EX.1
      applied in this case as he did not meet the requirements of R-LTRP.1.1
      (d). That sets out the requirements for limited leave to remain  as  a
      partner. It is thus provided that the appellant must not fall foul for
      refusal under sections S-LTR: Suitability Leave to  Remain;  and  also
      that he met the requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.1.2  -  1.12  and  E-
      LTRP.2.1 and that paragraph EX.1 applies.


  25.  The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
      subsisting  relationship  with  his  settled  partner.  Whilst  it  is
      acknowledged that she has lived in the UK most of her life and  is  in
      employment here, this did not mean  that  they  were  unable  to  live
      together in Pakistan. There was no evidence to suggest that there  are
      any insurmountable obstacles in accordance with EX.2  preventing  them
      continuing their relationship in Pakistan. He  accordingly  failed  to
      fulfil the requirements under EX.1 (b) of Appendix FM.


  26. The First-tier Judge however expressly found that  the  appellant  did
      have a genuine and subsisting relationship. His  wife  was  a  settled
      person with adult daughters here. He found that  even  returning  with
      the appellant, his wife would face insurmountable obstacles to  living
      in Pakistan.


  27. The Judge accordingly accepted that there would  be  very  significant
      difficulties which would be faced by his partner in  continuing  their
      family life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
      would entail very serious hardship  for  his  partner.  There  was  no
      contention that he fell foul of the suitability requirements for leave
      to remain. Nor was there any contention  that  he  did  not  meet  the
      requirements set out at R-LTPRP .1.1 (d) (ii).


  28. In the circumstances, the Judge was required to consider  whether  the
      appellant met the requirements of paragraph EX.1 (b) of Appendix FM.


  29. Accordingly, the failure to consider whether he met those requirements
      resulted in the making of a material error of law.  I accordingly  set
      aside the decision.


  30. I was invited by the parties to re-make the decision on the  available
      evidence.


  31. I find, on the basis of the Judge's  findings,  properly  arrived  at,
      that there would be insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant's  wife
      living in Pakistan.


  32.  The  appellant  has  accordingly  demonstrated  that  he  meets   the
      requirements for limited leave to remain as a partner and that he  has
      met the requirements of paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM.


      Notice of Decision


      The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Date 4 May 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

