
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/01971/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th July 2013                               |On 12th August 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                 adil shahid
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel instructed by Maliks & Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 24th January 1990.   The
Appellant arrived in the UK on 19th April 2011 when he was  given  leave  to
enter  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  in  order  to  study  at
Hammersmith Management College.  The Appellant did not follow  that  course,
but instead studied at the Kingston College of  IT  and  Management  between
June 2011 and July 2012.  The Appellant did  not  notify  the  UKBA  of  his
change of course.  On 31st July 2012 the  Appellant  applied  for  leave  to
remain in the same capacity.  That application was  refused  eventually  for
the reasons set out in a Notice of Decision dated 21st December  2012.   The
Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Seelhoff (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross  on  8th  April  2013.
He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given in his  Determination
promulgated on 18th April 2013.  The Appellant sought leave to  appeal  that
decision and on 25th June 2013 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  an  error  on  a
point of law so that it should be set aside.

The Judge dismissed the appeal because he was satisfied that in studying  at
the Kingston College of IT and Management instead of Hammersmith  Management
College without permission the Appellant was in breach of the provisions  of
Section 50 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.   Therefore  the
Appellant's application for leave to remain fell to  be  refused  under  the
provisions of paragraph 322(3) of the Statement of  Changes  in  Immigration
Rules HC 395.

At the hearing Mr Nasim argued that the Judge had erred in law in coming  to
this conclusion because paragraph 322(3)  of  HC  395  was  a  discretionary
remedy, and there was nothing to indicate that in refusing  the  Appellant's
application under that provision the Respondent had exercised a  discretion.
 In response, Mr Tufan indicated that he was sympathetic to that argument.

I find that the Judge did err in law in the way argued by Mr Nasim.   It  is
not in dispute that the Appellant changed courses  without  notification  or
permission in  breach  of  Section  50  of  the  2009  Act.   Therefore  the
Appellant had failed to comply with any conditions attached to the  original
grant of leave to enter which he was seeking to extend.  However,  paragraph
322(3) is one of those grounds on which leave to remain should  normally  be
refused.  Refusal therefore is a matter of the discretion of  the  Secretary
of State.  Reading the Notice of Decision dated 21st December 2012  and  the
explanatory letter of  the  same  date  there  is  no  indication  that  the
Secretary of State considered her discretion  in  coming  to  her  decision.
This  is  an  error  of  law  in  accordance  with  the  decision  in   Ukus
(Discretion: when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  00307  (IAC).   This  decision
establishes  that  where  the  decision  maker  has  failed  to  exercise  a
discretion in him, the failure renders the decision not in  accordance  with
the law.  I therefore set aside the decision of the  Judge  and  remake  the
decision by allowing the appeal to the extent of  finding  the  decision  of
the Secretary of State not to be in accordance with the law.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it to the extent of  finding
that the decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance  with  the
law.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
