
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01511/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th July 2014                               |On 01st October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                              MR pawan maharjan
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on the  5th  June  1989.
   His application for leave to remain as the spouse  of  a  person  who  is
   settled in the United Kingdom was refused on the 12th December  2013.  At
   the same time, the respondent decided  to  remove  him  from  the  United
   Kingdom. His appeal against the former  decision  was  dismissed  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pears) in a decision that was  promulgated  on
   the 13th May 2014. Permission to appeal was granted to the Upper Tribunal
   on the sole ground that "the grounds disclose an arguable  error  of  law
   with regard to the failure by the judge to address  the  issue  regarding
   section 47".


2. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  refer  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's failure to make "a decision to set  removal  directions  under
   section 47 UK Borders Act 2007". This reference is repeated in the  grant
   of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. However, that  section  is
   concerned with "police civilians". It does not therefore have any obvious
   application to the issue of  the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United
   Kingdom. I shall therefore assume that the intended reference was to  the
   section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


3. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant at  the  hearing
   before me on the 18th July 2014. I was nevertheless  satisfied  that  the
   appellant had been served with notice of the time, date and place of  the
   hearing. I therefore  decided  that  it  would  be  just  to  proceed  to
   determine the appeal without further delay.


4. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  simply  asserted  that,
   "the Section 47 decision is unreasonable in all  the  circumstances".  No
   particulars of the alleged 'unreasonableness' were provided.


5. Section 47 of the 2006 Act, as substituted by Section  51  of  the  Crime
   and Courts Act  2013,  permits  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  an
   application for further leave  to  remain  and  simultaneously  to  issue
   directions for the applicant's removal. The exercise of that power cannot
   be challenged  on  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  unless  it  amounts  to  an
   irrational exercise of discretion, thus rendering it "not  in  accordance
   with the law".


6. The Secretary of State is not obliged to make a  decision  to  remove  an
   applicant following refusal of his application to remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom (see Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72). Where  however,  as
   here, the Secretary of State has made a  lawful  decision  to  refuse  an
   application for leave to remain, and it has been found  that  removal  in
   consequence  of  that  decision  would  not  be  incompatible  with   the
   applicant's rights under the 1950 European Convention for the  Protection
   of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, it is impossible to see  how  a
   decision to remove the applicant from the United Kingdom could constitute
   anything other  than  a  rational  (and  thus  lawful)  exercise  of  the
   discretion conferred by Section 47 of the 2006 Act.


7. Permission to appeal  against  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal  from  the
   Secretary of State's decision to refuse the appellant's  application  for
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom was itself  refused.  Consideration
   of the Secretary of State's decision to remove  the  appellant  from  the
   United Kingdom cannot possibly therefore affect the ultimate outcome  for
   this appellant. It would not be  appropriate  in  such  circumstances  to
   delay  matters  further  by  remitting  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, simply so that it may complete  a  decision-making  process  in
   respect of which the outcome is inevitable. It is  therefore  appropriate
   for the Upper Tribunal to complete the judicial  decision-making  process
   by dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision to  remove  him
   from the United Kingdom.


Decision


8. The appeal against the respondent's  decision  to  remove  the  appellant
   from the United Kingdom is dismissed.


Anonymity is not directed.



Signed                                  Date



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







