
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01291/2014
     IA/01290/2014
     IA/01287/2014
     IA/01288/2014
     IA/01289/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 27th November 2014                         |On 14th January 2015           |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

    mazher hussain                                        First Appellant

   SOFIA ZAMAN                                           Second Appellant

  SASHA NEHAL                                              Third Appellant

    AHMED MAZHAR                                        Fourth Appellant

           MUHAMMAD MUSTAFA MAZHAR                Fifth Appellant

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On 16th September 2014 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R  C
    Campbell gave permission  to  the  appellants  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hague  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeals on immigration and human rights  grounds  against
    the decisions of the respondent to refuse leave to remain on the  basis
    of family or private life in accordance with the provisions of Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 2. Designated  Judge  Campbell  noted  that  the  grounds  of  application
    contended that  the  judge  erred  by  concluding  that,  although  the
    provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE  applied  to  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants, this was a fact of no substantial weight when seen  against
    paragraph 276B of the Rules which provides that limited leave  "may  be
    granted"  where  the  Secretary  of  State  is   satisfied   that   the
    requirements of  the  Rule  are  met.   It  was  also  considered  that
    reference to the Upper Tribunal decision in  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT
    197 gave rise to an arguable error because that decision related  to  a
    family which had entered the United Kingdom only  a  matter  of  months
    before determination of their appeal and should not have been relied on
    as  authority  for  the  proposition  that  the  seven  year  residence
    principle was a factor which should only be given modest weight.

 3. Before me Mr Ahmed argued that the judge should,  in  any  event,  have
    made a favourable decision under paragraph 276ADE  for  the  third  and
    fourth appellants who were able to come within those provisions as  the
    judge decided in paragraph 5.  The judge failed  to  grapple  with  the
    issues of private life concerning  himself  solely  with  family  life.
    Further, the issue of whether or not it would be reasonable  to  expect
    the third and fourth appellants to leave the United Kingdom  were  left
    open by the judge.

 4. Mr McVeety drew attention to the two responses issued  respectively  on
    19th and 22nd September 2014.  The respondent was of the view that  the
    judge had properly  reflected  the  guidance  in  Azimi-Moayed,  giving
    appropriate weight to the time spent in the United Kingdom of  the  two
    older children.  He was not wrong to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    family should  remain  together.   The  grounds  are  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the well reasoned findings of the judge.   Whilst  Mr
    McVeety conceded that the judge's consideration of the issues  appeared
    "rather odd" he submitted that no material error should be found.   The
    judge correctly considered the best interests of all  of  the  children
    applying  relevant  case  law   (paragraph   10).    By   applying   EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the judge had considered the relevant
    test of whether or not it was reasonable to expect the child to  follow
    the parent with no right to remain.

 5. Mr  Ahmed  concluded  his  submissions  by  arguing  that  the  judge's
    consideration of the best interests of the children should have led  to
    a different decision taking into consideration the case law referred to
    in paragraph 10 of the determination.  He argued  that  there  were  no
    strong countervailing factors to enable the conclusion  to  be  reached
    that the third and fourth appellants should be removed from the  United
    Kingdom.

Conclusions

 6. I agree with the comment made by Mr McVeety that the  determination  is
    "rather odd".  That is a reference  to  the  judge's  arguments  before
    deciding  that,  despite  the  favourable  application   of   paragraph
    276ADE(iv) to the third and fourth appellants, that was not  conclusive
    in deciding whether or not the appeal should  be  allowed.   The  judge
    made reference to paragraph 276BE of the Rule pointing out  that  leave
    "may be granted" on private life grounds when it  is  evident  that  it
    would have been sufficient for him to refer to  the  qualification  set
    out in paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Rule which  requires  that,  in  the
    case of a seven year resident child, it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Whilst  the  judge's
    reference to paragraph 276BE was therefore unnecessary having regard to
    the need to consider the qualification set out in paragraph 276ADE(iv),
    it cannot be said to be wrong or, for the  reasons  I  set  out  below,
    shows that the judge considered the relevant issues wrongly.

 7. I have also considered whether the judge's reference to the decision in
    Azimi-Moayed was wrong.  I am not satisfied that it was.   Despite  the
    difference between the circumstances of that  appeal  and  the  present
    appeal the Court of Appeal reached conclusions which showed  (paragraph
    58) that the ultimate question will be: "Is it reasonable to expect the
    child to follow the parent with no right to remain to  the  country  of
    origin?".  Further, the judge's analysis in paragraph 10 shows that  he
    was fully aware of the need  to  consider  that  test  because  of  his
    reference to the Court of Appeal decision in EV (Philippines).

 8. The fact that the third and fourth appellants had been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for seven years at the time of the hearing was  not  reason  in
    itself for the judge to either allow  the  appeal  or  make  favourable
    decisions in relation to the private life of both  of  those  children.
    It was open to him to decide that it would be reasonable to expect  the
    children to go with their parents and other sibling back to Pakistan to
    maintain the family unit in the circumstances in which  the  found  the
    family to be.  The judge summarises the factors favouring the return of
    the whole family to Pakistan in paragraph  11  noting,  in  particular,
    that it was a close-knit family with educated  and  prosperous  parents
    and that he had found that all the children  were  Urdu  speakers  with
    family connections in Pakistan.  Thus the  decision  does  not  show  a
    material error.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction pursuant to  Rule  45(4)(i)
of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  nor  do  I
consider such  a  direction  to  be  appropriate,  the  parties  not  having
requested such .



Signed        Date 13th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

