
IAC-AH-co-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/01621/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28th January 2015                      |On 16th April 2015                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                     ms Stella Ama Oforiwaa Kumi-Boahene
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 25th January 1975.  She  is
    the mother of three children the eldest two of whom are German citizens
    and therefore EEA nationals.  Their  youngest  sibling  is  a  Ghanaian
    national.  On 25th September 2012 the Appellant's legal representatives
    applied on her behalf for a residence card as a confirmation of a right
    to reside in the United Kingdom on the basis that she is a parent/carer
    of an EEA national child who claims to be exercising Treaty Rights as a
    self-sufficient person as defined in the EEA Regulations 2006.

 2. On 16th December 2013 the Secretary  of  State  issued  a  reasons  for
    refusal letter on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    consider that the Appellant satisfied the derivative right of residence
    and it was decided to refuse to issue a derivative residence card  with
    reference to Regulation 15A(2) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Herwald  sitting  at  Manchester  on  2nd  May   2014.    In   a
    determination promulgated on 28th August 2014  the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed under the EEA Regulations but  was  allowed  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 4. On 2nd September 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 18th November 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Kamara granted permission to appeal to the Secretary of State stating:

         "In an otherwise well reasoned  determination  the  judge  arguably
         erred in law in appearing to accept the claim that the  Appellant's
         children could not be cared for by anyone else, were the  Appellant
         to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,   notwithstanding   his   earlier,
         comprehensive, negative credibility findings."

 5. No Rule 24 response has been filed by the Appellant's  representatives.
    For the purpose of continuity throughout these proceedings albeit  that
    this is an appeal by the Secretary of State the Secretary of  State  is
    referred to herein  as  the  Respondent  and  Ms  Kumi-Boahene  as  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant appears by her instructed  Counsel  Mr  Khan.
    Mr Khan is familiar with this matter having appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr McVeety.

Evidence

 6. In order to get an understanding of the factual position in this matter
    it was agreed that factual evidence from the Appellant would be  taken.
    The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  She has three children  Sena  who
    is male and born on 2nd May 2007 and  Sedynam,  a  girl  born  on  11th
    November 2008  are  German.   She  too  is  German.   Their  father  is
    Christian Jamiji a citizen of Germany.  The Appellant advises she  lost
    contact with the children's father in 2010.  That  statement  does  not
    sit comfortably with paragraph 11(b) of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    determination where, having heard the Appellant's evidence,  the  judge
    states that the Appellant left her  German  husband  in  2010.   It  is
    accepted that the Appellant and Mr Jamiji never married.

 7. The Appellant confirmed the oral testimony from the First-tier Tribunal
    to be found at paragraph 11(d) of her claim that as a result of  a  one
    night fling with a man called Max whose surname she does not  know  she
    became pregnant and gave birth to a third child, Sefakor, on 6th  March
    2012.  It appears that Max was a Ghanaian citizen and that she has  had
    no contact with him since.  Sefakor is therefore a Ghanaian national.

 8. The Appellant states that she lives on her own in her sister's house in
    Salford.  Her sister is Mavis Asante.  Her sister is a British  citizen
    and works in Nigeria for an oil company where she  has  been  for  some
    three years.  The Appellant's evidence is that Miss Asante owns her own
    property and comes back to the UK to visit twice a  year.   She  states
    that only the Appellant and the three children live  in  Miss  Asante's
    house.  She does have assistance from  her  sister  (Ewuasi)  who  also
    lives in Manchester.  Ewuasi is a  nurse  who  is  married  with  three
    children.  The Appellant advises that the household accounts where  she
    is living are met by Miss Asante, the owner of  the  property.   It  is
    against that factual background that this appeal proceeds.

Submissions/Discretion

 9. Mr McVeety indicates that  the  thrust  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Grounds of Appeal are to be found in paragraph 4  of  the  grounds  and
    that it is not necessary or appropriate to address Grounds 1 to 3.   He
    submits that the Tribunal  has  erred  in  finding  that  removing  the
    Appellant from the UK would cause the Appellant's children to leave the
    EU in line with the case law of Zambrano.  He submits that the Tribunal
    has not considered whether or not the Appellant's children's father can
    care for them or if  anyone  else  is  able  to  especially  since  the
    Appellant has a sister who  could  do  so.   He  points  out  that  the
    Tribunal had found that the Appellant and her sister were not  credible
    witnesses and had lied to the Tribunal and it was  submitted  that  any
    evidence that they had given in regard to  the  Appellant's  children's
    father and his and anyone else's  ability  to  care  for  them  in  the
    Appellant's absence could not be relied upon.  He submits that there is
    no evidence that the Appellant's  children's  father  or  anybody  else
    could not care  for  the  children  in  the  Appellant's  absence  thus
    allowing them to remain in the EU and should the Appellant wish not  to
    leave her children the choice would remain for her to  choose  for  her
    children to relocate to Ghana with her and would be a choice for her to
    make as to whether her children leave the EU or not.  He  submits  that
    the judge has looked solely at the position of the  Appellant  and  has
    made a damning condemnation of her credibility.  He points out that  in
    the judge's findings he has found the Appellant has lied to  the  court
    and has made adverse findings of  credibility.   Therefore  he  submits
    that it is incumbent upon the Appellant to show that there is no  other
    alternative carer for the children and that no evidence has been  given
    as to the involvement of the children's father in their care.

10. Mr McVeety submits that having heard  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant
    today that there are yet further contradictions  to  the  evidence  she
    provided to the First-tier Tribunal.  He refers me firstly to paragraph
    15(d) of Judge Herwald's determination.  He points  out  that  evidence
    was provided for the First-tier Tribunal that contradicted itself as to
    what Miss Asante did for a living namely that she was either a computer
    analyst or a human resource manager and now it is  suggested  that  she
    works in the oil industry.  He conceded that the above tasks  could  be
    undertaken within the oil  industry  but  comments  that  yet  a  third
    version of employment for Miss Asante is now suggested by the Appellant
    and that their still remains  no  documentary  evidence  whatsoever  to
    support these contentions.  Further he  takes  me  to  paragraph  15(i)
    where reference is made to someone else also living  in  Miss  Asante's
    house and the lie that was told regarding same.  He submits  that  this
    is now further compounded by the evidence of the Appellant which  casts
    even further doubt on the credibility of her testimony.

11. Finally he takes me to paragraph 22 of Judge  Herwald's  determination.
    He submits that the test set out therein is not  the  appropriate  test
    under Zambrano that it is not appropriate to consider  whether  someone
    else could care for the children but that he  should  consider  whether
    there is a viable alternative for looking after the  children  pointing
    out the appeal is brought under Article 8 by the Secretary of State not
    under Zambrano and that if there is an  alternative  carer  they  could
    look after the children.  He contends it is reasonable for  submissions
    to be made by the Secretary of State pursuant to Article 8 and that the
    situation is quite simply one which the Appellant has  created  of  her
    own doing and that it is open to  her  to  return  to  Ghana  with  the
    children.   He  submits  that  the  judge  has  not   considered   this
    alternative approach and therefore that there has been a material error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

12. In response Mr Khan submits  the  judge  has  realised  that  only  the
    Appellant is able to look after the children and  that  the  judge  has
    properly addressed the issue under Article 8  and  concluded  that  the
    only person available to look after the children is the Appellant.   He
    submits that  the  circumstances  are  exceptional  and  that  all  the
    children can do is remain with the mother and it would be unduly  harsh
    to expect the children to go to Ghana pointing out  that  all  children
    have been born here in the UK.  He contends it would not  be  practical
    to expect the Appellant's sister Ewuasi to have care  of  the  children
    bearing in mind that she has a full-time job and has three children  of
    her own already.  He asked me to find there is no material error of law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Case Law

15. It is appropriate to consider the  relevant  case  law  position.   The
    effect of Zambrano v Office of National De L'Emploi  C-34/09  (ECJ)  is
    that any third country national family  which  includes  at  least  one
    dependant minor child who is an EU citizen even if that  child  is  the
    citizen of the state where the family lives is entitled to rely on  the
    EU child's rights under Article 20 TFEU to a residence  right  in  that
    state.  Such right for a third country national family member is  based
    on the principle that the dependant minor  with  EU  citizenship  might
    have to leave the territory of the union in order to accompany  his  or
    her parents if they were not allowed to reside and  worked  to  support
    the child.   The  position  was  considered  further  in  Ahmed  (Amos;
    Zambrano; Regulation 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA  Regulations)  [2013]  UKUT  89
    (IAC).  The Tribunal held that the principles established by the  Court
    of Justice in Zambrano have potential application even  where  the  EEA
    national/union citizen child of a third country is not  a  national  of
    the host member state and that the test in all  cases  is  whether  the
    adverse decision would require the child to leave the territory of  the
    union.

16. In DH (Jamaica) and Others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ  1736  the  Court  of
    Appeal said that the application of the Zambrano test required a  focus
    on whether as a matter of reality the EU citizen would  be  obliged  to
    give up residence in the EU if the non-EU national  was  removed.   The
    right of residence,  and the right to reside in  the  territory  not  a
    right to any particular quality  of  life  or  particular  standard  of
    living and only if that was effected to such  an  extent  that  it  was
    likely to compel the EU citizen to leave would the principle apply.

17. In Sanade and Others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT
    00048 (IAC) the Tribunal held that where in the context  of  Article  8
    one parent of a British citizen child is also  a  British  citizen  (or
    cannot be removed as a family member or in their own right) the removal
    of the other parent did not mean that either the child or the remaining
    parent  would  be  required  to  leave  thereby   infringing   Zambrano
    principles.  The critical question is whether the child is dependent on
    the parent being removed  for  the  exercise  of  his  union  right  of
    residence and whether removal of that parent will deprive the child  of
    the effective exercise of residence in the United Kingdom or  elsewhere
    in the union.

Findings

18. The above analysis  of  Zambrano  and  extended  principles  is  highly
    relevant in this matter.  It is however only given  the  most  curt  of
    discussion in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  determination.   It  is
    appropriate to note his findings.

         "... I considered that the ruling by the highest court  in  Europe,
         in the case of Zambrano, leaves the court with  no  choice  but  to
         allow the appeal.  It is clear that were the mother to be  excluded
         from this country, then technical EEA nationals  could  not  remain
         here without her and would face informal exclusion from the EEA."

19. That is an accurate analysis of  the  law  and  is  expanded  upon  and
    confirmed in the decisions referred to above.  The two  elder  children
    are German citizens.  They  are  consequently  EU  citizens  and  quite
    simply if the Appellant as the non-EU national was  removed  the  judge
    found that the EU citizens i.e. the two elder children were obliged  to
    give up their residence in the EU.  On that basis the judge  felt  that
    he had no alternative but to allow the appeal.

20. The thrust of the Secretary of State's appeal is that the  findings  of
    adverse credibility was so great and have remained unchallenged in  the
    Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant's  legal  representatives  that  the
    Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof and that it should  be
    assumed that someone else can support  the  children.   The  judge  has
    looked in considerable detail at the family life.  He  has  found  that
    despite  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  lied  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's case appears true in that  this  is  an  Appellant  who  is
    separated from her husband (for whatever reason), has no  contact  with
    him, and lives in her sister's house in the UK.  It  is  not  seriously
    contended that her other sister who has three children of her  own  and
    in full-time employment has the ability to look after  these  children.
    Judge Herwald in a damning determination has castigated the  Appellant.
    It is difficult to imagine a case where a judge has felt so impotent to
    make the findings that he wanted and constrained by  European  law  and
    that his view is that principles of natural  justice  are  offended  by
    allowing the Appellant's appeal.  However he finds himself  constrained
    by Zambrano principles  to  do  so.   I  find  nothing  wrong  in  that
    analysis.   He  has  described  the  case  before  him  as  a   cynical
    manipulation of Rules pertaining to the EU and that the children  could
    easily adapt to life in their African homeland but has felt constrained
    by the decisions of the European Court and  subsequent  endorsement  in
    extensions of those decisions to find in the Appellant's favour.

21. Zambrano is now enshrined in paragraph 15A  -  a  derivative  right  of
    residence - of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  This Regulation
    was inserted on 16th July 2012.  Consequently I find that the judge was
    entitled to reach the decision that he did and that he  gave  full  and
    due consideration to all the factors and the  suggestion  made  by  the
    Secretary of State based on the judge's credibility findings  that  the
    Appellant had not discharged the burden of  proof  under  Zambrano  and
    that it should be assumed that someone else can support the children is
    not sustainable.  The judge gave  very  clear  reasons  as  to  why  he
    reached his decision.  However the correct approach bearing in mind the
    embracing of Zambrano within the 2006  Regulations  by  amendment  from
    July 2012 under the claim for a derivative right pursuant to  paragraph
    15A is to set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  to
    remake the decision allowing the decision under  the  2006  Regulations
    and not Article 8 of the European Convention  of  Human  Rights.   That
    approach was adopted in Harrison v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 and Hines v London Borough  of  Lambeth
    [2014] EWCA Civ 660.  Those authorities apply the test applicable under
    Regulation 15A(4A)(c) and that it is  necessary  to  consider  in  this
    instant case the effects upon the EU children to which the  quality  or
    standard of their lives would be impaired if their mother were required
    to leave.  That answers the question whether the children would,  as  a
    matter of practicality, be unable to remain in the UK and this requires
    a consideration amongst other things of the impact which the removal of
    the primary carer would have on the  child  and  the  alternative  care
    available for the child.  Those were matters considered in some  detail
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and ones which I consider sustainable.
     For all the above reasons therefore the decision  is  remade  allowing
    the appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
in that the judge allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8  rather  than  the
Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The decision  is  remade  allowing  the
appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
