
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01083/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 6th November 2015                     |             On 7th December 2015   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         Mr anish kamleshkumar shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Swain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ford, promulgated on 19th May 2015.   In  the  determination  the
    judge allowed the appeal of Anish Kamleshkumar  Shah.   The  Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  India,  who  was  born  on  12th
    August 1990.  He applied for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student on 6th June 2014  and  his  application  was  refused  on  22nd
    December 2014 on account of the fact that he had not submitted a  valid
    CAS form with his application for further leave.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he had completed his level 5  diploma  in
    IT with the Cromwell College of IT and Management on 28th May 2014.  He
    still had an English language test to complete but on 21st August  2014
    the Secretary of State wrote to the Appellant to say that  all  testing
    at Cromwell College had been  suspended  with  immediate  effect.   The
    Appellant then was told in September 2014 that  his  proposed  Sponsor,
    the London School of Advanced Study, had also  been  closed  down.   He
    approached the London School of Business and finance.   They  told  him
    they had to see his passport or  a  certified  copy  of  his  passport.
    Without this documentation he could not sit an  English  language  test
    with them.  On 18th September the Respondent  wrote  to  the  Appellant
    confirming receipt of his Tier 4 (General) Student application  of  6th
    June 2014.

 4. This letter contains an apology for  the  delay  in  dealing  with  the
    application.  On 3rd December the Respondent  wrote  to  the  Appellant
    requiring him to attend for  an  interview  to  help  them  assess  his
    application.  They did not inform the Appellant that he was required to
    take  another  English  language  test  from  an  alternative  provider
    (paragraph 6).

 5. The Appellant attended an  interview  (to  which  Judge  Ford  makes  a
    reference at paragraph 7) and the interviewer

         "Concluded that the applicant was able to answer the  questions  in
         basic English and answered in a fluent  manner  suggestive  of  the
         fact that they had not been coached in providing  specific  answers
         by rote.  The interviewer stated that there were no points  in  the
         interview where the applicant appeared to  lack  credibility"  (see
         paragraph 7).

 6. The Appellant claims that  he  has,  accordingly,  been  treated  in  a
    conspicuously unfair manner.   His  passport  has  been  withheld.   He
    cannot sit the English language test, after first having been given  no
    indication that he was required to do so.   Moreover,  there  has  been
    consequent delay in the entire process which has disadvantaged him.

The Judge's Findings

 7. The judge considered the arguments before her of a breach of  a  common
    law duty of fairness by the Respondent Secretary  of  State.   She  had
    regard to the Respondent's policy on the return of visa immigration  or
    citizenship  documents  sent  with  applications,  which  were   needed
    urgently by an applicant, in  order  to  regularise  their  immigration
    status (see paragraph 12 of the determination).  The judge went  on  to
    expressly state that,

         "Contrary to what was stated in the letter from the  Respondent  to
         the Appellant dated 18th September 2014, it is clear that there  is
         a policy of returning documents to applicants if  they  are  needed
         urgently within the period of ten days unless the  application  has
         already been refused.  There is  an  online  form  to  request  the
         return of the documents which was not used by the applicant.  But I
         am satisfied that the applicant made a clear request for the return
         of his documents which was acknowledged by the Secretary  of  State
         in the letter of 18th September 2014.  For the Secretary  of  State
         to say that 'Your regional passport cannot be returned,  cannot  be
         issued to take a new English test' is in breach of the terms of the
         Secretary of State's own policy" (see paragraph 13).

 8. On this basis, the judge went on to conclude that the decision  of  the
    Respondent was conspicuously unfair because the Secretary of State  had
    participated in the unfairness by failing to follow her own established
    procedures.

 9. The judge went on to allow the appeal to a limited  extent  by  stating
    that it was not in accordance with the law  because  the  Secretary  of
    State was in breach of her duty of common law fairness.  The matter was
    remitted back to the Secretary of State to consider.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the Appellant did not  provide  a
    valid CAS with his application and that  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    explain adequately why the Appellant was the subject of unfairness.

11. On 24th July 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

12. At the hearing before me,  Mr  Kandola,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent drew my attention to paragraph 12 of the determination where
    the judge referred to the Respondent's policy with an online link.   He
    submitted that if one looks at the two  pages  of  this  document,  the
    first page makes  it  clear  that,  "You  might  have  to  cancel  your
    application ..." On 6th June 2014 the Appellant had applied for  return
    of his documents.  This was on the same  date  that  he  had  made  his
    application.   On  8th  September  2014  the  Respondent  rejected  the
    application.  The Secretary of State was not going to return  documents
    to allow the Appellant to make good his application.  There was no such
    responsibility on the Secretary of State.

13. Second, however, even if it is a policy that should have been followed,
    the position here was that the Appellant was an overstayer  because  he
    was applying on the last day of his leave, and whilst he had a  Section
    3(C) immigration leave that made his  residence  lawful  for  the  time
    being, by asking the Secretary for  return  of  the  documents  he  had
    overstayed by 28 days.  There was no unfairness.

14. For his part, Mr Swain drew my attention to the reason  why  the  judge
    had allowed the appeal at  paragraph  14  of  the  determination.   The
    policy, he submitted, tells only half the story.  The  application  was
    made on 6th June 2014.  It was accepted by all that there was no CAS to
    accompany the application.  However, the reason for this was,  not  the
    lack of a Sponsor college, but because the Appellant had sat an English
    language test and failed it the first time, and was now applying to re-
    sit it the second time, and 11th July 2014 was the earliest  time  that
    he could re-sit.  He was to re-sit an exam set by  Cambridge  Education
    but it was to be sat at Cromwell College, the first time  before  June,
    and the second time on 11th July 2014.

15. However, there then resulted a long delay, because  when  he  contacted
    the college in August he was told  that  there  was  an  issue  between
    Cambridge Education and Cromwell College and there are emails from 21st
    August 2014 from Edward Hodges, confirming this.   Cambridge  Education
    then told the Appellant that he could take a different test in the form
    of the IELTS test, given the delay that was resulting in the issuing of
    his marks.  So matters got more and more  complicated.   However,  then
    the London School of Advanced Study, where  he  was  due  to  take  his
    exams, also had their licence withdrawn.  At this stage  he  approached
    the London  School  of  Business  and  Finance  (as  is  documented  at
    paragraph 4 of the judge's determination), but they  stated  that  they
    were required to issue a CAS, and in order to do that he would have  to
    sit another English test, before they were able to  issue  him  with  a
    CAS, and for that they needed sight of  his  passport  (see  page  47),
    which the Home Office would not release.

16. It is in these circumstances, that the importance of the policy becomes
    enhanced.  The way that the policy bites can only be  assessed  on  the
    basis of these background facts.  If the policy were not  to  bite  the
    Appellant would be left entirely bereft of any assistance or help  with
    an inevitable rejection of his application because, quite  simply,  his
    application could not move on.  It was wrong for Mr Kandola to  suggest
    that this was not an urgent application because the  Appellant  had  to
    finish  his  course  and  embark  on  a  consideration  of  his  future
    prospects.

17. In reply, Mr Kandola submitted that the appeal was allowed on the basis
    that it was a decision by the Respondent that was  "not  in  accordance
    with the law" but there is nothing requiring the Secretary of State  to
    view it with the request for return of documents.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  In what is a meticulously  well  compiled  and  thoughtful
    determination, the judge has recited all the relevant evidence that  Mr
    Swain  has  today  put  before  me  (see  paragraphs  2  to  7  of  the
    determination).  In her assessment of the evidence she observes that,

         "The interviewer concluded that  the  Appellant  was  credible  and
         stated that, 'applicant has taken another ESOL Cambridge exam.   He
         is waiting for his results for one re-sit'.   Ten  days  later  the
         Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application without  any
         reference to the interview conducted on 12th  December"  (paragraph
         7).

19. It is unsurprising in these circumstances that the  judge  went  on  to
    conclude that there was conspicuous unfairness  in  the  way  that  the
    decision had been made in relation to the Appellant.

20. Second, this is all the more so  given  that  there  was  a  policy  in
    existence that the Respondent Home Office applied in cases of this kind
    where documents were to be returned in appropriate cases.  If one looks
    at the  first  page  of  the  policy  headed  "Request  for  Return  of
    Documents", there is nothing there to suggest that documents  would  be
    withheld.  In fact, there is a  statement  to  the  effect  that,  "The
    return of the documents may take more than ten working days if ..."  It
    is only in this context, that the statement at the outset,  "You  might
    have to cancel your application - you will be told if you  have  to  do
    this when you ask for your documents back" can be properly  interpreted
    to mean what it does mean, which is, that  only  the  documents,  which
    ought to be returned cannot be  returned,  that  the  authorities  will
    inform a prospective applicant for leave to remain, in which  event  he
    or she may have to cancel their application.  The policy does not stand
    as authority for the proposition the documents are not to be  returned,
    and in particular those documents which are necessary for an  applicant
    to make a viable application for immigration status.

21. The judge had gone on to  make  two  particular  observations.   First,
    that,

         "This Appellant was placed in a situation where due to  the  denial
         of the return of his passport or a certified copy of that  passport
         accompanied by a Home Office letter following an invitation by  the
         Home Office to take a new English test, the  Appellant  was  denied
         the opportunity to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules"
         (paragraph 14).

22. Third, the judge had heard how the Appellant had failed only one module
    of his English language test and the letter of 18th September 2014  did
    not make it clear whether or not he was required to re-take the English
    language test.  In fact,  he  was  expressly  told  that  he  would  be
    informed if that was the  case.   He  was  not  so  informed.   On  the
    contrary, the Secretary of State waited until 3rd December 2014  before
    indicating, that rather than inviting him to take an  English  language
    test, the  Appellant  would  be  invited  to  interview.   Whilst  that
    interview took place (see paragraph 7) the Appellant was just  to  have
    been a credible applicant who had not been coached and who had adequate
    English language capabilities.

23. It is entirely in these circumstances that the  judge  then  makes  the
    observation that,

         "No reference is made in that letter [letter of 3rd December  2014]
         to the interview conducted, or to the request made by the Appellant
         for the return of his passport or a certified copy of the same  ...
         the Secretary of State was effectively barring the  Appellant  from
         compliance" (see paragraph 14).

    At the end of the enquiry into the facts and the law,  the  judge  only
    concluded that the matter would be remitted back to  the  Secretary  of
    State, so that the appeal is allowed only to that  limited  extent,  in
    order to make  the  Secretary  of  State  to  actually  deal  with  the
    application in a bona fide and  proper  manner.   The  decision  cannot
    remotely be judged to amount to an error of law.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd December 2015




