

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Numbers:
IA/02252/2013

                                                           IA/02255/2013

                                                           IA/02256/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated               |
|On 17 June 2013                             |On 18 June 2013           |
|                                            |                          |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                             Tina Abdullah Albaz
                              Omar Abdal Safar
                          Lillyann Andalkerem Safar
                                 Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms F Clarke, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       These joint appeals come before the Upper Tribunal following the
      grant of permission to appeal on 8 May  2013  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Robertson in respect of the determination of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Cameron promulgated on 17  April  2013.  The  appellants  are  a
      mother and her two children. They are all Iraqi  nationals  and  their
      dates of birth are 19 May 1975, 23 November 2006 and 28  January  2008
      respectively. The appeals of the minor appellants are dependent on the
      outcome of their mother's appeal and she challenges  the  decision  of
      the respondent to refuse to issue her with a permanent residence  card
      as the former spouse of an EEA national.   I  refer  to  her  as  'the
      appellant' in this determination.

   2.       The appellant entered the UK in 2006 from  the  Netherlands  and
      sought asylum. She married in 2001 and her former husband is  a  Dutch
      national of Iraqi origin. It appears he arrived some weeks  after  the
      appellant and following the failure of her  asylum  claim  (which  she
      maintains was the result of bad advice)  she  sought  and  obtained  a
      residence card as his spouse  on  25  April  2007.  Subsequently,  the
      marriage broke down due to domestic violence and the  couple  divorced
      in May 2011.

   3.       The application for a permanent residence card  was  made  on  2
      July 2012. It was refused by the respondent on 31 December 2012 on the
      basis that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of  Regulation
      10(5), specifically that the  evidence  did  not  establish  that  the
      sponsor was exercising treaty rights in the UK because  only  an  ESOL
      certificate covering the period from December 2011 to January 2012 had
      been adduced. Furthermore under Regulation 4(1)(d)(ii)  there  was  no
      evidence of comprehensive medical insurance and finally, that  neither
      child had a passport and  that  there  was  no  birth  certificate  in
      respect of Omar which set out the names of his parents.

   4.       The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron  who
      accepted that the appellant had been a victim of domestic violence. He
      was not satisfied, however, that she had established that the  sponsor
      was a qualified person exercising treaty rights here. With  regard  to
      Article 8, he found that  there  had  been  no  consideration  by  the
      Secretary of State of section 55 and he  allowed  the  appeal  to  the
      extent that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

   5.       An application for permission to appeal was  made  on  25  April
      2013. Its grant has led to these proceedings.

The Hearing

   6.       The appellant was in attendance at the hearing before me  on  17
      June 2013. I should point out at the outset that it  was  accepted  in
      the respondent's Rule 24 reply that the judge had erred  in  remitting
      the matter to the Secretary of State for consideration  under  section
      55 when he could and should have dealt with the matter himself.  Given
      that concession, I heard submissions from the parties only on the  EEA
      issue.

   7.       Ms Clarke submitted that the appellant  had  not  been  able  to
      obtain documentary evidence of her former husband's work because their
      divorce had not been amicable. She acknowledged that  the  Regulations
      did not allow for any discretion and she was unable to point me to any
      case law to  assist  the  appellant.  Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that  the
      Regulations  were  clear  and  that  they  did  not  allow   for   any
      flexibility.   In response Ms Clarke could  only  accept  that  was  a
      stumbling block. She had  nothing  to  say  about  the  refusal  under
      Regulation 4(1)(d)(ii).

   8.        At the conclusion of the hearing I gave my decision and reasons
      which I now set out below.

      Findings and conclusions


   9.       There were two criticisms of the judge; the first  was  that  he
      erred in respect of his findings under the Regulations and the  second
      that he erred in respect of his approach to Article 8.

  10.       With respect to the first complaint, I find that the grounds are
      without any merit. The judge was fully cognisant  of  the  appellant's
      personal; circumstances and the difficulty in which she was  in.  this
      is plain from paragraphs 26, 29 and  31.  He  took  account  of  Ahmed
      (Amos; Zambrano; reg  15A(3)(c)  2006  EEA  Regulations)  [2013]  UKUT
      00089. He found, however, that notwithstanding her circumstances,  she
      still had to meet the requirements of the rest of Regulation 10(5) (as
      indeed was conveyed to the appellant in the respondent's letter of  13
      November 2008 (at page 76 of the bundle). It is not suggested that the
      documentary evidence establishes that she meets those requirements. In
      the circumstances it is difficult to see what other decision the judge
      could have reached as far  as  the  Regulations  were  concerned.  His
      decision in that respect is sustainable and contains no error of  law.



  11.       That is not the case, however, with regard to the decision under
      Article 8. The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
      respondent's failure to consider  section  55  rendered  the  decision
      unlawful but he failed to undertake any assessment of section  55  and
      Article 8 himself as he was required to do.  The  respondent  concedes
      this is an  error  of  law.  In  the  circumstances,  there  being  no
      objections raised, I remit the  appeal  back  to  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Cameron so that he can undertake the  assessment  and  make  the
      decision that he should have done when the matter  first  came  before
      him.

Decision

  12.       The Tribunal did not make any error of law  in  respect  of  the
      decision under the EEA Regulations. However I set aside  the  part  of
      the determination dealing with Article 8 and remit the matter back  to
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron to make a decision on Article 8.


      Signed:








      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      17 June 2013


