
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02740/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            HABIBULLO MUSURMONOV
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss L Appiah (counsel) instructed by Vine Court
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid, promulgated on 12  August  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The  Appellant  was  born  on  17  May  1986  and  is  a  national  of
Uzbekistan.  On  7  January  2015  the  Secretary  of  State   refused   the
Appellant's application for an EEA residence card.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Majid  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 16 December  2015  Frankish  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    The application for permission to appeal asserts that the  F-tTJ
    wrongly exercises his discretion under Reg 17 as to the  issuing  of  a
    residence card when specified evidence must first be  seen,  which  the
    respondent has not seen; further, the discretion, in any event, applies
    only to Reg 29A whereby the respondent may accept alternative  identity
    evidence which this appellant does not have; reversed burden  of  proof
    by requiring the respondent to solve the appellant's problems  with  an
    imaginative exercise of discretion.

    3.     The core of the  determination  ([15])  is  that  "discretionary
    relief can bring joy to this young  couple  and  I  find  it  eminently
    suitable to exercise discretion in their favour." This is  an  arguable
    misapplication of the 2006 regulations."

The Hearing

6.    (a)   Ms Fijiwala, for the respondent, moved the  grounds  of  appeal.
She told me that the only issue in this case was the production of  a  valid
passport or alternative identification, which the appellant did not  produce
with his application nor did he produce at  the  hearing  on  22nd  of  July
2015. She took me to [10] of the decision where the Judge says  that  he  is
exercising his discretion, and from there to [12]  where  the  Judge  states
that the issue in this case "... can easily  be  solved  by  an  imaginative
exercise of discretion".

    (b)    Ms Fijiwala told me that the  only  discretion  which  could  be
exercised is  the  power  given  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise
discretion under regulation 29A of the 2006 regulations. She  told  me  that
it is clear from the refusal  letter  that  that  discretion  had  not  been
exercised in this case. She told me that there was  no  discretion  for  the
Judge to exercise and that  the  error  made  by  the  Judge  amounts  to  a
material error of law. She urged me to set the decision aside.

7.    Miss Appiah, for the appellant, told me that  the  decision  does  not
contain a material  error  of  law.  She  reminded  me  that  the  appellant
produced a letter from the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the  Republic  of
Uzbekistan together with an apostille, and argued that  the  Judge  accepted
that it would be impossible for the appellant  to  obtain  a  passport.  She
reminded me that the reasons for refusal letter does not  contain  reference
to any discretion and argued that if I was to find an error,  it  could  not
be a material error of law. She told me that, in the alternative, the  Judge
could have granted this appeal to  the  extent  of  remitting  the  case  to
Secretary of State so that she could exercise her discretion.

Analysis

8.    Regulation 17 (1) & (2) provide

    "17.-  (1)   The Secretary of State must issue a residence  card  to  a
           person who is not an EEA national and is the family member of  a
           qualified person or of an EEA national with a permanent right of
           residence under regulation 15 on application and production of-

                (a)    a valid passport; and

                (b)    proof that the applicant is such a family member.

           (2)   The Secretary of State must issue a residence  card  to  a
           person who is not an EEA national but who is a family member who
           has  retained  the  right  of  residence  on   application   and
           production of-

                (a)    a valid passport; and

                (b)    proof that the applicant is a family member  who  has
                    retained the right of residence."

9.    The only discretion it can be exercised his  discretion  available  to
the Secretary of State to set out in regulation 29A as follows

    "Alternative evidence of identity and nationality

    29A.-  (1)   Subject to paragraph  (2),  where  a  provision  of  these
           Regulations requires  a  person  to  hold  or  produce  a  valid
           identity card issued by an EEA State or  a  valid  passport  the
           Secretary of State may accept alternative evidence  of  identity
           and nationality where the person is unable to obtain or  produce
           the required document due to circumstances  beyond  his  or  her
           control.

           (2)   This regulation does not apply to regulation 11."

10.   At [7]  the  Judge  summarises  the  appellant's  oral  evidence.  His
conclusions, based on that evidence are found  at  [10(a)]  where  he  finds
"..... The appellant will certainly have serious problems  to  get  the  new
passport from  his  home  country  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  EEA
regulations."

11.   The Judge does not make a finding that the appellant will  be  "unable
to obtain or produce"  the  passport.  The  Judge's  findings  amount  to  a
finding that the passport can be obtained, but it will be difficult.

12.   The discretion contained  with  in  regulation  29A  is  a  discretion
available to the Secretary of State when the appellant is unable  to  obtain
a passport. It is not a discretion which can be exercised if a passport  can
only be obtained with some difficulty.

13.   At [12]  the  Judge  resolves  to  use  "an  imaginative  exercise  of
discretion". He  defines  that  discretion  at  [13]  by  reference  to  the
European Convention on Human  Rights.  At  [14]  the  Judge  refers  to  the
potential removal of the appellant, and at  [1]  the  Judge  identifies  the
decision as a refusal of leave to remain in the UK.

14.    This  appeal  concerns  a  decision  under  the   Immigration   (EEA)
Regulations 2006. The appellant does not face the prospect of removal  as  a
result of the decision. The decision is not a refusal of leave to remain  in
the  UK.  The  1950  convention  has  no  relevance  to  this  appeal.    In
Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 it  was
held that where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served
and where no EEA decision to remove  has  been  made,  an  appellant  cannot
bring a Human Rights challenge  to  removal  in  an  appeal  under  the  EEA
Regulations. In TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ  1233  the  Court  of  Appeal
agreed with Amirteymour At paragraph 35 the Court said "It is impossible  to
say that the Secretary of State's decision to withhold a residence  card  (a
decision which is correct under the EEA Regulations)  will  or  could  cause
the UK to be in breach of the Refugee Convention or ECHR. The UK  will  only
be in breach of those Conventions if in the future the  appellant  makes  an
asylum or human rights claim,  which  the  Secretary  of  State  and/or  the
tribunals incorrectly reject". At paragraphs 26 and 27 the Court  of  Appeal
said that "...The appellant would only have such a right (to  proceed  under
Article 8) if the Secretary of State had served a one stop  notice  pursuant
to section 120 of the 2002 Act and paragraph 4 (8) of Schedule 2 to the  EEA
Regulations....Since there is no section 120 one stop notice, the  appellant
is confined to the subject matter of the original decision".

15.   Not only is there no foundation for the Judge's purported exercise  of
discretion, the Judge incorrectly identifies the decision  appealed  against
and appears to consider the 1950 Convention -  which  has  no  relevance  to
this appeal. These are all material errors of law. I must therefore set  the
decision aside.

16.   There is sufficient information before me to enable me  to  substitute
my own decision.

17.   The facts in this case  are  that  the  appellant  is  a  national  of
Uzbekistan. The appellant's Uzbek passport was issued on 9  June  2003,  and
expired in 2013. The appellant's wife is a Spanish national who  is  present
in the UK exercising treaty rights of movement as  a  worker.  In  order  to
renew his passport, the appellant will have  to  return  to  Uzbekistan  and
apply at the regional office of the Ministry of internal  affairs  where  he
is permanently registered.

18.   On 2 October  2014  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for  a
residence card. In  support  of  his  application  he  tendered  his  wife's
passport, his marriage certificate, his birth certificate,  wage  slips  and
bank statements for his wife, and a letter from the  Embassy  of  Uzbekistan
confirming that he will have to return to Uzbekistan to renew his passport.

19.   It is not impossible for the appellant to renew his passport,  but  it
may well be expensive and inconvenient.



Conclusion

20.   The appellant cannot fulfil the requirements  of  regulation  17(1)(a)
of the 2006 regulations. The appellant is able to renew his passport.

Decision

21.   There is a material error on a point of law in  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal. I therefore set that decision aside

22.   I substitute the following decision.

23.   The appellant's appeal under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
is dismissed.


Signed      Date 8 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

