
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02038/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14th February 2018                |On 26th February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                 NANCY ARMAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Malik (Counsel, instructed by Calices
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On the 31st of March 2015 the Appellant applied for  a  residence  card
    confirming a right of residence as the former spouse of an EEA national
    in the UK exercising treaty rights. The application was refused and the
    Appellant appealed. The appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Daldry in a decision promulgated on the 6th of October 2017.  The
    Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which  was
    granted on the 7th of November 2017.

 2. The history of the Appellant's case  is  relevant.  The  Appellant  had
    entered the UK in 2005. She married  a  Mr  Euphrem  Saboro,  a  French
    national, by proxy on the 25th of November 2009. Her first  application
    for a residence card was made on the basis of her being the spouse of a
    French national and she was issued with a residence card on the  17  of
    June 2010 valid for 5 years. It is accepted that the Appellant  and  Mr
    Saboro had divorced on the 30th of October 2014 again by proxy in Ghana



 3. Following this application the Respondent wrote the  Appellant  on  the
    7th of September 2015 requesting  the  former-husband's  passport.  The
    Appellant's representatives wrote stating that  the  documentation  was
    not available. In the Refusal Letter of  the  7th  of  April  2016  the
    application was refused. At the bottom of the first page it stated  "On
    17 June 2010 you were issued a residence card as the spouse of  Euphrem
    Emery Saboro who displayed a French ID card 081067802600. However,  the
    ID card in the name of Euphrem Emery Saboro was reported lost or stolen
    on 12 August 2010.  Your  former  spouse's  ID  card  has  been  issued
    fraudulently to cover other people's identity. As this has occurred, we
    cannot be sure that your former spouse  was  the  legal  owner  of  the
    identity card or he  was  fraudulently  the  card.  As  you  have  only
    submitted a copy of the identity card, we  are  unable  to  distinguish
    whether your former spouse actually is Euphrem Emery Saboro this is who
    is on the ID card." The residence card was  refused  as  there  was  no
    evidence that he was the rightful holder of the card.

 4. In the  decision  the  judge  summarised  the  Refusal  Letter  and  in
    paragraph  15  noted  that  the  only  issue  was  the  status  of  the
    documentation which had been produced by the Appellant  in  support  of
    the application. The Judge found that the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    entry to the UK was not to be held against her.  In  paragraph  24  the
    Judge found that with a copy of the French ID  card  had  the  passport
    been available then it would have been possible for the Home Office  to
    verify the ID.

 5. The Judge stated that it was reasonable for the Home Office to ask  for
    the passport as there was a suspicion of fraud in the application.  The
    Judge was troubled by the absence of evidence of the  efforts  made  to
    contact the Appellant's former spouse, with the issue of  fraud  having
    been raised she had failed to do so.  There  was  no  other  supporting
    evidence for the claim that Mr Saboro was French. In the  circumstances
    the Judge found that the Appellant had not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof.

 6. In the application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  it
    was submitted that the Judge had  erred  in  respect  of  the  case  of
    Barnett referred to in paragraph 19 of the decision. The burden was  on
    the Appellant in respect of the requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    2006. Under Agho the  burden  was  on  the  Home  Office  to  establish
    reasonable suspicions by evidence.

 7. Permission having refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  the  application
    was renewed and permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  on
    the 9th of January 2018. As Judge Canavan noted the French ID  card  as
    likely to have been before the Respondent when the 2010 application was
    granted. Even if the card had  been  used  in  fraudulent  applications
    after it was reported lost or stolen the Judge  had  not  conducted  an
    analysis  of  whether  the  evidence  was  sufficient  to  justify  the
    Respondent asking for further  documentation  relating  to  the  former
    spouse's identity. There did not appear to be any evidence  to  suggest
    that the copy of the ID card could not be relied on and, on the face of
    it there was nothing to suggest  fraudulent  use  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's first application.

 8. The submissions of the representatives are set out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and referred to where relevant  below.  In  the  course  of
    submissions from the Appellant's counsel I asked  Mr  Tarlow  what  was
    meant  by  the  sentence  that  the  spouse's  card   had   been   used
    fraudulently. Mr Tarlow did not have the file and was  unable  to  shed
    any light on the meaning of the phrase. It was submitted that there was
    a weak suspicion of fraud, there was no  positive  case  and  suspicion
    appeared to arise from the report of its loss and  the  loss  had  been
    reported after the original grant.

 9. The Judge correctly referred to the case of  Barnett  and  Others  (EEA
    Regulations: Rights  and  Documentation)  [2012]  UKUT  142  (IAC).  In
    regulation 17 of the EEA Regulations 2006 the reference to  a  passport
    is to that of the applicant not  the  EEA  national.  However  the  EEA
    national's passport can be requested if there is  a  valid  reason  for
    doing so. In relation to regulation 18 at paragraph 25  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Lane (as  he  was)  observed  that  "As  a  general  matter,  the
    Secretary of State cannot lawfully insist under  regulation  18  on  an
    applicant's producing the EEA national's  passport  or  other  identity
    document, unless the same is genuinely required in order to  prove  the
    right which the applicant is asserting, in  order  to  be  granted  the
    permanent residence card."

10. In Barnett there was  no  issue  with  regard  to  the  EEA  national's
    identity.  In  this  appeal  the  question  was  whether  there  was  a
    justification for the Secretary of State to request the former spouse's
    passport. The issue being raised by the Secretary of State was  whether
    the Appellant's former husband was an EEA national, if he was not  then
    whatever else was accepted  about  the  Appellant's  circumstances  she
    would not derive a right as her circumstances were  entirely  based  on
    her former spouse being an EEA national (and exercising  treaty  rights
    at the relevant time).

11. The fact that there was no basis for questioning  that  when  the  2010
    application was made and granted  did  not  preclude  the  issue  being
    raised later if there was justification  for  it.  To  be  a  qualified
    person  the  Appellant's  former  spouse  would  have   to   meet   the
    requirements of regulation 6 and to do that nationality of an EEA state
    would be a prerequisite.

12. Was the Secretary of State wrong to take this issue and the Judge wrong
    to find that the Secretary of State was justified in the request  made?
    The circumstances of the reported loss if the French Identity card  and
    evidence that it had  been  used  fraudulently  subsequently,  with  no
    suggestion that subsequent  use  was  by  the  Appellant,  entitled  to
    Secretary of State to investigate the previous  use  of  the  card.  In
    those circumstances I am satisfied that  the  request  for  the  French
    passport of the former spouse was a reasonable request by the Secretary
    of State to confirm that the Sponsor was French as claimed  because  it
    was on that basis that the Appellant's own claimed rights depended.

13. As the request  was  reasonable  was  there  a  justification  for  the
    passport not then being made available  by  the  Appellant.  The  Judge
    considered this in paragraph 24. In that regard the  Judge  noted  that
    the Appellant had been able to obtain wage slips for her former-partner
    for his work at Chelsea FC it would have been reasonable for her to  be
    able to provide his passport. His willingness to provide his wage slips
    was significant and inconsistent with a suggestion that he would not co-
    operate with her. The Appellant had not explained why the passport  was
    not available and there were no supporting witness statements  relating
    to his nationality.

14. The fact that the passport had not been provided  did  not  decide  the
    issue but a reasonable explanation was required. The Judge was, for the
    reasons given, entitled to find that the Appellant  had  not  justified
    the absence of the passport and in the circumstances  was  entitled  to
    find that the Appellant had not discharged the burden of proof. In  the
    final paragraph the Judge referred to the Appellant  being  unable  "to
    meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules."  Clearly  that  should   read
    Regulations but that is not material.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 22nd February 2018
