
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02522/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR TAJINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Singh Counsel instructed by The Sethi
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Lal  who
    sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  10  July  2015  and  in  a  determination
    subsequently promulgated on 22 July 2015  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    Respondent (hereinafter called the Claimant) against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 24 December 2014 to refuse his application
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds and to remove him from  the
    United Kingdom.

2.   The basis of the Claimant's claim to remain in the United  Kingdom  was
    due to his family life with his spouse and  his  three  children.   The
    Claimant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom sometime  in  March
    2004, clandestinely with the help of an agent.  On 16 February 2005  he
    married his wife in India whilst he was in the UK, a marriage that  was
    provided. The Claimant's partner claimed to have illegally entered  the
    UK sometime around April 2005.  Their three minor children were born in
    the UK in 2006, 2008 and 2010 respectively.  On 22  November  2011  the
    Claimant's children were  placed  into  the  care  of  Social  Services
    following instances of domestic violence by the  Claimant  against  his
    spouse.

3.   On 19 December 2011 the  Claimant  was  convicted  at  Isleworth  Crown
    Court of Actual Bodily Harm  and  Battery  against  his  wife  and  was
    sentenced to five months' imprisonment.

4.   On 15 February 2012 the Claimant submitted an application for leave  to
    remain outside of the Immigration Rules (OTR) claiming that he  enjoyed
    family and  private  life  with  his  spouse.   On  9  March  2012  the
    Claimant's spouse  submitted  an  application  in  her  own  right  for
    indefinite leave to remain on domestic violence grounds and their three
    children were linked to her application as  dependants.   On  16  March
    2012 the Claimant's children who had been left in the  care  of  Social
    Services were returned to the care of their mother.  On  13  June  2012
    the Claimant's spouse's application for leave to remain on the  grounds
    of domestic violence was approved and the Claimant's spouse  and  their
    three children were all granted indefinite leave to remain.

5.   On 20 May 2013 the Claimant's  OTR  application  was  refused  with  no
    right of appeal as he was evidently no longer residing with his wife or
    children.  His request for  reconsideration  of  this  application  was
    refused on 4 July 2013.  The Claimant requested further reconsideration
    on line in September 2013.  On 8 August 2014 the Claimant was  provided
    with an opportunity to notify the Secretary of State of any  additional
    grounds he might have to remain in the UK to which he responded  on  22
    August 2014.  On 18 September 2014 a referral was made to Ealing Social
    Services following the Claimant's claim that he  had  returned  to  the
    family home of his wife and children.  Ealing Social Services were  not
    aware of this development and due to  the  Claimant's  violent  history
    they were  now  re-assessing  his  case  due  to  obvious  safeguarding
    concerns.

6.   In her letter of refusal dated 24 December 2014,  it  was  noted  inter
    alia, that in all the circumstances it was  considered  reasonable  for
    the Claimant to  return  to  India  without  his  children.   This  was
    considered to be proportionate to the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control and in accordance with the  Secretary  of
    State's Section 55 duties.   It  was  considered  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances in the Claimant's case and  that  refusal  to
    grant leave outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  would  not  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the Claimant and his family.

7.   On appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  he  recorded  the
    Claimant had given evidence  and  adopted  his  witness  statement  and
    further, that in considering the written material before him the  Judge
    had taken account of a statement from the Claimant's wife in which "she
    confirmed her desire to reconcile with  the  (Claimant)  and  that  she
    hoped this would be possible in the future".  It would appear that  the
    Claimant's wife did not attend in person  to  give  oral  evidence  and
    there was nothing in the  decision  that  provides  a  reason  for  her
    absence in support of the Claimant's appeal.

8.    The  Judge  continued  to  record  over  paragraph  7  and  8  of  his
    determination the following:

         "7.  The Tribunal was also  provided  with  a  letter  from  Ealing
             Social Services dated 7th July 2015 from the allocated  social
             worker.  In this she wrote 'As part of my involvement with the
             children I was required to ascertain their wishes and feelings
             with regards to their having contact  with  their  father  ...
             From my individual meetings with the children ... it is  clear
             they wish to have contact with their father'.

         8.   She has also observed contact and the children  were  observed
             to spontaneously hug their father and indeed one of them asked
             when he was coming back to live with the.  The  Social  worker
             confirms that supported unsupervised contact has been arranged
             through a contact Centre for 5 weeks after which contact  will
             be reviewed."

9.   It was further recorded that the  Presenting  Officer  was  content  to
    rely on the Reasons for Refusal Letter and further she referred to  the
    "relatively recent contact and the (Claimant's) immigration history".

10.  It is well to record at paragraphs 10 to 12 of the Judge's decision  as
    follows:

         "10. The Tribunal first considered the Appellant to see whether  he
             could succeed under  Appendix  FM  R-LTRPT1.1.   The  Tribunal
             finds that the Appellant does qualify under this provision  as
             he has submitted official  documentation  of  current  ongoing
             supervised contact with his three children  at  least  two  of
             whom are over 7 years of age having been born in the UK.

         11.  In respect of  breach  of  immigration  law,  maintenance  and
             accommodation and English language the Tribunal turns  to  the
             provisions of EX.1.  The Tribunal accepts that  the  Appellant
             does have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
             his  children  as  the  evidence  from  social  services   was
             compelling of reciprocal feelings and that two of the children
             had been in the UK for 7 years.   Significantly  the  Tribunal
             accepts that it would not be reasonable to expect the children
             to leave the UK.  The Tribunal accepts and indeed it  was  not
             disputed that the family unit as a whole has some work  to  do
             to return to a situation of normality and that such work  must
             be focused and gradual and will no doubt address the issue  of
             parenting responsibility, attitude to  domestic  violence  and
             some level of after care.  The Tribunal is not satisfied  that
             it is in the best interests of the children  to  be  in  India
             with their father in those  circumstances.   The  Tribunal  is
             also not satisfied that the fact of the children operates as a
             'trump card' for the father as in some cases one can  envisage
             a situation where it is in the best interests of the  children
             not to have contact with their natural father.  However on the
             facts of this particular case the Tribunal is  satisfied  that
             what happened in 2011 must be seen in the context of a  family
             life before that  time  and  subsequent  to  that  time.   The
             Appellant therefore succeeds under Appendix  FM,  namely  that
             this was a family life interrupted in 2011.

         12.  The Tribunal in any event turned to a consideration of Article
             8 of  the  ECHR  because  the  jurisprudence  concerned  sheds
             valuable insight into the  competing  considerations  in  this
             case.  The Tribunal  has  had  at  all  times  regard  to  the
             provisions of Section 117 of the 2002 Act as amended.   Public
             interest considerations apply in all cases and these  are  set
             out in Section 117B.  The Tribunal  has  therefore  considered
             the matter in the light of the above and notes that  it  is  a
             qualified right.  It is normally for an appellant to establish
             that he or she has family and/or private  life  that  will  be
             interfered with on return to his or her own country,  and  the
             burden then shifts to the Respondent  to  establish  that  any
             such interference is not only legitimate but is also necessary
             and proportionate."

11.  At paragraph 15 the Judge cited the guidance in Mundeba (s55  and  para
    297) [2013] UKUT 00088 that included head note (v) that  states,  inter
    alia,  "As a starting point the best interests of a child  are  usually
    best served by being with both or  at  least  one  of  their  parents".
    Whilst such guidance has been approved in a subsequent decision of  the
    court, it should be pointed out that Mundeba  was  an  entry  clearance
    case where Entry Clearance Officers were not obliged  to  consider  the
    provisions of Section 55 or were advised to consider them although they
    were under no statutory duty to do so.  It  only  applies  to  children
    within the UK.

12.  The Judge concluded over paragraphs 17 and 18 as follows:

         "17. The Tribunal considered the matter with  some  care.   On  the
             particular facts of this case it is prepared  to  accept  that
             such compelling circumstances exist.  [There is] the  evidence
             from both the children and testimonial evidence  confirmed  by
             the social worker that the Appellant does enjoy  a  close  and
             loving relationship with his children and that they  miss  him
             and want him home.  Coupled to this is  the  evidence  of  the
             spouse  that  she  also  wants  a  reconciliation   with   the
             appellant.

         18.  Perhaps most significantly the family life  was  in  existence
             from 2005, was interrupted because of the events in  2011  and
             has resumed again but this time with  social  services  input.
             The Tribunal is satisfied that on the particular facts of this
             case this is not either a newly discovered family life or  one
             that needs to be instigated as part of an attempt to  stay  in
             the UK.  The ages of the children are also important  in  that
             they have a  developed  relationship  with  the  appellant  as
             opposed to very young children."

13.  In consequence the Judge allowed the Claimant's appeal both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.   The  Secretary  of
    State successfully obtained permission to appeal the grounds  of  which
    pointed out that relying on the Respondent's refusal letter it followed
    that the Presenting Officer  was  submitting  that  there  were  "clear
    issues  with  the  timing  of  the  contact  orders  initiated  by  the
    (Claimant)  and  taking  into  account  his  immigration  and  criminal
    history.  These were factors that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    required to consider."

14.  It was further contended that the Judge allowed the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules:

         "Solely on the basis that the (Claimant)  has  submitted  documents
         that he is having ongoing supervised  contact  with  his  children.
         The First-tier Tribunal has  made  no  findings  and  has  entirely
         failed to  make  any  findings  regarding  the  intentions  of  the
         (Claimant) and the nature of the timings of  the  attempts  to  re-
         establish contact".

15.  Further and whilst the Judge appeared to  place  great  weight  on  the
    social services' report which  dealt  with  the  interaction  from  the
    children and their father,  it  was  submitted  that  the  report  only
    appeared to have commented on the feelings of the  children  but  there
    "was no indication contained within the report regarding  the  father's
    intentions".

16.  It was submitted that the Claimant had served  a  prison  sentence  for
    ABH and his wife had thus been subsequently granted indefinite leave to
    remain on the basis of being a victim of domestic violence and that  it
    was incumbent upon the Judge to address the  submissions  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer regarding the Claimant's immigration history and the
    timing of his attempts  to  re-establish  contact  with  the  children.
    Reliance was placed on RS (immigration and  family  court  proceedings)
    India [2012] UKT 00218 (IAC) and in particular head note (iii) namely:

         "In the case of contact proceedings initiated by an appellant in an
         immigration appeal, is there any reasons to believe that the family
         proceedings have been instituted to delay or frustrate removal  and
         not to promote the child's welfare."

17.  The Secretary of State's grounds further submitted  that  although  the
    Judge dealt with Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 at paragraph 12 of his determination, "... he clearly has  had
    no regard to any of the  public  interest  considerations"  and  simply
    recorded that Section 117B was a "qualified right" : "the correct  test
    for assessing Article 8 was articulated by Lord  Bingham"  and  it  was
    submitted that the Judge was required to consider and take into account
    all relevant sections of Sections 117 and that his failure to do so was
    "a clear material error of law". In that regard I  note  with  interest
    that the provisions of Section 117 were not referred to in the decision
    letter under appeal.

18.  Thus the appeal came before me on 4 January 2015, when  my  first  task
    was to decide whether the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge disclosed an error or errors on a point of law such as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

19.  Mr Tufan relied upon the Secretary of  State's  grounds  of  challenge.
    He maintained that the Judge failed to take account of the guidance  in
    RS "at all" and the situation was  that  the  Social  Services'  report
    confirmed that the  appellant  was  now  in  a  relationship  with  the
    children.  He went on to state there was  no  proper  consideration  of
    Section 117B and that whilst the Judge made reference to the seven year
    requirement, this was intended as a matter of determining reasonability
    and it was not clear on what basis that it would  be  unreasonable  for
    the Claimant to be removed.

20.  Mr Singh for the Claimant, referred me to his Rule 24 reply and  in  so
    doing he maintained that contrary to the assertions of the Secretary of
    State, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in allowing the appeal
    under Appendix FM and that he had clearly set out at  paragraph  10  of
    his judgment, that the Claimant could  succeed  under  Appendix  FM  R-
    LTRP1.1. In any event, the Claimant had submitted official documents of
    current ongoing supervised contact with his three children at least two
    of whom were over 7 years old having been born in the UK.  Further, the
    Judge had found that EX.1 was met as the Claimant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his children. This was evidenced from  the
    social services' report who confirmed that  the  children  reciprocated
    that genuine and subsisting  relationship.   Mr  Singh  continued  that
    clearly the Judge had balanced this alongside the submission of a child
    not being a "trump card".

21.  Mr Tufan had referred me in exemplifying a lack of  reasoning,  to  the
    fact that the Judge had made the following reference in the penultimate
    sentence at paragraph 11 of his determination:

         "However on the fats of  this  particular  case,  the  Tribunal  is
         satisfied that what happened in 2011 must be seen in the context of
         a family life before that time and subsequent to that time."

    Mr Tufan submitted that it was not clear as to exactly what  was  meant
    by this conclusion.

22.  In response, Mr Singh pointed out  that  the  Judge  had  made  himself
    perfectly clear as to his reasoning  in  that  regard.   It  was  self-
    evident on a natural reading of the sentence concerned.

23.  In any event I would observe that at paragraph 18 of his decision,  the
    Judge had said, inter alia, "Perhaps most significantly the family life
    was in existence from 2005, and was interrupted because of  the  events
    in 2011 and has resumed  again  but  this  time  with  social  services
    input".  I find therefore it cannot be said that the Judge's  reasoning
    in that regard was unclear or inadequately reasoned.

24.  Much of Mr Singh's submissions were based upon the Rule 24  reply  that
    he had himself settled and it would suffice  for  me  to  say  at  this
    stage, that most helpfully not only did Mr Singh  set  out  the  entire
    head note of the detailed guidance of the Tribunal in RS  (India),  but
    in so doing he was able to identify at each stage,  the  way  in  which
    contrary to the assertions of the Secretary of  State,  the  Judge  had
    clearly applied that guidance even though he may not specifically  have
    referred to the case by name.

Assessment

25. I am not persuaded  by  the  Section  117  challenge.   Firstly  it  is
    acknowledged in the grounds, that the Judge did make reference  to  its
    provisions at paragraph 12 of the determination.  I have also  reminded
    myself of the guidance in Dube (ss.117-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) in
    which it was held inter alia, that Judges were required statutorily  to
    take into account  a  number  of  enumerated  considerations  and  that
    Section 117A-D were not therefore an a la carte menu of  considerations
    and that it was at the discretion of the Judge to apply or  not  apply.
    Judges  were   duty-bound   to   "have   regard"   to   the   specified
    considerations,  for  example  Section  117B,   that   enumerated   the
    considerations that were applicable in  all  cases  but  they  did  not
    represent ".

26. In particular  they  did  not  disturb  the  need  for  Judges  to  ask
    themselves the five questions set out in  Razgar.   Sections  117  were
    essentially a further elaboration  of  Razgar  question  5,  which  was
    essentially about proportionality and justifiability.

27. I note that in that regard and in terms of the present case, the  Judge
    did indeed make reference to the step-by-step  approach  of  Razgar  at
    paragraph 13 of his determination and indeed continued at paragraph  14
    to say that he was satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  a  family  and
    private life with his wife and children and indeed continued:

         "The impression given was of a supportive family unit  providing  a
         degree of care and  support  for  each  other  but  needing  social
         services support in order to do so at  this  point  in  time.   The
         Tribunal  is  in  no  doubt  that  the  operation  of   Article   8
         considerations is engaged and that any such potential  interference
         is lawful."

28.  Mr Singh quite rightly  pointed  out  in  that  regard  and  indeed  in
    general terms reliant in some part on  his  experience  in  family  law
    matters, that in a case  such  as  this,  where  the  father  has  been
    convicted of offences involving domestic  violence,  it  was  essential
    that there be a careful and indeed prolonged step-by-step  approach  on
    the part of social services in terms of allowing the father  supervised
    contact with his children over a sustained period, before it  could  be
    considered safe for the children to resume  life  with  him  and  their
    mother and that indeed in the context of the present  case,  there  had
    been five such supervised contacts by the  Claimant  and  his  children
    prior to the hearing of this  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

29.  Dube further held that it was "not an error of law to fail to refer  to
    Sections 117A-117D considerations if the Judge had applied the test  he
    or she was supposed to apply according  to  its  terms"  and  continued
    "what matters is substance not form".  It is  apparent  to  me  upon  a
    reading of the Judge's reasoning as a  whole,  that  his  approach  was
    wholly in accordance with that guidance.

30.  Dube also  held,  that  whilst  the  provisions  of  Section  117  were
    expressed as being binding on a "court or Tribunal" it  might  be  that
    the Secretary of State would consider  it  in  the  interests  of  good
    administration and consistency of decision-making on Article  8  claims
    at all levels, to have express regard to Sections 117A-D considerations
    herself, although she was not directly bound  to  do  so.   As  I  have
    earlier observed, no reference to the provisions of  Section  117  were
    made in the Secretary of State's refusal letter  in  relation  to  this
    appeal.

31. As to the Secretary of State's challenge to the  Judge's  reasoning  at
    paragraph 10 of his determination, I find that he was entitled to  take
    account of the official documentation  of  current  ongoing  supervised
    contact between the applicant and his three children and the fact  that
    two of them were born in the UK.

32. The grounds make no mention of paragraph 14 to which  I  have  referred
    above, but the Judge was clear that "the  impression  given  was  of  a
    supportive family unit providing a degree of care and support for  each
    other but needing social services support in order to  do  so  at  this
    point in time".  Further, at paragraph 17 the Judge was clear  that  he
    had considered the matter "with some  care"  and  he  was  prepared  to
    accept that compelling circumstances  existed  and  continued  in  that
    regard:

         "The evidence from  both  the  children  and  testimonial  evidence
         confirmed by the social worker shows that the Claimant does enjoy a
         close and loving relationship with his children and that they  miss
         him and want him home.  Coupled with this is the  evidence  of  the
         spouse that she wants reconciliation with the appellant."

33.  The grounds also fail to refer to paragraph  18  of  the  determination
    (above) where the Judge was clear that he was:

         "... satisfied on the particular facts of this case that it is  not
         either a newly discovered family life  or  one  that  needs  to  be
         instigated as part of an attempt to stay in the UK.   The  ages  of
         the children  are  also  important  in  that  they  have  developed
         relations with the Claimant as  opposed  to  very  young  children"
         [Emphasis added].

34.  I am also reminded that in Budhathoki (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]
    UKUT 00341 Haddon-Cave J stated inter alia, that it was  necessary  for
    Judges to identify and  resolve  key  conflicts  in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons  so  that  the  parties
    could understand why they had won or lost and  that  it  was  generally
    unhelpful for First-tier Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or
    issue raised in the case. I find that this was precisely  the  approach
    taken by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  his  consideration  of  the
    present case.

35.   The  grounds  assert  in  summary  that  the  determination  discloses
    inadequate reasoning and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to
    make findings of fact in every issue arising  and  generally  expressed
    disagreement with the findings made but it is entirely clear  from  the
    determination read  as  a  whole  why  the  appeal  was  allowed.   The
    reasoning of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  cannot  be  said  to  be
    irrational nor his conclusions perverse.  The  Judge  was  required  to
    explain why he reached his conclusions but was not required to assemble
    and set out  in  the  determination  everything  that  was  capable  of
    supporting contrary view - see also Mukarkar at paragraph 40.

36.  It is apparent  to  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached
    findings that were supported by and open to him  on  the  evidence  and
    thus sustainable in law.  For this  reason  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Decision

37.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

38.  No anonymity direction was made.


Signed   Date: 23 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
