
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02552/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 January 2016                        |On 10 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 Faiz Naeem
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Dawes, instructed by Kabir Ahmed & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Faiz Naeem, was born on 16 February 1989 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He is the former husband  of  Taira  Bibi  Rashid
    (hereafter "Mrs Rashid") and the father of M who was born in  September
    2013.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student  in  2010,
    leave to remain which was extended until 27 October 2014.  Prior to the
    expiry of that leave the appellant made an application to remain in the
    United Kingdom in order to have access with his son who  is  a  British
    citizen living in the United Kingdom with  his  British  mother.   That
    application was refused by the respondent on 29  December  2014  and  a
    decision also made to remove the appellant by way of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shimmin) which, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  2  April  2015
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are five grounds of appeal.  First, the  appellant  asserts  that
    there is an insufficiency of reasoning on the part  of  the  judge  who
    erred by "going against overwhelming  supporting  documentary  evidence
    which corroborated the fact that the appellant was clearly involved  in
    his child's life ...". The grounds cite a number of  photographs  which
    were before the Tribunal.

 3. The ground has no merit.  Photographic evidence  is  often  problematic
    given that the judge is unable to be sure to the  appropriate  standard
    of proof that all those individuals shown in the  photographs  are  the
    same individuals with which the appeal may be concerned.  In any event,
    the ground is nothing more than a disagreement with findings which were
    open to the judge on the evidence.  I agree with the  Rule  24  of  the
    respondent [4] that the judge "must be allowed to  critically  evaluate
    the evidence before him (sic)."

 4. The  second  ground  of  appeal  asserts  that  the  judge  applied  an
    inappropriate standard of proof.  It is also submitted that  the  judge
    asked unwarranted questions of the appellant who gave  evidence  before
    him.

 5. The refusal letter  of  the  respondent  indicates  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant met the  requirements  of  the  particular
    Immigration Rule, E - LTRPT 2.4.  The rule provides that the  appellant
    must have access rights to a child and must "provide evidence that they
    are taking and intend to continue  to  take,  an  active  role  in  the
    child's upbringing".  No details are provided of that rejection in  the
    refusal letter but the judge clearly took the view that letters  signed
    by the child's mother Mrs Rashid and which had been drafted for her  to
    sign either by the appellant or his own solicitors  should  be  treated
    with some caution.  I see no error of law in that approach at all.  The
    judge rightly observes [30] that an appellant does not necessarily need
    to show that he or she has a court order providing for access;  Section
    1 of the Children Act 1989 (the so-called  "no  order  principle")  and
    applied in contact applications before the county court often leads  to
    settlement by agreement rather than by the making  of  a  court  order.
    However, the judge was fully entitled,  in  the  absence  of  any  oral
    evidence from  the  mother  or  written  evidence  which  he  could  be
    satisfied accurately represented her views, to find that the  appellant
    had failed to prove that he had access rights.  There was no suggestion
    that he applied an  inappropriate  level  of  proof  in  reaching  that
    conclusion.  In any event, the appellant not only had to prove that  he
    had access rights but that he was taking and intended  to  continue  to
    take an active  role  in  the  child's  upbringing.   Even  adopting  a
    generous  approach  towards  the  appellant's  somewhat  unsatisfactory
    evidence of the existence of access rights, it is difficult to see  how
    the Tribunal might have concluded on the evidence that the second  limb
    of the Immigration Rule could be satisfied.

 6. The third ground is also without merit.  There is  nothing  to  suggest
    that the judge ignored the submissions of Counsel, an  assertion  which
    is little more than an expression of discontent  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant with the outcome of the appeal.  There was also no obligation
    on the Home Office to verify the authenticity of Mrs Rashid's  letters;
    it was for the appellant to produce clear and cogent  evidence  with  a
    view to discharging the burden of proof before the Tribunal.

 7. Ground 4 is without merit.  The appellant merely asserts the respondent
    had not taken issue with  the  identity  of  the  child  shown  in  the
    photographs.  It may well be the correct to say that the respondent did
    not descent to particulars at all in concluding that the appellant  had
    failed to produce evidence  to  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    finding regarding the photographs was, as I have noted above,  open  to
    the judge.

 8. The final ground of appeal concerns Article  8  ECHR.   The  ground  is
    without merit.  It was suggested that the judge failed  to  follow  the
    well-known test in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  There was no need for him to
    do so given that he was not satisfied (and had given cogent reasons for
    reaching that conclusion) that any  relationship  existed  between  the
    appellant and the son.  Article 8 was, therefore, not engaged.

 9. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane







I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

