
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02932/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th September 2013                        |On 2nd October 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                               Mahmudul Imtiaz

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 4th February 1984.

2.   He arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st July 2006 as a student with  a
    visa valid until 31st October 2009.   Further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student was granted until 29th October 2012.

3.   The appellant applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  student  but
    that was refused on the basis that he was seeking to undertake  studies
    at a degree level or above beyond the maximum period of five years.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood on 1st May 2013.

5.   It was common ground that the appellant could not meet the  requirement
    of the Immigration Rules, but nevertheless argument was advanced on the
    basis of Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.    In  summary  the  appellant  unfortunately  was   diagnosed   with   a
    schizoaffective disorder in November 2007.  He was admitted to hospital
    under the Mental Health Act on 20th  January  2007  until  8th  January
    2008.  Since then he has been receiving treatment  and  assistance  for
    his condition.

7.   He had come to the United Kingdom  in  order  to  study  for  a  BA  in
    Applied Accounting.  In the normal course  of  events  that  course  of
    study was expected to have been for 3 years but because of  his  mental
    health problems he was unable to complete that course on time  and  his
    expected finish date was revised to 30th August 2013.

8.   The application made on his behalf under Article 8 of the ECHR was  not
    to reside in the United Kingdom on any permanent basis but rather to be
    granted leave to remain until such time as he had completed his BA  and
    could return to Bangladesh.

9.   The Judge concluded that Article 8 was not engaged  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

10.  Grounds of appeal were  submitted  against  that  decision.   Initially
    leave to appeal was refused but granted on 6th August 2013.

11.  Thus the matter comes before me in respect of that appeal.  The  matter
    was listed for oral hearing but shortly before the  hearing  there  was
    received a bundle of documents from  those  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, indicating that they  were  content  for  a  paper  hearing.
    Unfortunately that letter requesting a paper  hearing  was  dated  16th
    September 2013, and arrived  too  late  for  the  oral  hearing  to  be
    cancelled.  Mr Wilding represents the respondent.

12.  In essence the grounds of appeal contend that the Judge approached  the
    issue of Article 8 on a very narrow basis and failed  to  consider  the
    breadth of the principle as set out in CDS (Brazil) [2010]  (IAC).   It
    is contended that inadequate consideration  was  given  to  the  mental
    health of the appellant, to his diligence as  a  student,  and  to  the
    desirability that his proposed studies would be  shortly  accomplished,
    providing that appropriate leave was granted.

13.  It was noted that the Judge was sympathetic to  the  situation  of  the
    appellant and indeed expressed  his  hope  that  the  respondent  would
    exercise discretion outside of the Rules.  It was  contended,  however,
    that this was a case where  the  Article  8  appeal  was  deserving  of
    success.

14.  Mr Wilding, on behalf of the respondent, invited me to  find  that  the
    Judge had properly considered the circumstances of  the  appellant  and
    particularly  his  ill-health.   Indeed,  the   respondent   had   been
    sympathetic to that difficulty and it was for that  reason  that  leave
    was extended upon the second application.  My attention was invited  to
    paragraph 17 of the determination where the Judge says as follows:-

         "Indeed, it seems to me that the respondent dealt extremely  fairly
         with the appellant when they granted  him  his  second  leave,  and
         notwithstanding his medical  evidence,  with  the  result  that  he
         failed to achieve anything in his first  course  of  studies.   The
         relevant Immigration Rule is based on a computation of time and the
         appellant was not preventing from providing any  evidence  relevant
         to that computation.  On any basis, he has been granted  more  than
         the maximum period allowed under the current Immigration Rules."

15.  Mr Wilding invites me to find that the Judge  had  properly  considered
    all the relevant factors in assessing the Article 8 claim.  The  nature
    of the appellant's illness  and  condition  is  well  set  out  in  the
    determination and it  is  entirely  apparent  that  the  Judge  is  not
    unsympathetic to the issue but finds that on the proper application  of
    Article 8 that it does not apply.

16.  In any event he invites my attention to the way  in  which  the  matter
    was put before the Immigration Judge,  namely  that  the  appellant  be
    permitted to remain until August 2013 at a time when his  degree  would
    be completed.  That time has indeed arrived  and  passed,  and  so  any
    error that there may be in the decision of the Judge is not material to
    its outcome.

17.  Mr Wilding expressed some concern that notwithstanding,   the  position
    as advanced before the Judge and indeed supported by evidence from  the
    college, there now  seems  to  be  a  suggestion  in  the  more  recent
    submissions under cover of the letter of 16th September  2013  and  the
    grounds particularly thereof, that the appellant's studies will now not
    conclude until January 2014.  There is a letter from the  LCA  Business
    School  of  London  dated  13th  September  2013  indicating  that  the
    appellant is registered on a course that starts on 15th May 2009 and is
    expected to be completed on 10th January 2014.  No explanation has been
    offered as to why the completion date  has  been  moved  from  that  as
    previously set out.

18.  Mr Wilding invited me therefore to find that  the  appellant  had  been
    treated fairly both by the respondent and also that  his  human  rights
    had been properly considered by the Judge.

19.  The grounds of appeal make reference to the wider aspect of Article  8,
    particularly in the case of Green (Article 8 - new Rules)  [2013]  UKUT
    00254 (IAC).  and of Izuazu (Article 8 - new Rules)  [2013]  UKUT  0045
    (IAC) and Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  UKUT  0060
    (IAC).

20.  All of those cases serve to indicate that the  recent  changes  in  the
    Immigration Rules relating to Article 8 do not alter the test  set  out
    in Razgar.  In determining whether an immigration decision is necessary
    to maintain  the  interest  of  immigration  control  in  a  democratic
    society, it is important in assessing that immigration decision, to ask
    the question whether a requirement to remove is disproportionate to the
    legitimate aim.

21.  The legitimate aim in this case being  of  course  that  the  appellant
    undertake study for which leave was granted and hopefully to  obtain  a
    qualification as a result.  There is little point in granting leave  to
    enter as a student if the student is not  generally  permitted  in  the
    exercise of that leave  to  reach  a  satisfactory  conclusion  to  the
    studies.

22.  Recognising of course that in this particular case the  appellant  does
    not meet the strict Rules because his course of study  contravenes  the
    five year principle.  It is, however, understandable why that is so  in
    his case.  There is, however, no suggestion that he is otherwise than a
    diligent and honest student seeking to improve his studies.  Indeed  it
    has been argued it is to be held to his  credit  that,  notwithstanding
    his mental health difficulties, he has made every  effort  to  continue
    with his studies.

23.  The grounds  conclude  that  proportionality  would  dictate  that  the
    appellant be allowed to remain in the United Kingdom,  certainly  until
    the completion of his study.

24.  The Judge was well aware in considering Article 8  that  the  appellant
    needed but to complete two modules of his course,  effectively  to  sit
    and pass it.  The Judge  was  directed  to  CDS  (Brazil)  and  to  the
    importance of the principle that a student should not be removed in the
    middle of a course.

25.  However, as the Judge noted, it is not  automatically  disproportionate
    to remove someone who cannot meet the Immigration Rules in  the  middle
    of a course.   The  Judge  found  that  there  can  be  no  "legitimate
    expectation" that the appellant will be granted  extensions  of  leave,
    when due to medical factors or other reason he is  unable  to  complete
    the course in the time originally  allocated  to  him,  and  which  was
    originally considered sufficient.

26.  This is the point touched upon by Mr Wilding in  his  submissions  that
    the appellant has already been given one extension of leave in order to
    complete his studies.
27.  The permission to appeal raises the  issue  that  the  Judge  was  more
    focused  upon  immigration  control  rather  than   acknowledging   the
    particular circumstances of the appellant and his mental health.

28.  The merits of the matter are finely balanced, but it is to be noted  in
    fairness to the Judge that, at paragraph 17 of the  determination,  the
    mental health of the appellant  was  very  much  to  the  forefront  of
    consideration. It was the  finding  of  the  Judge,  however,  that  in
    granting the second period of leave the respondent had acted fairly  in
    all the circumstances.  It cannot be said that the Judge was unaware of
    the mental conditions of the appellant as it is set out in considerable
    detail in paragraphs 8 and 9 of the determination.

29.  The difficulty, as Mr Wilding has indicated, in this sort  of  case  is
    to determine when the length of permission should come to an end.   The
    Judge clearly has recognised the importance of completing the study  to
    the  appellant,  but  also  the  importance   of   maintaining   proper
    immigration control.

30.  Looking at the matter overall I do not find that the  Judge  has  erred
    in the approach to the matter that has been taken.  Even  were  it  the
    case that the Judge had made an error, such  is  not  material  in  the
    circumstances as presented to the Judge because  the  period  of  leave
    that was originally requested was until August 2013, a time  which  has
    now passed.

31.  As I indicated previously, no explanation has been advanced as  to  why
    that period is now said to be January 2014.  No doubt  if  that  matter
    can be clarified by  those  acting  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and
    communicated to the respondent, it would be  my  hope,  as  was  indeed
    expressed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, that  discretion  could  be
    exercised certainly for that limited period.

32.  In the circumstances therefore the appeal is dismissed.   The  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall therefore stand, namely that the
    appeal in respect of the immigration decision is dismissed, and that in
    respect of Article 8 of the ECHR is also dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

