
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal Number
IA/02180/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19th September 2016             |On 12th October 2016               |



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                             MUHAMMAD YASIR KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant: Mr J Komolafe (Solicitor,
For the Respondent: Mrs H Abone (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. He applied for a residence card
   as an Extended Family Member (EFM) on the basis of his dependency on his
   uncle, a Germany national exercising treaty rights in the UK. The appeal
   was heard by Judge Birk on the 9th of October 2015 who allowed the appeal
   outright in a decision promulgated on the 21st of October 2015.

2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
   in grounds of the 26th of October 2015. The grounds noted the findings
   made by the Judge on the credibility of the Appellant. It was argued in
   the grounds that the Appellant had not actually shown dependency. It was
   also argued that the Appellant had not shown that he met the test of
   prior dependency. In allowing the appeal outright the Judge had erred as
   it was for the Secretary of State to consider the exercise of discretion.
   Permission was granted on the 11th of April 2016 by the First-tier
   Tribunal.

3. The hearing was conducted before the decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of
   Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC). That decision has a publication date of
   the 19th of August 2016 but it was not known to the parties or myself at
   the hearing and was first published to my knowledge by the Tribunal's
   Legal and Research Unit in the bulletin of the 20th of September 2016.


4. Under the law as it was understood when the First-tier Tribunal hearing
   took place in allowing the appeal outright the Judge had erred in any
   event. At the very least I would have had to remit the case to the
   Secretary of State to consider the exercise of her discretion to issue a
   residence card. Having considered the First-tier Tribunal decision I
   would have held that the decision was flawed in the approach to the issue
   of dependency pre-entry and within the UK and would have remitted the
   decision to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all issues with no
   findings preserved. However following Sala that is not a course of action
   that is open to me.


5. The effect of Sala is that there is no right of appeal in cases
   involving EFMs and that in this case the Judge had no jurisdiction to
   hear the appeal or to make findings. On that basis there is a clear error
   of law and I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake
   the decision finding that there is no valid appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal finding that there was no valid
appeal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In finding that there was no valid appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 11th October 2016

