
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02716/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2016                         |On 20th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                             mr ahmed roxy keita
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Cook (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on  1st  January  1961.
    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 29th June 2012 on an  entry
    clearance visa as a spouse valid until 2nd August 2014.  Thereafter the
    Appellant's detailed immigration history is as set out at page 1 of the
    reasons for refusal letter.  On 28th July 2014  the  Appellant  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain as a spouse  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the UK.  That application was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State by Notice of Refusal dated 6th January 2015.

 2. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal and the appeal came before Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Khawar sitting  at  Richmond  on  11th  June
    2015.  In a decisions and reasons promulgated on 1st September 2015 the
    Appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 11th September 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 19th January 2016 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer granted permission to appeal finding that it was  arguable  that
    the judge had erred by failing to apply SS (Congo) EWCA Civ 387 and  AM
    (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).

 4. There does not appear to be any Rule 24 response by the Appellant.   It
    is on that basis that the appeal comes before me to  determine  whether
    or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  For the sake of continuity Mr Keita  is  referred
    to  herein  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.  The Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel Miss Cook.
     Miss Cook is familiar with this  matter  having  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Staunton.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. Miss Cook accepts that it was conceded at  the  outset  of  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal that there was no challenge made by  the
    Appellant to the Respondent's findings under paragraph 322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  disclose  his
    previous identity and had failed to identify his previous  presence  in
    the United Kingdom and the fact that he had made previous applications.
     Further she acknowledges that during his  oral  testimony  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal the Appellant had been candid in accepting that his
    previous immigration history would have impacted  negatively  upon  his
    application to enter as a spouse.  However she points out that  because
    the Appellant sought leave to remain prior to the rule change  in  2012
    it is necessary to look at the old Rules and that the Appellant met the
    requirements of paragraph 287.  Further she points out that  in  making
    such application the Appellant had in fact used his  birth  name  Ahmed
    Keita whereas previously he had used the  name  given  to  him  by  his
    stepfather.

 6. Mr Staunton relies on the Grounds of Appeal contending that the judge's
    approach the Article 8 appeal had failed to identify that  Appendix  FM
    was in play and that it was not affected  by  the  decision  to  refuse
    under Rule 322(1A).  Further the judge had then failed, he contends, to
    follow the repeated dicta of the senior courts that Article  8  outside
    the Rules were  not  a  freestanding  assessment  unencumbered  by  the
    failure to meet the Rules and had erred by not assessing  the  strength
    of the public interest in this  case  partially  by  reference  to  the
    failure to meet the public interest described in the Rules.  However he
    submits that  the  judge  erred  by  applying  no  compelling  or  very
    compelling circumstances or even identifying which test was  applicable
    as set out in SS (Congo).  This, he says, was an unlawful approach.  He
    further contended the judge had failed to lawfully apply  Section  117A
    to D of the NIAA 2002 asserting that the judge's  engagement  with  the
    Act at paragraph 40 of his decision was an afterthought and that in any
    event it was not lawful.  He contends it was not lawful because:

      a) the judge had appeared to give weight to  the  Appellant's  private
         rights by reference to his ability to speak English and  that  this
         was wrong in law; and

      b) the judge seemed to reduce the public interest in this matter  down
         to  "economic  wellbeing"  when  he   submits   it   plainly   also
         incorporates other matters  such  as  the  Appellant's  failure  to
         declare his false identity in  application  or  to  an  Immigration
         Officer and his previous  poor  immigration  history.   It  is  his
         contention therefore that there are material errors of law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal and he asked me  to  set  aside
         the decision and remit it to the First-tier for re-hearing.

 7. Miss Cook in response points out that firstly it is necessary to decide
    whether or not it was appropriate for the judge to merely consider  the
    appeal outside of the Rules.  She  reminds  me  that  the  transitional
    provisions applied and that the old Rules are not a complete  code  and
    that there was no test of exceptionality.  She emphasises this  because
    under  the  old  Rules  the  judge  was  in  his  right  to   look   at
    exceptionality or the test as set out in SS (Congo) and  therefore  she
    submits there is no error of law in the manner in which the  judge  has
    considered the test in SS (Congo).

 8. Secondly she turns to the quality of the  Article  8  assessment.   She
    acknowledges that these apply but submits if I look  at  paragraphs  36
    and 40 of the judge's decision I will  see  that  he  has  taken  these
    factors into account.  She contends consequently there is  no  material
    error of law and  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. I start by noting the basis on which this matter comes before me.  I am
    not re-hearing the matter.  I am merely determining whether  there  has
    been a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge.  The decision is well constructed.  Firstly the history  of  the
    matter is set out.  Thereafter there is an analysis of the Respondent's
    reasons for refusal and findings and conclusions are  drawn  upon  that
    taking into account the refusal under paragraph 322(1A).  The Appellant
    concludes the Appellant cannot succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Thereafter  at  paragraph  30  onwards  he  goes  on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's appeal under Article 8.  It is  wrong  to  state  that  the
    judge has not addressed factors to be found in Section 117B of the 2002
    Act.  At paragraph 36 the  judge  has  considered  the  weight  of  the
    Secretary of State's duty to ensure  immigration  control  and  he  has
    analysed this further in paragraph 37.  He has at paragraph 39 assessed
    the present family position of the Appellant and the  effect  upon  the
    Sponsor if she were to be required (as  she  feels  she  would  as  the
    Appellant's partner) to move to Sierra Leone if he had to do so and  at
    paragraph 40 the judge has carefully gone on to consider, albeit in one
    paragraph, the provisions of Section 117B.  It is consequently wrong of
    the Secretary of State in the Notice of Refusal to  suggest  that  such
    considerations are an afterthought.  They are set out in detail  albeit
    that I acknowledge that there is little case law  analysis  within  the
    decision.

12. The two  authorities  referred  to  SS  (Congo)  and  AM  (Malawi)  are
    important decisions and have given the Tribunal considerable  guidance.
    Both were published and available to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    Having accepted that he did  not  make  reference  to  them  the  basic
    principles therein do not show that the Appellant has made  a  material
    error of law.  The position with regard to the test  of  exceptionality
    is set out at  paragraph  33  of  SS  (Congo)  and  I  agree  with  the
    submission made by Miss Cook that because the case was considered under
    the old Rules the judge was entitled to make the findings that  he  did
    and his failure to rely on SS (Congo) does not constitute an  error  of
    law.

13. Further I am equally satisfied that there is no error  of  law  in  the
    judge's consideration of Section 117B.  As is set out to  consider  the
    matters in Section 117B of the 2002 Act is satisfied if the  Tribunal's
    decision shows that it has had regard  to  such  parts  of  it  as  are
    relevant.  This is  further  emphasised  in  Dube  (Section  117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) which is authority for  stating  that  Sections
    117A-117D do not represent  any  kind  of  radical  departure  from  or
    "override" previous case law on Article 8 so far as concerns  the  need
    for a structured approach.  In particular they do not disturb the  need
    for judges to ask themselves the  five  questions  set  out  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.  Sections  117A  to  117D  are  essentially  a  further
    elaboration  of  Razgar's  question  5  which  is   essentially   about
    proportionality and justifiability.  Further  as  indicated  in  Forman
    (Section 117A to C considerations) [2015] UKUT  00412  (IAC)  in  cases
    where the provisions of Section 117B to 117C of the 2002 Act arise, the
    decision of the Tribunal must demonstrate that  they  have  been  given
    full effect.

14. Albeit that the assessment by the judge  is  scant  he  has  given  due
    consideration to the Section 117B factors and has made findings thereon
    which he was entitled to.  He has effectively,  albeit  in  very  short
    form, followed the basic principles set out in  the  above  authorities
    and whilst it may have been better if he had conducted a more  thorough
    approach submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State amount to
    little more than disagreement with both the findings  and  analysis  of
    the judge.

15. In such circumstances the  judge  has  reached  findings  that  he  was
    entitled to and has given his reasons  and  the  decision  consequently
    discloses no material error of law.  In such circumstances  the  appeal
    of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Decision

16. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a fee award.  The  Secretary  of  State's
appeal having been dismissed that award do stand.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
