
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02229/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th December 2016                |On 13th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            mr MALIK UMWER FAROOQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent (who I shall refer to as the claimant) is a  citizen  of
    Pakistan who made an application for leave to remain here as a  Tier  4
    (General)  Student  Migrant  under   the   points-based   system.   The
    application was refused by the Secretary of State in a refusal decision
    of 19th December 2014.

 2. The claimant appealed  the  refusal  of  that  decision  to  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Khan who noted that there was also  a  decision  of  7th
    November 2014 to remove him.

 3. The judge concluded that the  second  decision,  namely  that  of  19th
    December 2014 must supersede the earlier decision and that the decision
    of 7th November 2014 was therefore not in accordance with the law.  The
    judge went on to find that the Secretary of State should  have  granted
    the claimant a period of 60 days to seek  further  sponsorship  as  the
    claimant was denied the opportunity to continue with his  studies  here
    at a different educational institution.  The appeal was allowed on  the
    basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

 4. The grounds of application on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  were
    quite brief stating that it was not  clear  on  what  legal  basis  the
    decision of 19th December 2014 could be said to have superseded  or  to
    have withdrawn the one of 7th November 2014.

 5.  In  refusing  permission  to   appeal,   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth pointed out that it  was  clear  to  the  judge  that  the
    decision of 19th December 2014 superseded  the  earlier  decision.   On
    renewal of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic
    found that it was arguable the judge had failed to  adequately  explain
    why he concluded that the second decision superseded the first.

 6. Before me, for the Secretary of State  Mr  Duffy  maintained  that  the
    second decision was a nullity.  It was made in ignorance of  the  first
    decision and therefore the judge did not have jurisdiction to hear  it.
    It was accepted that this was not the way the case had  been  presented
    to the First-tier Tribunal Judge at the  hearing.   He  added  that  it
    would have been expected to have been mentioned in the second  decision
    that the first decision was withdrawn - which had not been stated.

 7. For the claimant Mr Sharma relied on what was set out  in  his  written
    submissions.  There were two decisions.  There  was  a  decision  dated
    19th December 2014 and there was also a decision to remove him pursuant
    to Section 47 under the 2006 Act - the 7th November decision.

 8. It was submitted that the decision of 19th December 2014 superseded the
    earlier decision  and  this  had  been  accepted  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing.   With  reference  to  his  oral
    submissions Mr Sharma pointed  out  that  the  decision  made  on  19th
    December 2014 was an appealable decision.   The  appeal  had  developed
    since the earlier decision to remove him.  We were now being told  that
    the second decision was a mistake, but that was not a matter  that  was
    canvassed before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, nor had permission been
    given to argue such a point.  As per the written submissions, the  19th
    December 2014 decision must implicitly have been taken to withdraw  the
    decision of 7th November.

 9. In terms of the actual decision by the judge,  reference  was  made  to
    SSHD v Khan [2016] EWCA  Civ  137  and  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor
    licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).  There was a  policy
    to notify those in the position of Mr Khan and to suspend consideration
    of their applications for 60 days to enable them  to  remedy  problems.
    That policy had not been applied in this case and it  was  accepted  by
    the Presenting Officer that it should have been.

10. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

11. On the face of it, it might seem rather puzzling why the  Secretary  of
    State made two decisions in this case.  It was submitted by Counsel for
    the claimant that the decision of 19th December  2014  must  implicitly
    have been taken to withdraw the decision of 7th November  2014.   While
    Mr Duffy made the point that if that had really been so, he would  have
    expected the second decision to have made that clear this was  not  the
    position taken by the Home Office Presenting Officer at the time of the
    hearing before the First- tier tribunal judge.  Indeed, in paragraph 13
    of the judge's decision it was noted that Mr Grennan, the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer "accepted the points  raised  by  Counsel  (for  the
    claimant) as "entirely valid".  Given  that  concession  it  is  hardly
    surprising the judge proceeded in the way he did.  Mr Grennan seems  to
    have accepted that the 60 day policy of the Secretary of State had  not
    been applied in this  case.   In  those  circumstances,  and  with  the
    agreement of parties, the judge  simply  found  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

12. We are now told, for the first time, that the second decision  of  19th
    December 2014 was made in error and it was always  intended  to  remove
    the Appellant.  As Mr Sharma pointed out, the Secretary of  State  does
    not have permission to appeal on those grounds and indeed Mr Duffy  did
    not seek permission to do so, presumably because it came far  too  late
    in the day to try and change  the  basis  of  the  appeal.  The  second
    decision of the Secretary of State gave the claimant a right of  appeal
    which  was  successfully  exercised  and  it  is  difficult  to  forsee
    circumstances where that chain of events can or should be undone.

13. While I am grateful to Mr Duffy for clarifying the position  which  has
    arisen, the position taken before the judge was that  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer agreed with the submission made by  Counsel  and  it
    followed that the judge  could  do  no  more  than  conclude  that  the
    Secretary of State should have granted the claimant a period of 60 days
    to seek further sponsorship.  That being so, there is no error  in  the
    judge's decision, which must stand.

Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

15. I do not set aside the decision.

16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal of the Secretary of State and therefore the  fee
award made by the First -tier Tribunal judge shall stand.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

