
IAC-AH-sc-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/02143/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th March 2015                        |On 15th April 2015                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Manshura Begum
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Camp, promulgated on 1st December 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 7th November 2014.  In the  determination,
    the judge  allowed  the  appeal  of  Manshura  Begum.   The  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State,  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was   granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of  Pakistan  who  was  born  on  1st
    January 1957.  She applied for indefinite leave to remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that she wished to remain in the  UK  to
    provide care for her daughter (Zakia), who  was  said  to  suffer  from
    mental health problems, and to care for Zakia's daughter (Asila).  This
    was after the Appellant had entered the  UK  as  a  visitor  on  a  six
    months' visa from 14th February 2013 to 14th August 2013.

The Background

 3. At the hearing before Judge Camp, there had been an application  by  Mr
    Lane, who had also represented the Appellant on that occasion,  for  an
    adjournment.  The application was on the basis that the evidence  cited
    by the Respondent was out of date.  Asila was  still  living  with  her
    mother.  Asila's father lived in Birmingham.   Contact  had  been  made
    with the social worker there. The  current  state  of  the  proceedings
    before the family court was unknown.  Zakia, who was  the  daughter  of
    the Appellant who allegedly needed more care, was in need  of  24  hour
    support.  (See paragraph 8).  The judge declined to adjourn the hearing
    before him (see paragraph 12).

 4. The judge recounted the evidence which was that Zakia had  been  living
    with her daughter Asila in Bradford  when  they  moved  to  Birmingham,
    after which Zakia's daughter, Asila, was taken away  from  her.   Zakia
    was not supported by Social  Services  in  Birmingham.   She  had  been
    supported in Bradford.  Birmingham Social Services were happy with  the
    way in which Zakia was receiving support from the  Appellant.   Zakia's
    health had been good in Pakistan but her mental state had  deteriorated
    in the United Kingdom because of her treatment by her husband.  She had
    been in the United Kingdom for nine or ten years.

 5. When the Appellant came to the UK in February 2013, she had intended to
    return  back  to  Pakistan,  "but  Zakia's  health  had   deteriorated"
    (paragraph 13) and the Appellant wanted to provide  her  with  support.
    There was evidence before the Tribunal that Zakia's ex-husband  had  no
    contact with  her  except  sometimes  when  Zakia  contacted  Asila  by
    telephone.

 6. The judge heard submissions in relation to the application  of  Section
    117 of the 2002 Act (paragraph 22).   He heard submissions from Mr Lane
    that:

         "Zakia was a vulnerable adult who suffered from depression and  had
         learning  difficulties".   It  was   her   interests   which   were
         essentially the subject of the appeal.  The situation  was  unusual
         and merited consideration of  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules.  Zakia had had no problems initially, but had been  affected
         by the breakdown of her marriage.  It was  the  Appellant  who  had
         offered  her  the  greatest  support.   The  question  was  one  of
         proportionality" (paragraph 23).

 7. The judge held that the Appellant and Mr Khan, who had  given  evidence
    as the relative of the Appellant, explaining that the Appellant was his
    wife's mother's sister (see  paragraph  18),  were  both  credible  and
    honest witnesses (see paragraph 24).  The  judge  held  that  he  would
    accept that, "the basis of the appeal is that the  Appellant  considers
    that she is needed to care for her daughter  Zakia  and  not  that  the
    Appellant or Zakia believes that the  Appellant's  presence  will  help
    Zakia to regain custody of her daughter Asila" (paragraph 25).

 8. The judge observed that the most recent professional report on  Zakia's
    condition was a psychological  assessment  dated  October  2012  by  Dr
    Samantha Hardingham, a clinical psychologist, who had said that Zakia's
    IQ was found to be "in the extremely low ranges" (paragraph  26).   The
    judge applied the leading cases on Article 8 (paragraph 31).

 9. The conclusions by the judge were clear that,

         "The relationship between the Appellant and Zakia is one  in  which
         there are not only emotional ties but also  emotional,  mental  and
         physical dependency.  I accept that the evidence that  Zakia  would
         be quite unable to manage her life without assistance and  that  it
         is the Appellant who provides that assistance.  Whether or not some
         other relative or outside agency could provide a  similar  kind  of
         care is not relevant to the question of whether family life  exists
         ......" (paragraph 38).

    The judge also held  that,  "Zakia  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    legitimately for some ten years" (paragraph 39).  The  issue,  however,
    was that in relation to the Appellant, and not in  relation  to  Zakia.
    In considering Article 8, the judge was driven therefore to examine the
    application of Section 117B of the 2002 Act  (see  paragraph  44).   He
    concluded that, "the circumstances in which the Appellant finds herself
    could not be deliberately replicated by others  seeking  to  evade  the
    Immigration Rules" (paragraph 45).  He was clear that, "the  disruption
    and emotional  damage  caused  by  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be
    considerable" (paragraph 46).

10. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law by failing
    to consider the public interest requirements set out in Section 117B of
    the 2002 Act in respect of the Appellant's ability to speak English and
    in relation to her financial independence.   Moreover,  the  judge  had
    misdirected  himself  on  the  requirements  of  Section  117B(iv)   by
    concentrating on the status of the Appellant's  daughter,  rather  than
    that of the Appellant herself.

12. On 4th February 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 20th March 2015,  Mr  Lane  handed  up  his
    skeleton argument, dated 18th March 2015, and relied upon the two cases
    of Dube (Section 117A - 117D) [2015]  UKUT  90,  and  upon  Beoku-Betts
    [2008] UKHL 39, both of which he handed up.  Since it  was  Mr  Smart's
    appeal on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State,  he  began  with
    his submissions.  He relied upon the Grounds of Appeal.  He also relied
    upon Dube, which he submitted was a very useful  case  to  explain  the
    application of Section 117.  He  submitted  a  Section  117A  expressly
    imposes a public interest consideration of  immigration  control  which
    cannot be ignored.   Judges  have  to  take  this  into  account.   The
    importance of immigration control was expressly emphasised  before  the
    judge by the Presenting Officer, as made clear at paragraph 22  of  the
    determination, that  the  public  interest  requirement  in  favour  of
    immigration control was important.  Second, the judge appears  to  have
    misread the situation (see paragraph 8 of the determination which deals
    with the adjournment request by Mr Lane) in concluding that  the  child
    was in the care of her mother, Zakia.  This was not true.   Third,  the
    Appellant's status was "precarious" as the judge noted at paragraph 44,
    and yet proceeded to allow the appeal.

14. For his part, Mr Lane referred to his skeleton argument.  He  submitted
    that the judge was not  wrong  in  the  way  that  he  dealt  with  the
    adjournment application  (at  paragraph  8)  and  did  not  create  the
    impression that the child was in care.  This is because at paragraph 25
    of the determination he made it clear that "the basis of the appeal  is
    that the Appellant considers  that  she  is  needed  to  care  for  her
    daughter Zakia and not that the Appellant or Zakia  believes  that  the
    Appellant's presence will help Zakia to regain custody of her  daughter
    Asila" (paragraph 25).  Therefore there was no confusion.

15. Second, as far as  the  public  interest  consideration  in  favour  of
    immigration control  is  concerned,  the  judge  expressly  states  (at
    paragraph 45) that the Appellant's situation is not one that would  "be
    deliberately replicated by others  seeking  to  evade  the  Immigration
    Rules".  He further adds that, "so far from placing a burden on  public
    funds, [the Appellant's continued presence in the  UK]  would  actually
    save them by obviating the need for an intervention of Social  Services
    to care for Zakia" (paragraph 45).

16. Third, the judge had found  the  parties  before  him  to  be  credible
    witnesses.  He accepted that the Appellant had come  for  a  short-term
    visit on a visitor's visa, but that when she saw the condition  of  her
    daughter, Zakia, she decided that she had to stay here  to  look  after
    her, and this is fully set out at paragraph  46  of  the  determination
    where the judge states that, "the Appellant had no initial intention of
    overstaying but felt compelled to remain".

17. Finally, as far as the public interest considerations as  a  whole  are
    concerned in paragraph 117 of the 2002 Act, the  judge  is  clear  that
    "the deception and emotional damage caused by the  Appellant's  removal
    would be considerable" and that "the Appellant's  intention  has  never
    been to bypass the Immigration  Rules"  (paragraph  46).   He  ends  by
    saying that, "I conclude that the human rights  of  the  Appellant  and
    Zakia outweigh the public interest objectives specified.   The  removal
    of the Appellant would consequently amount to a breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Article 8  of  the  ECHR"  (paragraph  47).
    These conclusions and findings are open to the judge.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  It is clear that
    the judge had the Section 117B considerations in  mind  (see  paragraph
    44).  The judge was aware that  the  Appellant's  English  was  limited
    because she gave evidence in Mirpuri (paragraph 13).  The  judge  found
    the Appellant and Mr Khan to be  credible  and  honest  witnesses  (see
    paragraph 24).  He also concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  supported
    financially by Mr Khan and by others and  that  she  sometimes  refused
    financial help.  Any leave to remain would be granted without  recourse
    to public funds (see IDI chapter 8.1.3(iii)).

19. The judge was mindful of the wider impact  on  the  public  purse  (see
    paragraphs 29 and 45) and the judge was cognisant of the fact that  the
    Appellant is elderly and  a  full-time  carer  for  her  daughter  (see
    paragraph 39).  The test in Dube was applied by the judge.  It  is  not
    the case that the judge has placed too much weight upon the Appellant's
    private life because the judge makes clear that  the  appeal  is  based
    upon  the  need  of  the  Appellant  to  support  her  daughter,  Zakia
    (paragraph 10).

20. This is emphasised later on as well  (see  paragraph  25).   The  judge
    faithfully and properly applies the House of Lords decision  in  Beoku-
    Betts [2008] UKHL 39 at paragraph 32 of the determination.  He is  also
    aware that little weight is to be granted to  the  Appellant's  private
    life which  has  been  established  at  a  time  when  her  status  was
    precarious (see paragraph 44 of the determination).

21. What is significant, however, is that the judge equally emphasises that
    Zakia's private life was established while she was in  the  UK  legally
    and that this adds more weight.  The judge  has  regard  to  the  wider
    economic issues (at paragraph 45)  and  considers  that  allowing  this
    appeal would not damage the public  interest  in  immigration  controls
    (paragraph 45).  All in all, therefore, the decision was one  that  was
    open to the judge because it does not exhibit a material error of  law,
    and is not one that was not recently open to this judge.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  determination.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        11th April 2015

