
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/02423/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 15 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                             PARMINDER JIT KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harris
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Parminder Jit Kaur, was born on 20 June 1976  and  is  a
    female citizen of India.  The appellant was refused  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student by a decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 24 December 2014.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Kempton) which, in a decision promulgated on 14 April  2015,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam wrote:

         "It is obvious that the appeal  cannot  succeed  under  substantive
         Rules relating to students.  However, it is arguable that the judge
         should have determined the appeal under paragraph  322(10)  of  the
         Rules and determine the issue concerning whether she is  a  genuine
         student."

 3. The parties agree that the  appellant  cannot  succeed  in  her  appeal
    against the refusal for further leave to  remain  as  a  student.   The
    appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(a)  of  HC
    395 (as amended).  As Judge Kempton noted [10], "it was  accepted  that
    the appellant could not succeed in her appeal as she had no valid CAS."
     The judge went ahead and heard the appeal regarding the genuineness of
    the appellant as a student which had, additionally, led  to  her  being
    refused further leave to remain under paragraph 322(10):

 4. The appellant had been invited to attend  an  interview  in  connection
    with her application scheduled  for  20  October  2014.   She  did  not
    attend.  On the basis of her non-attendance, the  respondent  concluded
    that the appellant was not a genuine student.  The  appellant  contends
    that she was told by  her  sponsor  (Cardiff  Metropolitan  University)
    that, because she had no CAS, it was pointless of  her  to  attend  the
    Home Office interview.  Having heard the evidence, the judge  concluded
    as follows [19]:

         "I was asked to decide if the appellant is a genuine student.  I am
         not in a position to say conclusively that she is.  However, on the
         other hand, I am not in a position to say that  conversely,  namely
         that she is not a  genuine  student,  as  there  is  no  conclusive
         evidence either way. "

 5. It is perhaps arguable that the judge need not have  embarked  upon  an
    examination of the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's  failure  to
    attend the Home Office interview.  Given that  the  appellant  accepted
    that she could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  and  was  not
    pursuing an appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds, it would have been enough
    for the judge to have dismissed the appeal.  However,  having  embarked
    upon a fact-finding exercise regarding the interview  and  the  reasons
    for the Appellant's failure to attend it, it was reasonable  to  expect
    the judge to make a positive finding one way or  another;  it  was  not
    enough for the judge to leave the matter unresolved.  In my opinion and
    having considered the evidence carefully, I find that it is likely,  on
    the standard of the balance of probabilities, that  the  appellant  was
    told by her sponsor that, given she had no CAS, it  was  pointless  for
    her to attend the Home Office interview.  The respondent concluded from
    the fact that the appellant did not attend that she was not  a  genuine
    student at all.  It may well be the case that the appellant  is  not  a
    genuine student but the reason given by the respondent (the appellant's
    failure to attend the interview) did not of itself and (in the light of
    my finding) without further evidence establish that as a fact.

 6. Whether my observations may prove of any assistance to  this  appellant
    in the future should she make an application from abroad for  leave  to
    enter is a matter for her and her advisers and, ultimately,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  Because the appellant cannot succeed  in  reversing
    the decision to refuse her further  leave  to  remain,  I  dismiss  her
    appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

