
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02568/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th August  2013                            |On 16th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                MR KAIF AQEEL
                                                                    Claimant

                                     and

                             Secretary of State

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Claimant:         Not Represented
For the Respondent:        Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Somal) who by a determination promulgated on 5th  June  2013  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to vary his leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  and  to
    remove him under s.47 of the Immigration, Nationality  and  Asylum  Act
    2006.

 2. When granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Frankish
    did not deal with the question of timeliness as he was required to  do.
    The time for seeking permission to appeal expired on 14th June but  the
    application was not received by the Tribunal until 2nd July.

 3. In Samir (First-tier Tribunal permission to appeal :time)  [2013]  UKUT
    00003 (IAC) it was made clear that in such circumstances the  grant  of
    permission is a conditional grant and that I as a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge must first decide whether to admit the application.

 4. The application explains that the Appellant is paying privately for the
    appeal proceedings and took time to raise funds and as soon as  he  did
    so the representatives submitted the  application.  As  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination does not deal with the s.47 removal decision  it
    is  arguable  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  and  so  I  admit   the
    application.

 5. The Appellant's representative did not  attend  the  hearing,  but  the
    Appellant did.  At 10.15 the Tribunal received a  telephone  call  from
    Malilk Law Chambers to the effect that he representative  was  ill  and
    could not attend and asking for an adjournment. A letter  to  the  same
    effect was faxed later in the day.  As the Appellant  was  present  and
    the grounds had been drafted by his representatives I saw no reason  to
    adjourn dealing with the error of law.

 6. The grounds are clearly a set piece - used in several cases - indeed  I
    have an identical set in another case before me  to-day.   They  assert
    that the Judge erred in failing  to  deal  with  s.47  which  case  law
    (Adamally  and  Jaferi  (section   47   removal   decisions:   Tribunal
    Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC) confirms was an  unlawful  decision
    when made at the same time as a refusal to vary leave and that the  two
    are distinct decisions each requiring a  determination.  Ahmadi  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 512 indicates that where an unlawful s.47 removal decision has
    been made the appeal in that regard should be allowed.

 7. In this case the First-tier Tribunal did not make any decision  on  the
    removal decision.  The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 reply suggests
    that the Home Office Presenting Officer withdrew the  decision  on  the
    day in line with current policy.  The Record of Proceedings makes clear
    that  is  what   occurred.    It   is   astonishing   that   the   same
    representatives, Malik Law Chambers, who were present at  that  hearing
    should then submit that as a ground of appeal.  They  were  well  aware
    that the s.47 decision   had been withdrawn and was thus not before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The grounds also assert that the Judge erred in failing  to  deal  with
    Article 8.  The determination makes  clear  at  paragraph  4  that  the
    representative did not rely on Article 8.  The  Record  of  Proceedings
    also records the representative saying  that  he  was  not  relying  on
    Article  8.   Again  it  is  therefore  astonishing   that   the   same
    representatives who made that concession should now  suggest  that  the
    Judge erred in failing to deal with it.  A Judge is entitled to  assume
    that a representative  knows what he is doing and if he says he is  not
    relying on Article 8 it is because he does not want findings to be made
    in that regard. In  seeking  and  securing  the  conditional  grant  of
    permission to appeal the representatives  have  misled  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 9. The grounds are wholly without merit, bear no resemblance to  the  case
    in issue and ought not to have been  submitted.   Both  the  Tribunal's
    time and the Appellant's money have been  wasted.   This  case  had  no
    prospect of success whatsoever and the Appellant ought properly to have
    been advised accordingly.

10. The First-tier Tribunal made no error of law in its  determination  and
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.








Signed                              Date 14th August 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


