
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02642/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 11th December 2015            |On the 5th January 2016               |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                         MRS ESTHER BOATEMAAH-LANGE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Cope promulgated on the 16th June 2015,  in  which  he
       dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the   Immigration   (EEA)
       Regulations 2006.

    2. Within the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it was argued  by
       the Appellant that the First-tier Tribunal had not taken into account
       the self-assessment records that have been set up for her husband and
       an online payment as a  self-employed  class  II  National  Insurance
       contribution paid to the HMRC, as evidence of him  exercising  Treaty
       Rights both as a self-employed and also a self-sufficient person  and
       that he had submitted such documentation to show that he was working.
       It is further argued that in June 2011 the UK border  agency  amended
       Chapter 4 and  Annex  A  of  the  European  Casework  Instruction  to
       indicate what would be considered acceptable proof  of  comprehensive
       sickness insurance and that the UKBA was willing to accept:

        i)  a comprehensive private sickness insurance policy

       ii) an European health insurance from an EU member state other  than
           the UK or

      iii) in certain circumstances S1,  S2  or  S3  form  FOM  (forms  for
           reimbursement from medical treatment).

    3. It is further  argued  that  Article  19  (1)  of  Regulation  883-04
       permitted EEA nationals and their families to  get  in-kind  sickness
       benefit as long as they were not in the UK to  stay  permanently  and
       that the UK had bilateral reciprocal health care  agreements  with  a
       list of countries in the EU, which included Germany.  It  is  further
       argued that the Appellant had taken a  further  step  by  taking  out
       private insurance cover, which was not available during the appeal at
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    4. Within the Rule 24 reply on behalf of the  Respondent  it  is  argued
       that the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself appropriately and
       made reasonable and sustainable findings open to him on the evidence.

    5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson
       on the 24th September 2015 on the grounds that it was  arguable  that
       the HMRC record dated October 2014 related to  payment  of  class  II
       National  Insurance  contributions  and  that   evidence   of   those
       contributions having been paid was arguably  sufficient  evidence  to
       conclude that the sponsor Mr Lange could be  described  as  a  worker
       within the meaning of Regulation 6 and that  a  self-employed  worker
       was not required to have sickness insurance in place and that it  was
       arguable that the Judge failed to consider that issue.

    6. In her oral submissions to me, the  Appellant  argued  that  she  had
       submitted suitable proof that she did meet the  requirements  of  the
       Regulations and that inclusion of  her  and  her  husband's  European
       health insurance card was sufficient proof, in light of  the  changes
       made to Chapter 4 Annex A of the  European  Casework  Instruction  in
       June 2011.  She  conceded  that  no  statement  of  intent  had  been
       submitted with the application, giving  evidence  of  her  intentions
       regarding staying in the UK permanently or on a temporary basis.

    7. She argued that the payments to HMRC had not been considered  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge and that  within  the  Pre-Action  Protocol
       letter that she sent to the Respondent on the 9th March 2015, she had
       stated  that  she  intended  to  put   forward   National   Insurance
       contributions as evidence of her husband being self-employed, as well
       as being self-sufficient.

    8. In his submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Mr Norton argued that
       there is nothing within the application to prove that the Appellant's
       intended residence was  only  short-term  or  temporary  and  that  a
       statement  of  intent  would  need  to  have   been   submitted   for
       consideration with the application given the  wording  of  Chapter  4
       Annex A. He further argued that the fact that someone registered with
       HMRC and paid contributions upfront was not  a  sufficient  basis  to
       demonstrate that someone was  working.  He  argued  that  within  the
       application it had been said that the sponsor had to get  a  National
       Insurance number, in case he had to show that he was working to get a
       residence card. He conceded that the Appellant could seek to re-apply
       on the basis of fresh evidence, but argued that the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge did not disclose a material error  of  law.
       He sought to rely upon the case of Choma-Lucena v Secretary of  State
       for the Home Department, an unreported case which is on the  Tribunal
       website, heard by Mr Ockelton, the Vice President and Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Deans on the 19th December 2014 which was  promulgated  on  the
       31st March 2015, in support of his argument that in order to be  able
       to rely upon a European health insurance card,  the  Appellant  would
       have to be in the UK only on a temporary basis and that in this  case
       the evidence did  not  suggest  that  the  Appellant  was  here  only
       temporarily. However, as this is not a  reported  case,  I  have  not
       placed weight upon it in reaching my decision.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

    9. In respect of the  first  ground  of  appeal,  in  respect  of  which
       permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Simpson, namely that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider
       whether  or  not  the  payment  of  class   II   National   Insurance
       contributions were sufficient to conclude that Mr Lange was  a  self-
       employed worker and if so he  did  not  need  comprehensive  sickness
       insurance in place for the purpose of Regulation 6, I find that First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Cope did consider the question regarding the HMRC
       self-assessment records and payment of class  II  National  Insurance
       contributions at [26] and [27] of his decision.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found specifically that  the  Appellant
       and her sponsor had provided a letter dated the October 2014 from  HM
       Revenue and Customs confirming that a self-employed record  had  been
       set up for him and that notice of payment due for self-employed class
       II national insurance contributions for the period of  the  1st  June
       2014 to the 28th February 2015 had been sent and the Internet payment
       record from Mr Lange's Halifax  Bank  account  for  payment  of  that
       amount due have been  submitted.  However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge went on to find that  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  this
       documentation was sufficient evidence to conclude that  the  presence
       of Mr Lange in the UK for exercising Treaty Rights purposes,  was  on
       any other basis in this country rather than him continuing to be here
       on  a  self-sufficient  basis.  The  Judge  therefore  has   properly
       considered this issue and the evidence submitted, and given clear and
       adequate reasons for finding that this was not sufficient  evidential
       basis to conclude that Mr Lange was exercising Treaty Rights  in  the
       UK as a self-employed worker. Indeed, in this regard,  I  agree  with
       the submission made by Mr Norton, that the fact that someone has  set
       themselves up for National Insurance contributions and partially paid
       contributions upfront for the period between the 1st June 2014 to the
       28th February 2015 does not necessarily indicate that  Mr  Lange  was
       actually working as a self-employed worker during this period.  There
       was no evidence that other documentary  evidence  was  placed  before
       First-Tier Tribunal Judge Cope to show that  Mr  Lange  was  actually
       working, in the  form  of  letters  from  any  of  his  employers  or
       contracts of employment, wage slips or otherwise.  It  was  therefore
       perfectly open to First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope  to  find  that  the
       documentation submitted from the HMRC and payment of  self-employment
       class  II  National  Insurance  contributions  was   not   sufficient
       evidential basis to conclude that Mr Lange was in the  UK  exercising
       Treaty Rights on any basis other than him being self-sufficient. This
       was a finding  that  was  perfectly  open  to  him  on  the  evidence
       presented. This is especially the case where on  the  application  it
       was said by the sponsor at A10, that he had to  obtain  his  National
       Insurance number "in case I have  to  work  for  my  wife  to  get  a
       residence card".

   11. In respect of the second ground  of  appeal,  it  is  argued  by  the
       Appellant that the changes to Chapter  4  Annex  A  of  the  European
       Casework Instruction in June 2011 meant that simply providing her and
       her husband's European health insurance cards from another  EU  state
       was sufficient evidence of comprehensive of sickness insurance.

   12.  Although  Annex  A  within  Chapter  4  of  the  European   Casework
       Instruction did state that applications from EEA  nationals  applying
       for documentation confirming their right to reside in the  UK  "as  a
       student or self-sufficient person must present one of  the  following
       forms of evidence in  order  to  demonstrate  comprehensive  sickness
       insurance..." and that evidence did include "for persons  temporarily
       in the UK a valid European health insurance card (EHIC)." The EHIC is
       a replacement for the E111 form. Under subparagraph B  entitled  "use
       of EHIC as evidence of comprehensive sickness insurance" the European
       Casework Instruction went on to state that "the addition of the  EHIC
       as a valid form of comprehensive sickness insurance in  circumstances
       where the holder is in the UK temporarily  follows  consultation  and
       negotiation with other government  departments.  Where  an  applicant
       presents a valid EHIC issued by a member state  other  than  the  UK,
       with an application as evidence of comprehensive  sickness  insurance
       then, in accordance with Department  of  Health  Guidelines,  we  can
       accept  this  as  meeting  the   comprehensive   sickness   insurance
       requirement but only where they are resident in the UK on a temporary
       basis. One way an applicant can demonstrate that they are a temporary
       resident in the UK is by providing a "statement of intent" with their
       application.  The  statement  may  include  a  declaration  that  the
       Appellant has a number of properties and  or  business  interests  in
       their home country to which they  intend  to  return.  Alternatively,
       they may provide details of their family ties in their  home  country
       and evidence of visits home. Any statement should be signed and dated
       by the applicant and assessed on its individual merits".

   13. It was conceded by the Appellant that no statement of intent had been
       submitted with her application. Nor do  I  find  that  there  is  any
       evidence of her having provided to the Respondent or  the  First-tier
       Tribunal evidence of her intent to remain only temporarily in the  UK
       and there was no evidence seemingly submitted to the Respondent  that
       she had sufficient property or business interests in  either  her  or
       her sponsor's home countries to mean that  they  intended  to  return
       there or that they had sufficient family ties to mean that they  were
       likely to leave the UK.  It  was  not  argued  before  me  that  such
       evidence had been presented. Without such evidence that the residence
       was temporary in the United Kingdom, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cope
       did not materially err in law in finding that simple presentation  of
       the EHIC did not meet the requirements of Regulation 4  (c)  (ii)  of
       the EEA Regulations. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cope  properly  dealt
       with this issue between [29] to [33] of the decision.

   14. Further, the fact that family members and EEA nationals may  get  in-
       kind sickness benefit as long as they are  not  in  the  UK  to  stay
       permanently under Article 19 (1) of Regulation 83/04 or that  the  UK
       has  bilateral  reciprocal  health  care  agreements  with  countries
       including Germany, does not in itself  entitle  the  Appellant  to  a
       residence  card  in  circumstances  where  the  Regulations  and  the
       interpretation of European Casework  Instructions  are  not  complied
       with. Without evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that  the  Appellant's
       residence was temporary, the Casework Instructions was  not  complied
       with, and therefore the simple submission by her and her  husband  of
       their  EHIC's  was  insufficient  to  prove  they  had  comprehensive
       insurance cover which was necessary for a self-sufficient applicant.

   15. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Cope not  disclosing  a  material
       error of law, the decision is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope not disclosing  any  material
error of law the decision is maintained and his decision stands;

No Anonymity Order  is  made,  none  having  been  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal and none having been sought before me.


Signed      Dated 14th December 2015
[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
