
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02976/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th October 2015                     |On 11th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

             DESIGNATED JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL FRENCH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Manish SEHDEV
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bellara instructed by S and S Immigration Law

                            DECISION AND REASONS
 1. Manesh Sehdev is a citizen of India who arrived in this country in 2003
    aged 16 on a visit visa and who subsequently overstayed.  I will  refer
    to him as "the Claimant."  On 29th May 2012 he made representations for
    the grant of leave to remain under Article 8 ECHR on the basis  of  his
    relationship with Shakonthla Kumar, who is a British  citizen  and  has
    two children who are also British citizens.  There appears to have been
    an initial refusal of his application against which there was an appeal
    conjoined with an appeal against removal. On  22nd  October  2012  that
    appeal was allowed on the basis that  consideration  should  have  been
    given to Article 8 ECHR and Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.  The Claimant's application was refused again  by
    letter dated 20th December 2013 and a decision made to  remove  him  to
    India.  His appeal against that  decision  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J C Boyd, following a  hearing  at  Birmingham  on  14th
    October 2014, in a decision promulgated on 10th December 2014.

 2. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal both representatives  had
    agreed that as the application had been lodged prior to the  amendments
    to the Immigration Rules which came into force on  9th  July  2012  the
    Rules did not apply and the judge accordingly decided the case  without
    reference to the Immigration Rules.  Having heard  evidence  the  judge
    was satisfied that the Claimant and Ms Kumar were in a relationship and
    had been living together probably since 2012.  He  was  satisfied  that
    the Claimant had both family and private life in the United Kingdom and
    having had regard to Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 he went on to allow the appeal under Article 8.  I will
    refer to his decision in more detail below.

 3. The Secretary of State  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   In  the
    grounds it was contended that in the light of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640
    (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) the judge  had  not  identified
    adequate reasons why the Claimant's circumstances were so compelling or
    exceptional that the appeal should have  been  considered  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was also said that whilst the  judge  had  found
    that the Claimant acted as a father figure to  his  partner's  children
    and was a stabilising influence he had also found that  the  children's
    best interests would not be adversely affected  by  his  absence.   The
    relationship had been established in the full knowledge of his unlawful
    status and it would not be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and apply for leave to enter.  It was also said  that  a
    finding that he would be financially independent  if  he  remained  was
    speculative.  The grounds went on  to  say  that  Article  8  had  very
    limited impact for private life cases which did not  interfere  with  a
    person's moral and physical integrity.   The  Claimant  had  spent  the
    majority of his life  in  India  and  there  would  be  no  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration into Indian society.  It  was  submitted
    that the Tribunal should have found that the  decision  to  remove  was
    proportionate.

 4. In granting permission on 27th January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge A
    R Williams firstly stated that he considered that the challenge on  the
    basis of Gulshan and Nagre was misconceived as the application had been
    made prior to July 2012.  He continued by noting  that  the  judge  had
    found that there was  a  relationship  between  the  Claimant  and  his
    partner's two children and the Claimant was  "a  stabilising  influence
    for the  children."   However  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  on  the
    partner's evidence that she  would  not  be  able  to  look  after  the
    children on her own.  She had her mother living with her and her social
    worker had made no comment in relation  to  that  element.   It  was  a
    matter of proportionality.  Finally he stated

         "I find in this case that it is arguable that adequate reasons have
         not been given for allowing the appeal (MK (Duty to  Give  Reasons)
         Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641).  In those circumstances  there  is  an
         arguable error  of  law  and  permission  to  appeal  is  granted."



 5. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr Smart sought permission
    to vary the Secretary of State's Grounds to Appeal.  He wished to  rely
    upon the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Singh v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 74.  He said that the hearing before the judge  at  first  instance
    had taken place on 14th October  2014.   The  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal had been made on 27th January 2015 and the judgment in Singh had
    only been handed down on 12th February 2015.  It was apparent from  the
    judgment in Singh that the new Immigration Rules applied to every  case
    decided after 6th September 2012 and therefore the concession  made  by
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had been misconceived as had the consideration  by  the  judge  without
    reference to the Immigration Rules.

 6. Mr Bellara objected strongly  to  a  further  Ground  of  Appeal  being
    admitted so late in the day.  He said that the judgment  in  Singh  had
    been handed down in February of the current year  and  there  had  been
    ample time for the Secretary to State to make an application in  proper
    form for grounds to be varied but the application had only been made on
    the day of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal  and  he  had  had  no
    prior warning of it.  He pointed out that permission to appeal had only
    been granted in respect of issues under Article 8.  He added that  even
    if it had been found that the Claimant could not have  succeeded  under
    the Immigration Rules the Tribunal would have had to go on to  consider
    issues under Article 8 bearing in mind the interests of the children as
    highlighted in JO and Others (Section  55  Duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT
    00517 (IAC).  I considered Mr  Smart's  application  but  came  to  the
    conclusion that it would not be appropriate to grant  it.   There  were
    strict requirements in the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules  as  to  time
    limits for when applications for permission to appeal  could  be  made.
    The application had not been made until  an  oral  application  at  the
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal even though there had been  a  period
    of more than six months since the judgment in  Singh  had  been  handed
    down.  No prior indication of the proposal to rely on  Singh  had  been
    made to Mr Bellara.  I also bore in mind that at the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal the Presenting Officer had expressly conceded  that
    the matter should be considered only under Article 8 ECHR and not under
    the Immigration Rules and permission to appeal had been granted only in
    respect of Article 8.  In those circumstances I declined  to  agree  to
    any amendment to the Grounds of Appeal.

 7. Mr Smart then addressed me on  the  substantive  appeal.   He  said  he
    relied upon all the grounds.  He said it was clear from the judgment of
    the Court of Appeal in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  that  for
    an applicant to succeed beyond the Rules exceptional circumstances  had
    to apply.  The grounds related  that  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    applicant was a father figure to his partner's children but he had also
    said that their best interests would not be affected by his absence and
    therefore Section 55 of the 2009 Act would not  come  into  play  as  a
    result of his removal.  It was irrational for the judge to conclude (at
    paragraph 29 of his decision) that the Claimant's removal would have an
    effect on the children in the light of the earlier finding.  The  judge
    did not explain why he found that Section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  was
    engaged in the light of his earlier  finding.   The  remainder  of  the
    grounds were detailed and he relied upon them.

 8. In response Mr Bellara submitted that the judge had set out  the  whole
    range of relevant factors.  At paragraph 24 of his decision  the  judge
    had said that the partner would  have  been  able  to  look  after  the
    children with the  help  of  her  mother.   He  found  as  genuine  the
    relationship between the Claimant and the children and noted  that  the
    partner had a difficult background.  At paragraph 30 he found that  the
    return of the Claimant to India would cause unnecessary  upset  to  the
    family.  It was clear from JO that  the  views  of  the  children  were
    required to be taken into account and those views he said  were  before
    the judge.  He had focussed on the unit of the family as  a  whole.   I
    questioned whether it could be said that the Claimant  had  a  "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" with the children as referred  to
    at Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  Mr Bellara replied that there  was
    no definition of parenthood but the judge had found that  the  Claimant
    was a father figure and the social worker's report had been glowing  in
    this respect.  He had been a member of  the  family  for  a  number  of
    years.  It appeared that the children referred to him as "Dad."

 9. Finally Mr Smart said that the judge had not  found  specifically  that
    there  was  a  parental  relationship  between  the  Claimant  and  the
    children.  He contended that a parental relationship must  involve  the
    claimed male parent being either the actual father of a  child  or  the
    adoptive father.  The judge had not made an  express  finding  in  that
    respect.

10. I reserved my decision having heard  those  submissions,  which  I  now
    give.  In the light of the concession made by the Presenting Officer at
    the hearing the judge cannot be  criticised  for  not  considering  the
    appeal in the light of the Immigration Rules, even  though  it  is  now
    apparent from Singh that the Rules should be considered first.  I noted
    that at paragraph 24 of his decision the judge stated

         "I am not  necessarily  satisfied  that  either  Ms  Kumar  or  the
         children would be devastated if the Appellant were to  be  returned
         to India to make an application.  I am satisfied that  this  is  an
         overstatement of the situation.  I have considered  Section  55  of
         the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act.  I am  not  satisfied
         that the welfare of the children would be adversely affected if the
         Appellant were to be returned to India to make a fresh  application
         from there.  The children have coped very well being  looked  after
         by their mother and I do not accept her evidence that she would not
         be able to look after the children on her own.  She has her  mother
         living with her.  Her mother is only 61 years of age.   I  have  no
         evidence before me, apart from Ms Kumar's own evidence, to say that
         she is not fit to help her looking after the children.   I  do  not
         accept that evidence.  Indeed the social worker made no comments in
         relation to that."

11. In the following paragraph the judge stated that the  applicant  had  a
    family life with his  partner  and  "is  in  effect  a  father  to  her
    children."  At paragraph 28 he referred to Section 117B of the 2002 Act
    which mandated that he was required to  take  the  public  interest  in
    maintenance of effective immigration control into account.   The  judge
    said he was  satisfied  that  the  Claimant  could  speak  English  and
    although not presently financially independent, with appropriate  leave
    he clearly could be.  He noted that little weight should be granted  to
    his private life or his relationship with his partner as they had  been
    established whilst he was in this country unlawfully.  He continued  as
    follows

         "29. The counterbalance to this part of Section 117B is that he has
             also formed a relationship with Ms Kumar's  two  children.   A
             qualifying child is defined in Section 117D as  is  qualifying
             partner.  This would appear to cover the situation of Ms Kumar
             and her children.  I also have to take into account Section 55
             of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  in
             relation to the children and the Appellant's relationship with
             them and the effect upon  them  and  their  welfare  were  the
             Appellant to  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom.   I  am
             satisfied that the Appellant has a good relationship with  the
             children and acts as a father  figure  to  them.   Ms  Kumar's
             previous relationship has broken down in divorce and  appeared
             to be somewhat traumatic.  It would appear therefore that  the
             Appellant  is  a  stabilising  influence  for  the   children.
             Accordingly therefore although there  is  public  interest  in
             removing the Appellant this is simply one of the factors  that
             requires to be taken into account in the balancing exercise.

         30.  In the balancing exercise on the issue of proportionality  the
             situation is that the Appellant, probably under the  direction
             of his father, has been migrated to the  United  Kingdom.   He
             was left here at the age of 16.  He has now been in the United
             Kingdom for eleven years.  Much of his formative life has been
             established in the United Kingdom and all of  his  late  teens
             and his adult life have been in the United Kingdom.  He speaks
             English.  He is fully  integrated  into  the  United  Kingdom,
             attending sporting functions.  He is  living  with  a  British
             citizen and her British citizen children.  He has  established
             a relationship with Ms Kumar and her children.  On  balance  I
             am satisfied that in the particular circumstances of this case
             it would be disproportionate to remove the Appellant to India,
             even to the extent of removing in order that  he  can  make  a
             fresh application to come back to the United Kingdom.  In  the
             circumstances of his case such a course of action would appear
             to be pointless and  would  cause  unnecessary  upset  to  the
             family.  I am therefore satisfied that to remove him would  be
             a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR."

12. What is lacking from that analysis is any reconciliation  of  what  the
    judge had stated at paragraph 24 to the effect that the welfare of  the
    children would not be adversely affected if the  Claimant  were  to  be
    returned and what he stated at paragraph  29  to  the  effect  that  it
    would.  He also failed to set out on  what  basis  he  found  that  the
    Claimant could qualify as a person  having  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship under Section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.   He  was
    not a blood parent.  He was not an adoptive parent.  He had no parental
    rights or obligations in respect of the children so far as was apparent
    from the evidence.  In the light of these shortcomings  I  found  there
    was force in the indication in the grant of permission that  the  judge
    had not given adequate reasons as illustrated in MK  for  finding  that
    the Claimant's removal would be disproportionate to the legitimate  aim
    pursued.  He thus made a material error of law  and  I  set  aside  his
    decision.  I had raised with the representatives  what  should  be  the
    position if I found a material error of law and both accepted that  the
    appropriate course would be for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal as fresh findings of fact would  have  to  be  made.   It
    would also be the case that at a further hearing the guidance given  by
    Singh to the effect that the Immigration  Rules  should  be  considered
    first would have to be  followed.   Having  regard  to  Upper  Tribunal
    Practice Statement 7.2(b) the  appeal  is  remitted  accordingly  under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to
    the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with the directions which follow.



No anonymity order was requested and none is made.



Signed                                  Date 02 November 2015


Deputy Judge French


Directions

(Sections 12(3)(a) and 12(3)(b) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement  Act
2007).

(1)  The members of the First-tier Tribunal who are to reconsider  the  case
    should not include First-tier Tribunal Judges J C Boyd or A R Williams.

(2)  The appeal is to be heard afresh and the  issues  to  be  decided  will
    include whether or not the Claimant is entitled to  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

(3)  The appropriate  hearing  centre  is  Birmingham.   No  interpreter  is
    required and the time estimate is two hours.

(4)  Each party shall serve upon the other and upon the First-tier  Tribunal
    at least seven days before the hearing any documents, including witness
    statements, upon which reliance is sought to be placed.


Signed                                  Date 02 November 2015


Deputy Judge French
