

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02634/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 24 September 2014                          |on 25 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                WEN PING CHEN

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Stevenson, of McGill & Co, Solicitors

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. Parties are as described above, but are referred to in the  rest  of
       this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.


    2. The appellant applied on 6 July 2012 for indefinite leave to remain,
       based on his residence in the  UK  since  3  July  1997.   The  SSHD
       refused that application by letter dated 11 December 2013 under  the
       Immigration Rules as amended on 9 July 2012 (the  "new  Rules"),  in
       particular Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.


    3.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In   his
       determination promulgated on 6 May 2014, Judge  Farrelly  held  that
       the appellant's case based on paragraph 276ADE(vi) was misconceived.
        He then referred to the case law on the  criteria  for  considering
       Article 8 ECHR outwith the new Rules,  and  went  on  to  allow  the
       appeal under Article 8.

    4. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the grounds that  although
       the judge cited the relevant cases, including  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT
       640, he failed to identify arguably good grounds for  going  outside
       the  Rules,  or  any  compelling  circumstances   not   sufficiently
       recognised under the Rules.  Mrs O'Brien  submitted  that  the  case
       disclosed no significant barriers to  the  appellant's  return,  and
       that his simple presence here for a lengthy period falling short  of
       what the Rules required could not be a reason for going  beyond  the
       Rules.

    5. Mr Stevenson referred to Edghill [2014] EWCA Civ 402.   He said that
       in view of the date of the application leading to these proceedings,
       the new  Rules  did  not  apply.   The  point  had  not  been  taken
       previously, but, once noticed, the case had to be approached on  the
       correct basis.  The judge had therefore been right, even if for  the
       wrong reasons, to look at Article 8 beyond the requirements  of  the
       new Rules.  The outcome reached on proportionality in that light was
       open to the judge and showed no legal error.

    6. Mr Stevenson was aware of the contrary case  of  Haleemudeen  [2014]
       EWCA Civ 558, but he  said  that  the  Court  there  went  wrong  at
       paragraph 25 by thinking that the material  date  was  the  date  of
       decision, as in Odelola [2009] UKHL 25.  That was so in Odelola, but
       not  in  a  case  such  as  this,  because  there  are  transitional
       provisions to the effect that applications made before 9  July  2012
       are to be decided in accordance with the Rules in force  on  8  July
       2012.

    7. I do not think that the judge gave any good reason to  look  outside
       the new Rules, but that was not the proper  question.   I  found  Mr
       Stevenson's submissions persuasive.  The judge was  misled  by  both
       sides into thinking that the new  Rules  and  the  jurisprudence  on
       going beyond them were relevant.  Although for  the  wrong  reasons,
       the judge was right in  thinking  that  a  proportionality  exercise
       arose.  He was obviously aware of the  general  public  interest  in
       upholding the Rules unless significant factors were to be  found  on
       the other side.  He did not leave any relevant considerations out of
       account, nor take into account any  irrelevant  considerations.   It
       might well be said that the  facts  show  nothing  more  than  might
       ordinarily be expected in a long residence case falling short of the
       number  of  years  required,  and  that  the  outcome  is  unusually
       generous; but the respondent did not argue that the  outcome,  if  a
       proportionality exercise was properly arrived at, is  one  which  no
       reasonable judge might have reached.


    8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                24 September 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


