

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02234/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 19th December 2014               |On 10th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                             Angela Jose Manuel
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moksud, International Immigration Advisory
Service
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of Angola date of birth  15th  June  1975.
      She appeals with permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      (Judge Simpson)[2] to dismiss her appeal against a  refusal  to  issue
      her with a residence card in accordance  with  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006.
   2. The Appellant's case was that she is in a durable relationship with  a
      Mr Paolo Lourenco de Sousa, a Portuguese  national  exercising  treaty
      rights.  The Respondent had refused the  application  on  the  grounds
      that there was insufficient evidence to show that Mr de  Sousa  was  a
      "qualified person" under the Regulations, or that the two were in fact
      in a durable relationship.


   3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Simpson was
      satisfied that Mr de Sousa was exercising treaty  rights  in  the  UK.
      That finding has  not  been  the  subject  of  any  challenge  by  the
      Respondent. As to whether the Appellant was in a durable  relationship
      with Mr de Sousa it was common ground that the Appellant was  required
      to show that she had been co-habiting with him for  a  period  of  two
      years or more.  Although the  Tribunal  accepted  that  the  two  were
      living together, there  was  found  to  be  insufficient  evidence  to
      demonstrate that it had been for a period of two years. On that  basis
      the appeal was dismissed.


   4. The grounds of appeal are that the findings about the  length  of  co-
      habitation were "not adequately reasoned" and "failed to take relevant
      evidence into account".  It is submitted  that  at  the  date  of  the
      appeal the parties had to show co-habitation between August  2012  and
      August 2014. It would appear from paragraph 12  of  the  determination
      that the Judge accepted, on the basis of  documentary  evidence,  that
      the Appellant had been living with Mr de Sousa from at  least  October
      2012. She found their evidence about their current circumstances to be
      credible  and  consistent.  Mr  Moksud   submitted   that   in   those
      circumstances there did not appear to be any rational reason to reject
      their oral evidence that they had been  living  together  there  since
      2010.


      My Findings


   5. It is clear from the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the oral
      evidence of the relationship was found to be consistent and credible -
      at  paragraph  11  it  is  described  as  "identical".  Judge  Simpson
      expressly accepts that from October 2012 they were living together  as
      claimed. The difference between October 2012  and  September  2012  is
      that in the later  period  there  was  some  documentary  evidence  to
      support the parties' testimony. It follows that in respect of  October
      there was a greater quantity of evidence than there was for September.
       In those circumstances the Tribunal was entitled to find  the  burden
      discharged in respect of the later period  but  not  the  former.   Mr
      Moksud is right to say that the Tribunal  could  have  drawn  positive
      inferences from the rest of the evidence and allowed the appeal on the
      basis that the oral evidence alone was  sufficient  to  discharge  the
      burden of proof, but this is not the route that  Judge  Simpson  took.
      That she did not do this does not amount to an  error  of  law.    The
      decision was open to the Tribunal on the evidence that was before it.


   6. I note that very little turns on my  decision.  At  today's  date  the
      Appellant, if indeed she is still in a relationship with Mr de  Sousa,
      will have been living with him since  October  2012,  this  being  the
      unchallenged finding of Judge Simpson. All that she need do is  supply
      the Respondent with evidence covering the period August 2014  to  date
      and the  Respondent  will  no  doubt  exercise  her  discretion  under
      Regulation 17(4)(b) and consider whether to issue a residence permit.


      Decision


   7. I was not asked to make a direction as  to  anonymity  and  I  see  no
      reason to make one.


   8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error  of
      law and it is upheld.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          27th February 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 7th October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Omotosho
[2] Promulgated on the 27th August 2014.

