
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02148/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 January 2014                          |On 16 January 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   MS F Q
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
    For the Appellant: Ms S Iqbal of counsel instructed by Lincolns
    solicitors
    For the Respondent: Mr J Parkinson a Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the determination of  the  Tribunal.  It  follows  an  earlier
      hearing before one of us, Judge Moulden, on 24 October 2013  when  the
      decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Blandy (the FTTJ) was set  aside
      because of errors of law. The Decision and  Reasons  issued  following
      that hearing is set out in the  Appendix  to  this  determination  and
      could usefully be read first as it sets the  scene  and  explains  the
      reasons for setting aside the decision of the FTTJ.


   2. The appeal comes back before us in order to remake the decision on the
      appeal against the respondent's decision of 8 January 2013  to  refuse
      to grant the appellant leave to remain in the UK as the mother of  her
      son and sponsor Mr Q under the provisions  of  paragraph  317  of  the
      Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


   3. A direction was  given  at  the  last  hearing  that  the  appellant's
      representatives should lodge with the Upper Tribunal and serve on  the
      respondent no later than 1 November  2013  an  indexed  and  paginated
      consolidated  bundle  containing  all  the  documents  on  which   the
      appellant relied, including witness statements. This bundle  was  sent
      to the Upper Tribunal  but  unfortunately  does  not  appear  to  have
      reached the respondent. In the circumstances Mr Parkinson was provided
      with a copy and given time to consider this and prepare, which he told
      us was sufficient.


   4. We heard oral evidence from the appellant  through  an  Urdu  speaking
      interpreter and from the sponsor and his wife neither of  whom  needed
      an interpreter. The sponsor is the appellant's younger son. The  elder
      son was present  at  the  hearing  but  did  not  give  evidence.  The
      appellant also has a daughter who is living in the USA. The  witnesses
      were examined in chief and cross-examined. We asked some questions for
      the purpose of clarification. Their evidence is set out in our  record
      of proceedings.


   5. Mr Parkinson submitted that there were two main issues. The first  was
      whether the appellant would, if she returned to Pakistan, be living in
      the most exceptional compassionate circumstances. He  emphasised  that
      this was a high threshold. He submitted  that  there  had  been  "some
      degree of gloss" on the evidence submitted on the appellant's  behalf.
      In reply to our question he said that he was not suggesting  that  any
      of the witnesses were not credible. On the appellant's behalf  it  was
      argued that she was vulnerable and could not  cope  on  her  own.  She
      tended to forget to take her medication.  Against  this  he  submitted
      that her life history demonstrated considerable fortitude. She  had  a
      severe motor accident and nearly died. Soon  after  her  husband  died
      young from a heart attack. At this stage her youngest child was 10 and
      the eldest 17. She had  no  other  male  support.  She  suffered  from
      depression but fought this, moved back to Rawalpindi  and  brought  up
      her children with some help from her mother. She had to  take  on  her
      brothers-in-law in order to achieve the sale  of  the  property  which
      they had co-owned with her late husband. The evidence did not indicate
      that she was any more depressed in 2012 than she was in 2007.


   6. Mr Parkinson submitted that the psychiatric evidence contained a gross
      overstatement of what had happened to her. The family  plan  was  that
      the appellant would use her  multiple  entry  visa  to  come  to  this
      country for periods of less than six months, leave the country  for  a
      month or so and then return for another period of less than six months
      and so on until  she  was  65  when  it  would  be  easier  to  obtain
      settlement. He did not suggest that she was not entitled to do this or
      that it was abusing the immigration system. The appellant was a  woman
      who had had difficulties and problems but had overcome them. She still
      had a house in Pakistan and could live there and afford  to  employ  a
      servant. The affidavits submitted by her  brothers  were  not  a  true
      reflection of the position in Rawalpindi. The appellant  could  afford
      to visit this country and have  her  family  visit  her  in  Pakistan.
      Indeed, she could go on using her multiple entry visa as  she  had  in
      the past. In short, she would be able to cope.


   7. Mr Parkinson accepted that the appeal against the S47 removal decision
      should be allowed.


   8. In relation to the Article 8 grounds Mr Parkinson  accepted  that  the
      appellant had established a family life with her son and  daughter-in-
      law and grandson in this country. He  submitted  that  there  were  no
      compelling reasons for the appellant to remain in this  country  where
      she did not have settled status. He relied on  the  judgement  of  the
      Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.


   9. Mr Parkinson argued that,  in  comparison  to  her  family  life,  the
      appellant had only a minimal private  life  here.  We  were  asked  to
      dismiss the appeal.


  10. Ms Iqbal relied on her skeleton argument. Until  they  obtained  legal
      advice the appellant and her family were not aware that paragraph  317
      of the Immigration Rules might assist her before she was 65.  We  were
      asked to find that all the witnesses were credible. We asked Ms  Iqbal
      to assist us on the question of  whether,  if  we  accepted  that  the
      sponsor intended to return to Pakistan to live there  and  look  after
      his mother, as he said he would, she could be  "living  alone  outside
      the  United  Kingdom"  or  "in  the  most  exceptional   compassionate
      circumstances". She submitted that we should look at her  evidence  in
      the light of the circumstances of the whole family and that  it  would
      be unreasonable to expect the sponsor to break up his  own  family  in
      order to return to Pakistan to look after his mother. We should  treat
      the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  grandchild  as  a  primary
      consideration.


  11. Ms Iqbal asked us to look at the medical reports in the round with the
      rest of the evidence. None of the witnesses had sought  to  exaggerate
      in any way. She submitted that the appellant had shown  that  she  met
      the requirements of  paragraph  317  including  the  most  exceptional
      compassionate circumstances. Furthermore, she was entitled to  succeed
      on both Article 3 and 8 human rights grounds; the former  in  relation
      to her mental health. The psychiatric evidence was that her  condition
      would deteriorate if she had to return. We reserved our determination.


  12. In the reasons for refusal letter dated 8 January 2013 the  respondent
      did not  call  into  question  the  appellant's  credibility.  In  his
      submissions Mr Parkinson did not suggest that  any  of  the  witnesses
      were not credible, although he criticised  the  psychiatric  evidence.
      His submissions went no further than saying that there had been  "some
      degree of gloss" on the evidence submitted on the appellant's  behalf.
      Whilst we accept that the evidence puts the appellant's  case  at  its
      highest and in the best light that is not a  criticism.  We  find  the
      appellant, the sponsor and his wife to be credible witnesses. We  were
      particularly impressed by the evidence of the sponsor.


  13. We make the following findings. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan
      who was born on 1 April 1953. She is living in this country  with  her
      younger son, daughter-in-law and  four-year-old  grandchild.  She  has
      three children; two sons and  a  daughter.  Her  younger  son  is  her
      sponsor. Both sons  are  now  living  in  this  country.  Her  married
      daughter is living in the USA, has two children and a full-time job as
      a pathologist. She has two brothers living in Pakistan.


  14. The appellant was involved in a car crash in 1986  breaking  her  left
      leg and suffering severe facial and head injuries.  She  suffers  from
      osteoarthritis in both knees, had  a  hysterectomy  in  2006  and  has
      suffered from depression  for  many  years  for  which  she  has  been
      prescribed medication. We will need to return to the question  of  the
      psychiatric evidence. Her husband died of a heart attack in 1984 after
      which she brought up her children with  some  help  from  her  mother.
      Whilst she inherited a small proportion of her late  husband's  estate
      with a greater proportion going to her children she had  to  fight  to
      achieve the sale of a property jointly owned by her late  husband  and
      his brothers in order to obtain his share of  the  proceeds  of  sale.
      This has resulted  in  some  degree  of  continuing  enmity  with  her
      husband's family. The appellant and her children lived on  the  income
      from the inheritance until her elder son started work in 1992.


  15. The appellant came to the UK in 2007  with  the  sponsor.  She  had  a
      multiple entry visit visa and was at pains to ensure that she complied
      with the terms of this by staying for periods of less than six  months
      on  each  occasion  before  leaving  the  country   for   periods   of
      approximately a month to go either to Pakistan or  the  USA.  She  has
      never overstayed. Since 2007 she has visited Pakistan on two occasions
      to visit her elder son. Since 2010, when her elder son left  Pakistan,
      she has visited Pakistan on one occasion, accompanying her sponsor and
      his family for a two-week visit. At all times she has lived  with  one
      or more of her children. She is socially and emotionally dependent  on
      her children, particularly the sponsor and his wife with whom  she  is
      now living. Occasionally the appellant goes to stay with her elder son
      and his family who are living near Manchester.


  16. The appellant still owns  the  family  house  in  Rawalpindi  and  has
      savings amounting to 4 lac rupees.  Whilst  living  there  she  had  a
      servant and some emotional support from her mother. Her elder son paid
      her private medical expenses. The sponsor lived with her until he came
      to the UK in 2007 and she accompanied him. Until he left  Pakistan  in
      2010 her elder son lived just across the street. He is now settled  in
      the UK and will become eligible for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in
      2015. He is a Pharmaceutical Manager, married with three  children  in
      full-time education. The appellant has no pension and is supported  by
      her children and accommodated by the sponsor and  his  wife  in  their
      home. She has two brothers both living in Pakistan. She has not spoken
      to them for a long time and before that only saw them occasionally  on
      religious festivals or family occasions. They are elderly and  not  in
      the best of health. One brother lives with his son and his family  and
      is financially dependent on the son. The other brother  is  a  retired
      government officer with a small pension and has a family of  four  who
      depend on him. We accept that neither  brother  could  accommodate  or
      support the appellant emotionally or financially. Whilst the appellant
      was living in Rawalpindi thieves came to the house on  two  occasions.
      She is now frightened to go back there.


  17. The sponsor is a  full-time  surgical  registrar  working  for  a  NHS
      hospital trust. He is a British citizen who has been working  in  this
      country since he came here in 2007. His wife and four-year-old son are
      both British citizens. His  evidence  confirms  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant which we have set out. She has been  living  with  him,  his
      wife and son since they  both  came  to  this  country  in  2007.  The
      appellant has never  lived  alone  in  Pakistan  without  one  of  her
      children in her home or across the street.


  18. The sponsor's wife, born in 1977, is a British citizen  who  has  been
      living and working in the UK since 2004. She married  the  sponsor  in
      2007 and their son is nearly 5. Theirs  was  a  "love  match"  not  an
      arranged marriage. Her husband came to live in  the  UK  bringing  his
      mother with him because she  was  not  prepared  to  go  and  live  in
      Pakistan. She works part-time in the NHS as  a  specialist  child  and
      adolescent psychiatrist. Her working hours and the  proximity  of  her
      workplace are designed to help her to look after both her son and  the
      appellant. Her evidence, which we accept, is that she is not  prepared
      to move back to Pakistan. She is settled and has a good and  rewarding
      job here. She does not believe that similar work would be available in
      Pakistan. She fears that if  she  returns  to  Pakistan  she  and  her
      husband would be perceived as  professionally  qualified  and  wealthy
      individuals returning from the UK and that they and their son would be
      at risk of kidnapping. Their son has always lived with his grandmother
      and is emotionally attached to her. The sponsor's wife  has  tried  to
      break it to him that his grandmother may have to return  to  Pakistan,
      as a result of which he has become upset, stopped eating properly  and
      developed severe iron deficiency anaemia. There  is  medical  evidence
      confirming this.


  19. The evidence from the sponsor and  his  wife,  borne  out  by  medical
      reports, shows that his efforts to ensure that his mother can continue
      to live with them and not have to return to Pakistan and  the  failure
      of those efforts so far has resulted in a  severe  depressive  episode
      and anxiety and panic attacks. These are having an adverse  effect  on
      his wife and son. There was a period during which he was unable to  go
      to work. He is on antidepressants. The decision has been taken that he
      should stop performing operations  for  the  time  being  although  he
      continues part-time with other medical duties.


  20. There are two psychiatric reports from a consultant  psychiatrist,  Dr
      Edgar dated 21 June and 23 August 2013. He saw the appellant  for  two
      assessments each  lasting  approximately  90  minutes.  On  the  first
      occasion she was accompanied by her daughter-in-law and on the  second
      by her son and daughter-in-law. In his first report Dr Edgar  recorded
      that; "shortly before coming to the UK (the appellant)  was  subjected
      to 2 armed robberies in her home within a 12 month period and on  both
      occasions she was physically assaulted  by  the  assailants.  She  was
      quite badly bruised and beaten, although fortunately did not  need  to
      be hospitalised for her physical injuries." This was said to  conflict
      with the more detailed evidence given at the hearing before  the  FTTJ
      where the appellant said that in one incident the car was stolen  from
      the forecourt of her home and she did not see the perpetrators; on the
      other there was a robbery and she was threatened with violence if  she
      did not hand over  money  or  valuables  but  there  was  no  physical
      assault. In his second report Dr Edgar put this down to the failure of
      the appellant to make a clear distinction between the circumstances of
      the two events during his first interview with her. We prefer the oral
      evidence given by the appellant which  in  any  event  indicates  less
      serious events.


  21. Dr Edgar states that the appellant is on  antidepressant  and  anxiety
      medication, medication to help her sleep, anti-inflammatory medication
      for arthritis and a drug to protect her stomach against the effect  of
      the anti-inflammatory medication. She has a long history of depressive
      disorder of at least moderate severity  with  significant  generalised
      anxiety symptoms. She has residual symptoms of PTSD arising  from  the
      robberies which took place in about 2005. If  she  has  to  return  to
      Pakistan there is a high likelihood that her depressive symptoms  will
      worsen and she will struggle to cope. If she has to  return  there  is
      "even a possible suicide risk".  Dr  Edgar  says  that  the  appellant
      admitted to "fleeting thoughts of suicide" although she  has  made  no
      active attempts or plans. The second  report  states  that  since  the
      failure of her appeal heard by the FTTJ the appellant's depressive and
      generalised anxiety disorders are now of high severity.


  22. In their most recent evidence, given at the hearing before us, nothing
      was said by the appellant, her son or daughter-in-law about  the  risk
      of suicide. In the  absence  of  any  attempts,  plans  or  continuing
      suicidal ideation we find that the appellant has not established  that
      there is now a real risk of suicide.


  23. Paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules provides;


         "317. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  parent,
         grandparent or other dependent relative of  a  person  present  and
         settled in the United Kingdom are that the person:


         (i) is related to a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom in one of the following ways:


         (a) parent or grandparent  who  is  divorced,  widowed,  single  or
         separated aged 65 years or over; or


         (b) parents or grandparents travelling together of  whom  at  least
         one is aged 65 or over; or


         (c) a parent or grandparent aged 65 or over who has entered into  a
         second relationship of marriage or  civil  partnership  but  cannot
         look to the spouse,  civil  partner  or  children  of  that  second
         relationship for financial support; and where the person settled in
         the United Kingdom is able and willing to maintain  the  parent  or
         grandparent and any spouse or civil partner or child of the  second
         relationship who would be admissible as a dependant; or


         (d) parent or grandparent under the  age  of  65  if  living  alone
         outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional  compassionate
         circumstances; or


         (e) parents or grandparents travelling together who are both  under
         the age of 65 if  living  in  the  most  exceptional  compassionate
         circumstances; or


         (f) the son, daughter, sister, brother, uncle or aunt over the  age
         of 18 if living alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most
         exceptional compassionate circumstances; and


         (ii) is joining or accompanying a person who is present and settled
         in the United Kingdom or who is on the same occasion being admitted
         for settlement; and


         (iii) is financially wholly or mainly  dependent  on  the  relative
         present and settled in the United Kingdom; and


         (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately, together  with  any
         dependants, without recourse  to  public  funds,  in  accommodation
         which the sponsor owns or occupies exclusively; and


         (iva) can, and will, be maintained adequately,  together  with  any
         dependants, without recourse to public funds; and


         (v) has no other close relatives in his  own  country  to  whom  he
         could turn for financial support; and


         (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom  entry
         clearance for entry in this capacity; and


         (vii) does not fall for  refusal  under  the  general  grounds  for
         refusal.


  24. Mr Parkinson accepts that the only requirement in issue is whether the
      appellant would be "living alone outside the  United  Kingdom  in  the
      most  exceptional  compassionate   circumstances".   All   the   other
      requirements are met.


  25. This is a case where the appellant is not living outside the  UK.  She
      is not making an entry clearance  application  from  Pakistan  but  an
      application  for  leave  to  remain  from  within  the  UK.  In  these
      circumstances MB (para 317: in country applications) Bangladesh [2006]
      UKAIT 00091 makes  it  clear  "that,  in  applying  paragraph  317  to
      applications for leave  to  remain,  the  question  is  not  what  the
      position was before the applicant left her home country. But nor is it
      simply what the applicant's position is now,  whilst  she  is  in  the
      United Kingdom. The correct question is what the applicant's  position
      would be if, instead of being in the United Kingdom, she were  in  her
      own country." (Paragraph 9)


  26. We take into account all our findings of fact in assessing whether the
      appellant has established that she would be living alone  outside  the
      United Kingdom in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances  if
      she was now in Pakistan. It is  for  her  to  establish  this  to  the
      standard of the balance of probabilities.


  27. We look at all the evidence in the  round.  The  appellant  cannot  be
      considered in isolation from her family. She  still  owns  the  former
      family home in Pakistan and could live there. She  would  be  able  to
      afford the help of a servant,  as  in  the  past.  Having  a  domestic
      servant does not mean that she  cannot  be  considered  to  be  living
      alone. We have no doubt that  she  would  receive  adequate  financial
      support from her  children.  She  would  be  able  to  afford  medical
      treatment. There is a continuing rift with her late  husband's  family
      and she would have no support from them.  Her  elderly  brothers  have
      families of their own and would not provide her with significant  help
      or support.


  28. Since they were born the appellant has never lived without all  or  at
      least one of her children in the same house or  nearby.  Mr  Parkinson
      was right to describe her as having shown great fortitude,  recovering
      from very serious injuries  suffered  in  a  road  crash,  losing  her
      husband at an early age, bringing up her children almost  entirely  on
      her own and fighting for their inheritance in order to  support  them.
      It is clear that  they  are  a  close  and  devoted  family.  Cultural
      imperatives mean that it is expected  that  one  of  her  sons  should
      accommodate  and  look  after  her.  We  find  that  the  history  and
      circumstances of this family mean that the sponsor is  driven  by  the
      strongest of obligations to look after his mother. We believe him when
      he says that if his mother has to return to Pakistan he will  go  with
      her to live with and look after her. We also  believe  his  wife  who,
      whilst she appears to accept the imperative which drives her  husband,
      is not prepared to leave this country for reasons which she  genuinely
      believes and are reasonably held not just for herself but for her son.
      If the sponsor does what he considers to be the right  thing  then  he
      will break up his family with inevitable adverse consequences for  the
      three of them. He has a career here in a caring  profession,  as  does
      his wife. The sponsor has suffered serious health problems as a result
      of the worries over his mother's application and appeal and there must
      be increased concerns for his health if he gives up his job and leaves
      the country to look after his mother. We do not consider  that  it  is
      reasonable to expect him to return  to  Pakistan  to  look  after  his
      mother. It would not be reasonable to expect his elder brother or  his
      sister to uproot in order to return to Pakistan to  look  after  their
      mother.


  29. Mr Parkinson submitted that the appellant was  a  woman  who  had  had
      difficulties and problems but had overcome them. We agree, but it does
      not necessarily follow that she would now be  able  to  cope.  She  is
      older and her health has deteriorated. She has grown accustomed to the
      help and support of her son  and  daughter-in-law.  She  suffers  from
      depressive and generalised anxiety disorders which  are  now  of  high
      severity. They  have  deteriorated  because  of  the  failure  of  her
      application  and  first  appeal.  She  needs  emotional  support   and
      reminding to take her medication. However, we have concluded that  she
      has not established that there is a real risk of suicide.


  30. The appellant and her grandson are close. It is  not  surprising  that
      against the background of her  profession  his  mother  has  tried  to
      prepare him for the possibility of his grandmother  having  to  leave.
      This has had an adverse effect on his health.


  31. We find that it is not reasonable to expect the sponsor  to  break  up
      his family in order to go and live with the appellant in Pakistan.  We
      are conscious that "the most exceptional compassionate  circumstances"
      has a high but not insurmountable  threshold.  We  conclude  that  the
      appellant has established that if she had to return  to  Pakistan  she
      would  be  living  alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most
      exceptional compassionate circumstances.


  32. In these circumstances it is not necessary for us to decide whether to
      allow the appeal on Article  8  human  rights  grounds.  Had  it  been
      necessary to do so we would have allowed  the  appeal  mostly  on  the
      basis of family life combined, to a lesser extent,  with  her  private
      life. The respondent would not be able to show  that  removal  of  the
      appellant would be a proportionate interference with her private life,
      her family life and the family lives of her son,  daughter-in-law  and
      grandson, particularly bearing in  mind  and  treating  as  a  primary
      consideration the best interests of her grandson.


  33. We find that the appellant's mental ill-health has not and  would  not
      if she had to return to Pakistan reach a level of severity which would
      engage her Article 3 human rights  taking  into  account  the  medical
      treatment she could obtain there.


  34. We have not been asked to make an  anonymity  direction  but  consider
      that we should do  so.  Identifying  the  appellant  could  result  in
      identification  of  her  son,  daughter-in-law  or   grandson.   Their
      professions and his age would make this undesirable.


  35. We make an order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant
      or any member of her family.


  36. The decision of the FTTJ  J  having  been  set  aside  we  remake  the
      decision and allow the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.
      We also  allow  the  appeal  against  the  S47  directions  under  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.










      .............................................
            Signed
           Date 11 January 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden































                                  APPENDIX

1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 1 April 1953. She
   has been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
   Tribunal Judge Blandy (the FTTJ) who dismissed her appeal against the
   respondent's decision of 8 January 2013 to refuse to grant her leave to
   remain in the UK as the mother of her son and sponsor Mr Q under the
   provisions of paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.


2. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was a widow over the
   age of 65 years or that she would be living alone outside the UK in the
   most exceptional circumstances. The appellant had not claimed to be over
   the age of 65 years and the respondent misquoted the relevant provision
   which refers to "the most exceptional compassionate circumstances". The
   appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard her appeal on 26 June 2013. Both
   parties were represented and the FTTJ heard oral evidence from the
   appellant and the sponsor. He found that the appellant had established
   that she met all the requirements of paragraph 317 except for one. She
   had not shown that she was living outside the UK in the most exceptional
   compassionate circumstances. He dismissed the appeal under the
   Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


3. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge
   in the First-Tier Tribunal but not on all grounds. The appellant renewed
   her application to the Upper Tribunal, asking that she be permitted to
   argue all her grounds of appeal. This application was granted.


4. At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow conceded that there were errors of
   law and that the decision should be set aside. I agree. There was a
   psychiatric report before the FTTJ prepared by Dr Edgar giving his
   opinion that the appellant suffered from severe depression and PTSD and
   that there was a risk that she would attempt suicide if forced to leave
   her family in the UK. It said that she had been taking antidepressants.
   The FTTJ said that the account of crimes committed in Pakistan affecting
   the appellant had been grossly exaggerated and that in the circumstances
   he was "unable to place no significant weight upon the report of Dr Edgar
   (sic)". He must have meant that he was unable to place any significant
   weight on the report. In the report Dr Edgar recorded that; "shortly
   before coming to the UK (the appellant) was subjected to 2 armed
   robberies in her home within a 12 month period and on both occasions she
   was physically assaulted by the assailants. She was quite badly bruised
   and beaten, although fortunately did not need to be hospitalised for her
   physical injuries." This conflicted with the more detailed evidence given
   by the appellant at the hearing and two FIRs which said that in one
   incident the car was stolen from the forecourt of the appellant's home
   and she did not see the perpetrators, on the other there was a robbery
   and she was threatened if she did not hand over money or valuables but
   there was no physical assault. Clearly the FTTJ considered that the
   appellant had misinformed the consultant psychiatrist and grossly
   exaggerated what had happened. However, he does not appear to have
   considered other possibilities, for example whether there had been a
   misunderstanding in circumstances where her daughter-in-law had
   interpreted for the appellant. The point does not appear to have been put
   to the appellant or her representative. The Court of Appeal in  Y (Sri
   Lanka) [2009] EWCA  Civ 362 made it clear that where psychiatric findings
   were sought to be undermined by suggesting that an appellant had been
   exaggerating symptoms great care was required before modifying or even
   more radically discounting the expert witness evaluation. In this case
   the FTTJ found that the exaggeration was in the account of events not the
   symptoms but I consider that the same principles apply. In paragraph 24
   of the determination the FTTJ rejected the expert opinion that the
   appellant was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder or that there
   was any suicide risk. However, in paragraph 25 he accepted that she had
   been receiving medical treatment for depression for many years. I find
   that, in the light of Y (Sri Lanka) the FTTJ erred in his treatment of
   the expert report from Dr Edgar. Any inconsistencies in the evidence as
   to what happened during two incidents in Pakistan were not adequate
   reasons for the FTTJ appearing to accept that part of the report which
   said that the appellant was suffering from depression whilst rejecting
   the opinion that she was also suffering from PTSD and what was described
   as no more than "a possible suicide risk".


5. I also find that the judge erred in law because, in paragraph 26 when
   giving reasons for rejecting the expert evidence that there was a risk of
   suicide he said; "to do so would ignore the fact that when she reaches
   the age of 65 it is very likely that she will be able to once again join
   her sons in this country on a permanent basis". This statement gives the
   clear impression that the judge believed that a future application by the
   appellant for settlement in the UK would be governed by paragraph 317 of
   the Immigration Rules. Had paragraph 317 continued in force it would have
   been easier for the appellant to qualify once she reached the age of 65
   because there would no longer be the requirement to show the most
   exceptional compassionate circumstances. However, the basis of the FTTJ's
   statement was incorrect because, for applications made after 9 July 2012,
   paragraph 317 ceased to have effect and the appellant would have to meet
   the far more stringent requirements contained in paragraph FM EC-DR of
   the Immigration Rules.


6. I find that by reason of the matters set out above the determination
   contains material errors of law and the FTTJ's decision must be set aside
   and re-made.


7. Mr Zyed asked me to hear further oral evidence from the appellant and
   the sponsor. He produced two new witness statements which had not been
   submitted in advance of the hearing as required by the directions which
   had been given when permission to appeal was granted. Furthermore, the
   appellant required an interpreter and, although the same direction said
   that this should be done, there had been no request to provide one. Mr
   Tarlow indicated that if further evidence was given he would wish to
   cross examine the witnesses. I considered excluding the evidence and
   remaking the decision on submissions only but on balance concluded that
   the interests of justice would be best served if the appellant was
   allowed to call further oral evidence notwithstanding the failure of the
   representatives to comply with directions.
