
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02049/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 October 2013                            |On 4 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE CRANSTON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

              Mr Hasitha Jeewaka Bandara RekOgama Mudiyanselage

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Helen Horsley, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a decision of Judge Owens sitting in the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The judge had allowed an appeal by the  respondent,  who  is  from  Sri
    Lanka.  He was a Tier 4 Student whose applications for an extension  of
    leave had been refused.  The appeal raises an issue as to  the  meaning
    of "academic progress" in paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The background is straightforward.   On  2  July  2010  the  respondent
    entered the United Kingdom with leave to remain until 25 May 2012 as  a
    Tier 4 Student.  That was to study for a certificate for the  Chartered
    Institute of Management Accounts (CIMA) at Kaplan College.   The  leave
    was granted on the basis that he would undertake a level 6 course.  His
    intention was to return to work in his father's business in  Sri  Lanka
    once he had completed the course.  He  had  been  granted  a  confirmed
    acceptance status, a CAS, by Kaplan  College.   Under  the  Immigration
    Rules Kaplan College was his sponsor.

3.   It was found by the  judge  that  the  CIMA  involved  study  at  three
    levels, at level four, five and six.  The respondent commenced study at
    level 4, enrolled for level 5 examinations but did not complete  levels
    five and six.   Kaplan  College  suspended  his  sponsorship  for  poor
    attendance.  His explanation was that that was attributable  to  travel
    problems.  He requested that his sponsorship be reinstated but that was
    refused.  The respondent's leave was to expire on 27 May 2012.   On  23
    May he applied to extend his leave to remain as a  Tier  4  Student  to
    take an Advanced Diploma in Business Management at Essex  College.   He
    claimed 30 points under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules  for  those
    studies.  That course is a level five course.  The college accepted him
    and confirmed the position in the  CAS  that  it  represented  academic
    progress.

4.   On 7 July 2013 the Secretary of State refused to vary the  respondent's
    leave since the Secretary of State was not satisfied that  his  Tier  4
    sponsor had confirmed that the  course  for  which  his  CAS  had  been
    assigned represented academic progress from his previous study  or  met
    one of the exemptions:

         "Your CAS states that you intend to study an  Advanced  Diploma  in
         Business Management  course  at  NQF/QCF  level  5,  but  you  were
         previously issued leave to study on a CIMA course at NQF/QCF  level
         6.  As you are intending to study a course at a  lower  level  than
         the course you were previously issued leave to study,  your  course
         does  not  represent  academic  progression  from   your   previous
         studies."

5.   The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis  that
    the Secretary of State had got her facts wrong.  The  CIMA  examination
    he had enrolled to  study  was  level  5  and  he  had  to  complete  a
    comparable course before he could progress to level 6.

6.   At the hearing the respondent was unrepresented.

7.   In the determination and reasons the judge set out  the  background  as
    we have  just  summarised  it.   He  records  that  both  parties  made
    submissions.  For the Secretary of State it was  submitted  that  there
    was no evidence of academic progress since the previous leave  was  for
    the respondent to study at level  6.   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    respondent was a credible witness.  He then found  that  when  the  CAS
    referred to level 6 it referred to the final level of the  CIMA  course
    and not  the  actual  level  completed.   As  the  CAS  confirmed,  the
    respondent had not completed level 6.  The new course was level  5  and
    involved further study  at  level  6.   In  the  CAS  the  sponsor  had
    confirmed that it would involve complementary study in  that  it  would
    assist the respondent to learn the fundamentals of business management.
     The sponsor was aware of the respondent's  previous  academic  history
    and had certified that it represented  progress  for  the  respondent's
    previous  study.   The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  not   in
    accordance with paragraph 245ZX(c) of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  he
    allowed the appeal.

8.   The relevant part of paragraph 120A of Appendix A relating to Rule
    245ZX is as follows.

         "(b)     For a course to represent academic progress from  previous
             study, the course must:


             (i)  be above the level of the previous course for  which  the
                  applicant was granted leave as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
                  or as a Student, or


             (ii)     involve further study at the same  level,  which  the
                  Tier 4 Sponsor  confirms  as  complementing  the  previous
                  course for which the applicant was granted leave as a Tier
                  4 (General) Student or as a Student."

9.   In Naeem [2013] UKUT 00465  (IAC)  Mr  Ockleton,  Vice  President,  and
    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin examined the meaning of that Rule and  said
    this at paragraph 10:

         "The question is not the actual level of his previous studies,  but
         the level 'of the previous  course  for  which  the  applicant  was
         granted leave as a Tier 4 General Student'.   Although  it  appears
         that the appellant only completed level 4, it is clear that he  was
         in April 2009 granted leave in  respect  of  a  three  year  course
         comprising levels 4, 5 and 6.  In fact he did not complete level  4
         until January 2012 by which time the college had  discontinued  the
         course structure under which the appellant had originally enrolled.
          His new enrolment was for level 5.


         ... It follows that the appellant's new course  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 120A of Appendix  and  he  was  therefore
         entitled to no  points  for  the  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
         Studies."

10.  Unfortunately that authority was not before the judge in deciding  this
    case.  In our view it is a complete answer to the point.  The Secretary
    of State's appeal must be allowed.

11.  We therefore set aside the  judgment.   We  remake  that  decision  and
    dismiss the respondent's appeal.






Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Cranston
