
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02429/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision Promulgated     |
|On 3rd November 2014                   |On 8th December 2014     |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Ms Mercy Tetteh
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Mercy Tetteh.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the respondent but
    for the purposes of this appeal I shall refer to the  parties  as  they
    were described before the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana and born on 12th December 1981  and
    she applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right  to  reside
    in the UK on the basis of her marriage or durable relationship  with  a
    French  (EEA) national, Mr R Frimpong.  This application was refused on
    16th December 2013.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's application  with  reference  to
    Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations.  The respondent alleged  that  the
    appellant had also failed to provide satisfactory evidence she  was  is
    in a durable relationship with  an  EEA  national  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 8.

 4. The detailed refusal letter stated that the appellant had not  provided
    evidence to demonstrate she had registered her  customary  marriage  in
    accordance with the Customary Marriage and Divorce  (Registration)  Law
    1985.  Accordingly it was not legally recognised as valid in Ghana  and
    thus could not be accepted as valid in the UK.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert determined the matter  on  25th  June
    2014 and issued a determination on 30th July 2014 allowing the  appeal.
    An application for permission to appeal by the respondent  was  granted
    by First Tier Tribunal Judge Chambers.  The matter came before me.

 6. Judge Herbert accepted that there was a valid customary  marriage.  The
    judge noted Kareem (Proxy marriages EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24  and
    stated [8] that 'the production of a marriage certificate issued  by  a
    competent authority (that is issued according to the registration  laws
    of the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place)  would  usually  be
    sufficient'. He found the relevant customary law to  be  complied  with
    was Ghanaian law and therefore the marriage was valid.    I  find  this
    was an error of law as Kareem confirms that there must be proof of  the
    private international law of the relevant country, in this case  French
    law, as to whether marriages in the form of proxy marriages  are  valid
    and such evidence not only has to identify relevant legal provisions in
    that other country (France) but identify how they operate in  practice.
    The legal system of  the  nationality  of  the  Union  citizen  governs
    whether a marriage has been contracted Kareem [18].

 7. TA  and  Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316  (IAC)
    confirms that following the decision in  Kareem  the  determination  of
    whether there is  a  marital  relationship  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  must  always  be   examined   in
    accordance with the laws of the  Member  State  from  which  the  Union
    citizen obtains nationality.

 8. In this instance there was no evidence of the relevant (France) foreign
    law and the judge erred in law in allowing the appeal on this basis.

 9.  The  appellant  appeared  in  person  before  me  and   requested   an
    adjournment. She and her then solicitors, Edward Marshall, were sent  a
    notice of appeal  6th  October  2014  at  which  point  she  instructed
    alternative solicitors. She states that she did not  formally  instruct
    the new solicitors until last Tuesday but she was aware of the  hearing
    date when the notice was sent out.   I  find  that  the  appellant  had
    sufficient time within which to instruct other solicitors and for  them
    to attend the hearing before me. Indeed the  appellant  had  instructed
    solicitors for the hearing before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  but  the
    relevant documentation, in respect of the relevant law,  had  not  been
    produced. Appropriate directions had been issued by the Upper  Tribunal
    with the relevant reminder  further  to  Rule  15(2)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Procedure Rules 2008.

10. I find that there is an error of law in the determination of the  First
    Tier Tribunal judge for the reasons explained above  and  I  set  aside
    that determination. I remake the decision with respect to the  validity
    of the marriage and dismiss the appeal further to Regulation 7 for  the
    reasons given above.

11. Nonetheless the judge failed to make findings with respect the relevant
    aspects of Regulation 8 and whether  the  appellant  is  in  a  durable
    relationship. On this basis alone I remit the matter back to the  First
    Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. No documentation had  been  produced
    in relation to French law and proxy marriages either before  the  First
    Tier Tribunal or before me.   The First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  however
    made no findings in respect of the durable relationship.

12. The matter, however, in view of the nature and extent of  the  findings
    to be made, should be returned to the First Tier Tribunal for a hearing
    de novo in respect of Regulation 8 (durable relationship) alone.


Signed                                  Date 3rd November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
