
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/02082/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th February 2018                     |On 2nd March 2018                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NNR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Sufian (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend the anonymity order made by Judge Eldridge.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Eldridge, sitting at Hatton Cross, to allow  the  appeal  of  NNR
    against the refusal his application for leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on family  life  grounds.   For  ease  of  reference,  I  shall
    nevertheless refer to the parties in accordance with  their  status  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a national of India who was born on 29th April 1983.

 4. The main reason that the Secretary of State refused the application was
    because the Appellant had  not  met  the  suitability  requirements  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. This was because the Secretary of
    State alleged that in  July  2013  the  Appellant  had  relied  upon  a
    fraudulently-obtained English  language  test  certificate  in  seeking
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  student.   It  is
    clear from Judge Eldridge's Record of Proceedings  that  the  Appellant
    contested that allegation and  claimed  to  have  legitimately  sat  an
    English language test.

 5. It is right to say that the Secretary of State also gave other  reasons
    why she was refusing the Appellant's application. It  was  nevertheless
    clear from her reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  the  allegation  of
    deception was the primary reason for refusal. Moreover, any decision to
    uphold this aspect of the Secretary of  State's  reasoning  would  have
    been determinative of the appeal, regardless of any other reasons  that
    there may have been for dismissing it.  Its importance cannot therefore
    be overstated.

 6. However, in an otherwise extremely detailed and careful analysis of the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights, the judge failed to make any  finding  on
    this potentially critical issue.  At paragraph 34, he effectively side-
    stepped the issue:

         "Even if the  Appellant  had  provided  a  false  English  language
         certificate in 2013 (before he met his partner and  her  children),
         that is not a factor strong  enough  to  prevail  over  the  strong
         expectation that it is the interests of these  two  young  children
         that they remain in the United Kingdom with both parents and it  is
         he, the Appellant, who could been seen as and is  acting  as  their
         father."

 7. The Grounds of Appeal complain  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  any
    finding at all in relation to the question of whether the Appellant had
    employed deception in July 2013.  In considering this complaint, it  is
    appropriate to  recall  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  first  and
    foremost a fact-finding Tribunal.  It is therefore incumbent upon it to
    make findings of fact in relation to every potentially relevant factual
    issue in the appeal.  In the present case, it was unfair  not  only  to
    the Secretary of  State  but  also  to  the  Appellant  for  a  serious
    allegation of fraud to be left unresolved.  The Appellant protested his
    innocence at the hearing. If the judge believed him, then it  was  only
    right and proper that he should have acquitted the  Appellant  of  this
    particular charge.  Conversely, had the judge found the  charge  proved
    by cogent evidence, then the Secretary of State was entitled to  expect
    a clear finding to this effect. The proper course  is  always  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to begin by finding the facts.  Only  then  can  it
    consider the application of the law to those  facts  and  exercise  any
    judgment that may be called for in respect of them. Even if the  status
    of the appellant's English language test ultimately  proved  immaterial
    to the outcome of the instant appeal, it may yet prove material to some
    future application. It was thus an error of law  for  the  Tribunal  to
    base its decision upon hypothetical facts.

 8. The question for me is whether I ought to  exercise  my  discretion  in
    favour of setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision due  to  the
    clear error of law in failing to make potentially material findings  of
    fact.  There is a respectable argument for saying that given the weight
    attaching to the public interest in  deterring  fraudulent  immigration
    applications  it would have been perverse to allow the  appeal  had  it
    been proved that this was what the Appellant had  done.   That  is  not
    however a ground that has  been  raised  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Rather, the grounds simply assert that had the Tribunal made an adverse
    finding in relation to this issue it "may" have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion. However, it is clear from  paragraph  34  of  the  decision
    (cited above) that if the judge had not made an error of  law  in  this
    regard he would nevertheless have  come  to  the  same  conclusion.   I
    therefore have no hesitation in saying that the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 26th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly


