
[pic]

                                  UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at: Birmingham
On: 20 June 2013
                                             Decision Promulgated

                    On: 25 June 2013


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss


                                   Between

                                 Ion Cursaru

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Not represented
For the Respondent: Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS



The appellant is a citizen of Romania and was born on 13 April 1985.

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dove  QC
which dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
dated 4 January  2013  which  refused  a  Registration  Certificate  as  the
dependent of an EEA Accession Worker.

The appellant indicated in his appeal form  that  he  was  content  for  the
appeal to be decided on the papers. First-tier Tribunal  Judge Dove did  so,
stating as follows at [2]:

      "Unfortunately, for whatever reason, the paperwork  comprised  in  the
      appeal is (with the exception of  material  related  to  dealing  with
      whether or not the appeal had been made out of time) the documentation
      which was lodged with the appeal. That solely comprises  the  decision
      letter, a letter dated 21 January 2013 from the  Appellant,  and  some
      Halifax Bank statements. I do not  have  in  the  papers  any  of  the
      documentation which pertains to the original application such  as  the
      application form itself, the registration certificate for the  Sponsor
      or the Sponsor's pay slips. In the absence of that  documentation  and
      material  to  support  necessary  requirements  of   the   Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, I can  only  conclude  that
      the Appellant in this case has  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of
      proof, since it is necessary for that that (sic) documentation  to  be
      before me in order to satisfy relevant requirements. Thus, the  appeal
      must be dismissed as on the material before me the requirements of the
      Regulations have not been met, albeit that that (sic)  is  a  decision
      which I am driven to without detailed consideration of the merits  but
      simply on the basis of incomplete information having found its way  to
      the  appeal  file.  In  those  circumstances  this  appeal   must   be
      dismissed."

The appellant's  ground  of  appeal  was  simply  that  the  respondent  was
responsible for providing the evidence that had been  submitted  in  support
of the application and that it was not open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
proceed on the  basis  that  he  had  not  made  out  his  case  where  that
documentation was not on the file.

Mr Smart sensibly conceded that a  material  error  of  law  arose  for  the
reasons set out by the appellant in the grounds of appeal. Rule  13  (1)  of
The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  stipulates  that
the respondent "must" file with the Tribunal documents referred  to  in  the
notice of decision. The notice of decision  in  this  case  referred  to  an
application  and  bank  statements.  The  respondent  was  responsible   for
providing these documents to Tribunal, not the appellant. If they  were  not
on the file when the First-tier Tribunal came to decide the appeal,  it  was
incorrect to proceed on the basis that the responsibility for this lay  with
the appellant and had to lead to his  appeal  being  dismissed  without  any
consideration of the merits.
There being no dispute as to a material error of  law  having  occurred,  we
set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and proceeded  to  re-make
it. The directions issued to  the  appellant  with  the  Notice  of  Hearing
indicated that, absent any further indication from him, it was open  to  the
Tribunal to proceed to re-make the appeal immediately if  an  error  of  law
was found.  A handwritten record on the  file  showed  that  the  Notice  of
Hearing and directions had been sent out on 22 May  2013  and  there  was  a
corresponding entry on the Tribunal  database  system.   We  were  satisfied
that this indicated that proper service had  taken  place  albeit  that  the
copy of the Notice of Hearing on the file had been  endorsed  by  hand  with
the issue date of "22/06/13" which could only have been an error  where  the
date of the hearing before us was 20 June 2013.

We were greatly assisted by Mr Smart when remaking  the  appeal  as  he  was
able to provide us with the material that had been before the respondent  at
the date of the decision.

We  did  not  find  that  the  appellant  had  shown  on  the   balance   of
probabilities that he was the dependent of an Accession Worker. We  accepted
that his mother was registered as an Accession Worker as  we  were  provided
with  a  copy  of  her  Accession  Worker  Card;  see  appendix  D  of   the
respondent's bundle. However, the evidence did not indicate to us  that  the
appellant was dependent on her in line with Regulation 7 of The  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. The appellant asserted that  this
was so and provided photocopies of payslips for his mother, bank  statements
for his mother and bank statements for his sister. None of  these  documents
indicated to us, without  more,  that  these  family  members  provided  the
appellant with funds or supported him in other ways. In a  letter  from  the
appellant dated 21 January 2013, he stated that he had marked  up  the  bank
statements of his mother to show which cash  withdrawals  related  to  funds
given to him. None of the bank statements before us had such marks on  them.
Even if they had, it remained the assertion of the appellant that  this  was
so.  His mother did not provide a statement to this effect.

In short, we  did  not  find  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
appellant had shown that he was dependent on his mother. He  cannot  qualify
for a Registration Certificate, therefore. We dismissed the appeal.





DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

We re-make the appeal, dismissing it under the Immigration Rules.


Signed:                                 Date: 26 July 2013

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
