
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: IA/02450/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 25 July 2014                        |On 06 August 2014         |
|Prepared on 25 July 2014               |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    K. Z.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. On 13  December  2001  he
           applied for entry clearance  as  an  overseas  domestic  worker,
           which  application  was  refused  on  30  December   2011.   The
           Appellant's appeal against  that  decision  to  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal was however allowed. Thus on  5  October  2012  he  was
           granted entry clearance as an overseas domestic worker, until  5
           April 2013.
        2. On 5 April 2013 the Appellant applied for  LTR  as  an  overseas
           domestic worker, which application was  refused  on  19  October
           2013, and in consequence a decision was made by reference to s47
           of the 2006 Act to remove him from the UK. The sole reason given
           by the Respondent for these decisions concerned the limit  to  a
           maximum of  six  months  leave  in  this  capacity  set  out  in
           paragraph 159D(ii); the reasons for the decision do not  suggest
           that the merits of the application, or the evidence relied  upon
           in support of it, were considered.
        3. The Appellant's appeal against those immigration  decisions  was
           heard on 17 April 2014. It  was  dismissed  in  a  Determination
           promulgated on 6 May 2014 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy.
        4. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Davidge dated 9  June
           2014 the First Tier Tribunal granted the Appellant permission to
           appeal on the basis it was  arguable  the  Judge  had  erred  in
           failing to appreciate  that  the  Appellant  was  granted  entry
           clearance pursuant to an application made and  considered  under
           the Immigration Rules as they were prior to the changes made  on
           6 April 2012; even though his physical entry to the UK  did  not
           occur until November 2012.
        5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice  dated  19  June  2014  in
           which she complained that she not seen either the grounds of the
           application or the Determination  under  appeal.  Neither  party
           applied for permission to rely upon further  evidence  that  had
           not been before the First Tier Tribunal. Thus the  matter  comes
           before me.


      Service
        6.  The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing,  and  was   not
           represented at it. I was satisfied that both he, and Mr  A,  his
           sponsor and representative, were served by first class post with
           notice of the hearing at the date they had  given  for  service.
           That notice was not returned to the Tribunal  through  the  dead
           letter system.
        7. The Appellant has offered no  explanation  for  his  failure  to
           attend the hearing, and has requested no adjournment of  it.  In
           the circumstances I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  been
           served with notice of the hearing, and I am not  satisfied  that
           there is any reason why I should not proceed  to  determine  his
           appeal in his absence.


      The relevant Immigration Rules
        8. It is accepted by Mr Deller that the application was made on  13
           December 2011, and that  it  was  initially  considered  by  the
           Respondent pursuant to the Immigration Rules as they were  prior
           to 6 April 2012, on  30  December  2011.  When  the  Appellant's
           appeal against that initial decision by the ECO was  successful,
           it is therefore accepted that the grant of entry clearance  must
           have been made under the Immigration Rules as they were prior to
           6 April 2012, notwithstanding the  changes  in  the  Immigration
           Rules that had by then occurred.
        9. Accordingly Mr Deller concedes  that  although  this  point  was
           before the Judge, he did not adequately deal with it. It is also
           conceded now that it is plain that the decision maker applied on
           19 October 2013 the wrong Immigration Rules to  the  Appellant's
           most recent application. In turn it is conceded that  the  Judge
           erred in failing to appreciate that she had done so.
       10. It is conceded therefore that the decision must be set aside and
           remade.
       11. In order to make a lawful  decision  upon  the  application  the
           decision maker must consider and apply paragraph  159EB  of  the
           Immigration Rules, granting a period of leave of up to 12 months
           at a time, but only  if  the  requirements  of  paragraph  159EA
           continue to be met. No  consideration  has  yet  been  given  to
           whether the Appellant met at the date  of  the  application  (or
           currently meets) the requirements of paragraph  159EA.  Nor  has
           the Appellant or his sponsor chosen to  attend  the  hearing  of
           this appeal to explain what his circumstances were and are. They
           may of course have already left the UK, or there  may  be  other
           reasons for their failure to do so. I am not  however  satisfied
           that I have the material before  me  to  make  a  decision  upon
           whether those requirements were met at any material date. Thus I
           simply  allow  the  appeal  to  the  limited  extent  that   the
           Respondent's decisions of 19  October  2013  were  not  made  in
           accordance with the law. Thus the Appellant's application  of  5
           April 2013 remains outstanding, and  awaits  a  lawful  decision
           upon it.

   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      6 May 2014 did involve the making of an error  of  law  that  requires
      that decision to be set aside and remade.


      I remake the decision so as to allow the appeal to the limited  extent
      that the Respondent's decisions of 19 October 2013 were  not  made  in
      accordance with the law, and thus the Appellant's application  remains
      outstanding and awaits a lawful decision upon it.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  him.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated  25 July 2014
