
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: Ia022702015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 April 2016                      |On 25 May 2016                       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                              MR. KARAN SALUJA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. Mallick, counsel instructed by Veja & Co
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                       ERROR OF LAW DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of India, born on 5 September 1982. On  25
March 2013, the Appellant obtained entry clearance to join his wife  in  the
United Kingdom and entered the country on 15 April  2013.  The  relationship
suffered difficulties, including the loss of  her  job  by  the  Appellant's
wife, which caused her to make a suicide attempt. She recovered  but  it  is
claimed increasingly directed her frustration at her  circumstances  at  the
Appellant.

2.    The Appellant visited India for a wedding in December  2014  and  upon
his return to the United Kingdom on  11  January  2015,  the  Appellant  was
stopped and questioned and served with a  decision  refusing  him  leave  to
enter. The Appellant appealed against this decision on 15 January  2015.  In
his grounds of appeal he asserted that he  had  suffered  domestic  violence
from his wife.

3.    The appeal came before FtTJ Kimnell  for  hearing  on  1  July  and  6
August 2015. The Appellant gave evidence, along  with  a  witness,  Inderjit
Singh Daheley. In a decision promulgated on 26 August 2015, the  First  tier
Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal, on  the  basis  that  the  relationship
between the couple was over and the Appellant had left the matrimonial  home
well before the decision was taken in April  2015  [47]  and  there  was  no
causation between the violence and the end of the marriage [53].

4.    An application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  in-time  on  8
September 2015. The grounds in support of the application asserted that  the
First tier Tribunal Judge had materially erred in law: (i) in  treating  the
Respondent's decision as being taken on 7 April 2015 when  in  fact  it  was
taken on 11 January 2015;  (ii)  the  error  in  relation  to  the  date  of
decision resulted in an unfair  conclusion  given  that  the  Judge  had  to
assess whether there had been a material change in circumstances  justifying
refusal to leave at the date of decision; (iii) the  Judge  failed  to  give
adequate reasons as to why the  Appellant  was  not  entitled  to  leave  to
remain as a victim of domestic violence; (iv) the decision was  taken  under
paragraph 321 rather than 321A and  was  thus  not  a  mandatory  ground  of
refusal but erroneously no discretion had been exercised.

5.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
Simpson, on all grounds on the basis that there is a duty to act fairly  and
justly and it is arguable that the error as to date of decision has  led  to
unfairness because the Judge's assessment as to whether  there  had  been  a
material change in circumstances at the date of decision was  predicated  on
the wrong facts.

Hearing

6.    At the hearing before me, Ms Mallick sought to rely upon  the  grounds
of appeal, which she had not drafted. She further sought to argue  that  the
issue of domestic violence can  be  a  contributory  factor  rather  than  a
causal link in respect of the breakdown of a  relationship  cf.  Ishtiaq  at
[31] and [38] per Dyson LJ as he then was and R ota Butler [2002]  EWHC  854
where Lady Hale at 21, 26, 30-33 found that whilst the relationship had  not
broken  down  as  a  result  of  domestic  violence  is  was  a  significant
contributory factor. She submitted that the Judge made a  crucial  error  of
law in applying the wrong rule when considering the change  in  circumstance
as paragraph 321 refers to "may" lead to a refusal and  321A  provides  that
leave "is to be  cancelled"  at  the  port,  where  there  is  a  change  in
circumstances. One is discretionary and one is mandatory. Yet there  was  no
complaint that the marriage had broken down prior to that date  [11  January
2015]. She submitted that the  only  evidence  before  the  Judge  that  the
Appellant had not lived there was from a witness Mr Dehaley and he had  said
that the Appellant had not lived for a few days a week  at  the  matrimonial
home since shortly after the marriage had begun. That being  the  case  when
the Judge came to make his decision he  wrongly  looked  at  the  change  in
circumstances. He wrongly records at [8] and at [14] that the Appellant  had
denied saying this. He did not consider that the endorsement on the  landing
card could have arisen as a result of the Immigration  Officer  speaking  to
the Appellant's wife on the telephone. It  is  not  clear  the  sequence  of
events and how they took place.

7.    She submitted that the sequence of events are  also  relevant  to  the
claim of domestic violence  and  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
factual matrix and whether there was  psychological  domestic  violence-  it
may well have been the Appellant's wife gave the account to the  Immigration
Officer  of  her  not  having  a  subsisting   marriage   because   of   her
psychological state and that this is another form of abuse,  which  was  not
considered in the factual matrix.  The  other  points  the  Judge  does  not
consider are in the witness statement, such as the suicide  attempt  by  the
wife. If the marriage had broken  down  in  2013  why  would  the  Appellant
assist her in finding a job in his area of expertise  -  media  and  not  in
hers and why is it that she obtained a job through his  assistance  and  why
is it then it was not until December 2014 when she is  settled  in  her  job
that he decided to have a  short  visit  to  India.  She  attempted  suicide
because she lost her previous job. In applying  the  wrong  Rule  the  Judge
made a material error of law and did  not  consider  all  the  circumstances
before him.

8.    Ms Mallick further submitted that the Judge placed too much weight  on
the Immigration Officer's evidence  and  he  was  not  cross  examined.  The
evidence of the Appellant was  far  weightier  and  the  Judge  should  have
placed little weight on those who decided  not  to  give  evidence.  On  the
issue of change in circumstances, Ms Mallick essentially set out  Grounds  1
and 2 of the grounds of appeal and the fact that the Judge erred in  finding
that the relevant date was April, which was when the  explanatory  statement
was sent out. When one looks at the date of circumstances and  decision  she
submitted that there is no evidence to indicate that the Appellant left  the
family home and no evidence to indicate that divorce  proceedings  had  been
commenced. Notably the Judge at [41] said the change  of  circumstances  was
that the marriage had been in difficulty for some  time,  but  this  is  not
sufficient for the purposes of paragraph 321A.  A  change  of  circumstances
would have to be more than a difficulty and the  Immigration  Officer  would
have  to  be  satisfied  that  the  parties  no  longer  intended  to   live
permanently together. If the Judge was going to  make  findings  on  matters
that post dated 11 January 2015 he should have found that the  decision  was
erroneous as of that date and remitted it back to  the  Home  Office  to  be
reconsidered.

9.    In respect of the domestic violence point,  she  submitted  that  this
was challenged on the basis that it lacks reasoning and that  parts  of  the
decision are simply unsupported by any evidence e.g. the reference  at  [53]
to a mutually tempestuous relationship. The Judge was required  to  look  at
what evidence existed of domestic violence and there was no evidence  before
him or referred to that  showed  that  his  wife  had  made  allegations  of
domestic  violence  and  this  is  an  unsupported  assertion  of  fact  and
trivialises the allegation  of  the  Appellant  that  he  was  a  victim  of
domestic violence. In April 2014 the Appellant  went  to  the  doctor  [51].
There was evidence from the  witness  that  there  had  been  some  domestic
violence very early on in the marriage. That  is  not  referred  to  by  the
Judge when he comes to make his decision at [53] when he finds there  is  no
such causation in this case. What he  should  have  asked  was  whether  the
domestic violence was a significant contributory factor,  rather  than  just
finding it was not the cause of  marriage  breaking  down.  The  Appellant's
statement at [21] onwards states that the violence continued and  he  became
the punching bag. He also refers to the GP and  psychological  violence  and
at [27] refers to the fact that he started  counselling.  The  decision  was
clearly inadequately reasoned in light of the  evidence  before  the  Judge,
who applied the wrong test.

10.   In  response,  Mr  Bramble  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response.  He
submitted that both the decision of  11.1.15  and  the  decision  of  7.4.15
refer to paragraph 321(A) and that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  refer  to
paragraph 321(A) and cite it in the decision. In respect  of  Ground  1,  Mr
Bramble accepted that at [46] and [47] the Judge does refer  to  April  2015
and that this is an error but it is not material. He submitted that  it  was
necessary to look at is the construction of  the  reasoning  as  to  whether
there was a change in circumstances, at [40] onwards. He submitted that  the
Judge took into account the  landing  card  and  found  the  fact  that  the
marriage has broken down is consistent with the  evidence.  The  Appellant's
wife had no contact with him in 2015. There has clearly  have  a  change  in
circumstances on the basis  of  the  Appellant's  own  evidence.  The  Judge
considered the evidence about the  relationship  at  [50]  onwards  and  the
letter from Dr Kooner at [51]; the Judge has reminded  himself  of  what  is
required when considering domestic violence at [52] and at  [53]  the  Judge
has set out the reasons  why  on  this  set  of  circumstances  he  was  not
satisfied that the circumstances are a contributing factor to the  breakdown
of the marriage. The Judge was entitled to find this on  the  basis  of  the
evidence; he looked at everything in the round and was entitled to  come  to
that conclusion. It does not undermine the decision but looks  at  the  more
important factors. The Judge took into account the comments that  were  made
in the medical reports and the actions of the Appellant that he  would  have
remained with the wife if it was not for the  divorce  proceedings  and  the
evidence of a witness who acknowledged the fact that the Appellant had  left
the home on previous occasions. The Judge has taken all  this  into  account
and when coming to the conclusion has found the Appellant was not  a  victim
of domestic violence and the Judge was entitled to come to  that  conclusion
having considered all the competing factors.  He  asked  me  to  uphold  the
decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge.

11.   In response, Ms Mallick submitted  that  in  respect  of  the  correct
Rule, irrespective of how it is cited it is how it is applied that  matters.
The Immigration Officer refused the Appellant leave to enter and this was  a
paragraph 321 decision and not  a  cancellation  of  leave  under  321A.  In
respect of the consideration of domestic violence, she submitted  that  what
crucially is missing is that nowhere in the decision of the  Judge  are  his
reasons as to why he rejected the claim of domestic violence and he has  not
put all the evidence together. She confirmed in response to a question  from
me  that  no  formal  application  under  the  Rules  had  been   made   but
representations had been made to the Secretary of State in  the  grounds  of
appeal: see [4] of decision. These were before the Secretary  of  State  and
the First tier Tribunal Judge.  I  asked  Ms  Mallick  whether  it  was  not
inconsistent that the Appellant both claimed that he  wished  to  remain  in
the marriage and that he  had  been  subjected  to  domestic  violence.  She
replied that it was important to look at the sequence of events. You can  be
a victim of domestic violence and remain in the marriage. At the  point  the
Appellant returned to the United Kingdom in January 2015 he  considered  his
marriage to be subsisting and when his wife tells  the  Immigration  Officer
that the marriage is not subsisting he then has a claim to be  a  victim  of
domestic violence. She reiterated that we do not know when  the  Immigration
Officer spoke to the Appellant's wife and whether this was before  or  after
he spoke to the Appellant, which is important because if she is  right  this
supports the Appellant's claim.

My findings

12.   It is the case, as is identified in Grounds 1 and 2,  that  the  First
tier Tribunal Judge erroneously referred to  the  Respondent's  decision  as
having been taken on 7 April 2015  whereas  it  was  in  fact  taken  on  11
January 2015. The Explanatory Statement is dated 7 April 2015  and  appended
to it are interview notes with both the Appellant and his wife,  in  respect
of interviews that took place on 11 January 2015. Whilst the Judge erred  in
respect of the date of decision, I do not consider that  it  is  a  material
error in light of the following:

    12.1. the Respondent's consideration of whether or not there had been a
change in circumstances took place on 11 January 2015, following  interviews
with the Appellant and his wife, who attended Heathrow Terminal 5 in  person
on that day and signed  her  interview  notes.  In  the  Appellant's  wife's
interview, which is not numbered, the following exchange took place:

    "Q.    Do you live together?

    A.     No - we have been separated since the 12.12.13. We haven't lived
    together since then."

In the Appellant's interview, which is  also  not  numbered,  the  following
exchange took place:

    "Q.    According to  your  wife  you  have  not  lived  together  since
    December 2013?

    A.     On and off. She left her job and she wanted to rent her house. I
    moved out in Feb because of her medical condition."

The reference to "Feb" must be to February 2014, given that  it  post  dates
December 2013 and predates the interview on 11  January  2015.  However,  in
his oral evidence it is recorded at [8] that the Appellant  stated  that  in
May 2013 he "had stayed away from home for three to  four  days  because  of
indecent behaviour by his wife then he would return." And at [10] that on  5
April 2013  his  wife  finally  lost  her  job,  was  detained  in  hospital
overnight and her behaviour then changed. "The  appellant's  doctor  advised
him to move out. The appellant travelled for about six months working  as  a
broadcaster." It is implicit that this was  in  the  latter  part  of  2013.
Then, in cross-examination at [14] "the appellant said  that  between  April
2014 and December 2014 everything was fine." He accepted that in April  2014
he took legal advice about what to do if  physical  violence  occurred.  His
evidence was that he had moved out (of the matrimonial home) on 18  February
2015 [17]. The Appellant's witness, Mr Daheley's evidence, recorded at  [29]
is: "The appellant told Mr Daheley that he  moved  out  of  the  matrimonial
home in February 2014 following which he stayed for  a  few  days  with  the
witness before moving to an address in Chigwell."

    12.2. As is apparent, the evidence in the form of the interviews of the
Appellant  and  his  wife  is  discrepant;  the  Appellant's   evidence   is
internally discrepant and there is a discrepancy between  his  evidence  and
that of his witness. The Appellant was interviewed  both  before  and  after
his wife's interview, so that he could be given  an  opportunity  to  refute
some of the points that she made,  which  substantially  differed  from  his
answers. Given that the Appellant's wife attended for interview at  Heathrow
Terminal 5 and signed her interview  notes,  I  find  that  the  Immigration
Officer has discharged the burden of showing that there had  been  a  change
in circumstances so as to justify cancelling the Appellant's leave to  enter
and the First tier Tribunal Judge was justified in  upholding  the  decision
of the Immigration Officer.

    12.3. Whilst First tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell refers to  the  decision
as having been taken in April 2015 and that is an error, and  his  reference
at [47] to subsequent events having shown that a  divorce  is  taking  place
between the couple is also erroneous, given that the issue  before  him  was
whether  or  not  there  was  a  change  in  circumstances  to  justify  the
cancellation of leave at the date of decision [11.1.15] I do not  find  that
it is a material error given the discrepancies in the evidence  set  out  at
12.1 above. On  the  Appellant's  own  account  in  interview  he  left  the
matrimonial home in February 2014 and this is consistent with  the  evidence
of his witness and the medical notes (which indicate that in  fact  he  left
in January 2014). This clearly pre-dated the date of decision. Even  if,  on
the basis of his interview record, they  lived  together  on  and  off,  the
Appellant's wife clearly stated that  they  had  not  lived  together  since
December 2013 and neither the evidence of the Appellant nor his witness  has
displaced that evidence so as to show that the marriage was  subsisting  and
both parties intended to live with each permanently. Thus there had  been  a
change in circumstances which justified the  refusal  of  leave  and/or  the
cancellation of leave.

13.   In respect of Ground 3 and whether or  not  the  Judge  gave  adequate
reasons as to why the Appellant was not entitled to leave on  the  basis  of
domestic violence, I find there is no material error of  law.  The  evidence
before the Judge was, at  best,  scanty,  comprising:  the  Appellant's  own
evidence, both oral,  which  is  internally  inconsistent  and  his  witness
statement which is undated but in  any  event  attests  at  its  highest  to
aggression and verbal abuse by his wife; the evidence of  his  witness  that
the Appellant telephoned him within 2-3 months of his arrival in the UK  and
said he needed a place to stay as his wife was behaving in a  very  peculiar
manner and they had fallen out; the medical notes, which  on  13.1.14  refer
to "stress at home. Erratic behaviour from  wife  of  2  years...  wife  has
?mental health issue ... he has  moved  out  temporarily."   There  is  also
reference to threats by his wife to  kill  him  or  herself  and  constantly
trying to email and phone him and ask for money on 25.4.14 and  on  18.57.14
reference  to  "wife's  disruptive  behaviour  again."  The  Appellant   was
referred to a counsellor but there is no specific evidence as  to  how  long
he received counselling nor the specific focus of the counselling, if any.

14.   Whilst there is a discretion as to the  evidence  considered  to  show
that domestic violence has taken place and each case  should  be  considered
on a case by case basis [Domestic  Violence  guidance  29.5.15  at  21]  the
evidence normally required is, for example, evidence of court conviction  or
police caution [22] an injunction [24] or  non  molestation  order  [27];  a
medical report confirming that the applicant has  injuries  consistent  with
domestic violence, which may not be physical injuries or  a  report  from  a
domestic violence organisation [29]-[30]. No evidence  of  this  nature  was
submitted. Moreover,  even  if  the  Appellant  was  subjected  to  domestic
violence by  his  wife  by  way  of  psychological  or  emotional  abuse  or
controlling and/or coercive behaviour, all  of  which  are  covered  by  the
definition adopted by  the  Home  Office  in  their  guidance  cited  above,
paragraph  289A  of  the  Rules  requires  that  the  domestic  violence  is
causative  of  the  breakdown  of  the  marriage.  Whilst,  as  Ms   Mallick
submitted, it need not be the only cause as long  as  it  is  a  significant
contributory factor, on the facts of this case the marriage was  not  caused
to break down due to domestic violence against the  Appellant  by  his  wife
but because his wife did not wish to be  married  to  him  any  longer.  The
Appellant's evidence at interview on 11.1.15  was  that  he  loved  her  and
wished to continue the marital relationship, despite the fact  that  he  had
been subjected to domestic violence. Whilst the breakdown  of  his  marriage
is clearly a personal tragedy for the Appellant, I find that  the  threshold
for showing that his marriage broke down due to domestic  violence  has  not
been reached on the evidence before me, or the First tier Tribunal Judge.

15.   I further find  that  the  basis  of  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
relationship between the Appellant and his wife was  "mutually  tempestuous"
which was impugned by Ms Mallick, can be found in the  interview  record  of
the Appellant's wife where she stated, in response to  an  arguably  leading
question from the Immigration Officer, that the Appellant had  been  violent
towards her. There is also a letter on file from the Appellant's  solicitors
to him dated 3 February 2015 to the effect that his  police  station  matter
is concluded as his ex-wife has refused to provide a statement to police  in
support of her earlier allegation. This is  referred  to  by  the  Judge  at
[53]. The Appellant in his witness statement at [29] he states that  he  was
interviewed by the police on 18 January [2015] as his wife had  accused  him
of rape in June 2013. For the reasons set out at  [13]  and  [14]  above,  I
find no error of law in the  manner  in  which  the  Judge  dealt  with  and
reasoned his findings at [48]-[53] that the Appellant was  not  entitled  to
leave on the basis of domestic violence.

16.   In respect of Ground 4 and the question of whether or  not  the  First
tier Tribunal Judge applied the correct paragraph of the  Immigration  rules
- 321 or 321A, I have concluded that this  is  misconceived.  Paragraph  321
makes provision for the refusal of leave to enter in relation  to  a  person
in possession of an entry clearance. Paragraph 321  (ii)  provides  that  he
may be refused leave only where the Immigration Officer  is  satisfied  that
there has been a change of circumstances  since  it  was  issued  which  has
removed the basis of the holder's claim to admission. Paragraph  321A  makes
provision for grounds on which leave to enter or remain which  is  in  force
is to be cancelled at port  or  while  the  holder  is  outside  the  United
Kingdom and include at (1)  that  there  has  been  such  a  change  in  the
circumstances of that person's case since  the  leave  was  given,  that  it
should be cancelled. It is the case that paragraph 321 is  in  discretionary
terms whereas paragraph 321A is in mandatory terms.  Reference  is  made  in
the refusal to both cancellation of  leave  and  the  refusal  of  leave  to
enter, essentially referring to both paragraphs of the Rules.  However,  the
test is essentially the same and I find on  the  particular  facts  of  this
case that nothing turns on the distinction between  a  discretionary  and  a
mandatory refusal  as  the  Immigration  Officer  was  bound  to  reach  the
conclusion he did, having interviewed both the Appellant and  his  wife,  in
light of his wife's  clear  indication  that  the  marriage  was  no  longer
subsisting.

17.   For the reasons set out above, I find no material error of law in  the
decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell and I dismiss the appeal.

Decision

18.   The appeal is dismissed.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

24 May 2016
