
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02760/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 March 2016                              |On 05 April 2016              |
|Determination prepared 21 March 2016          |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                               MR FAISAL BILAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Marrington


                            DECISION AND REASONS

          In this appeal the Appellant is referred to as  the  Secretary  of
State and the     Respondent as the Claimant.
1.   The Claimant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth 18  November  1990,
    appealed against the Secretary of  State's   decisions,  on  7  January
    2015, to make removal directions under Section 10  of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999 having refused a spousal  application  for  further
    leave to remain based upon his marriage.  The  appeal  against  removal
    directions came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy (the Judge) who,
    on 14 April 2015, allowed the appeal on the basis that the reasons  for
    refusal, reliant upon the Claimant's claim for leave to remain, had not
    been substantiated and the judge dealt with the matter entirely on that
    basis. Thus the appeal succeeded under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395.
2.   The core of the refusal for leave to remain related to a so-called  ETS
    exercise because the Claimant had applied for, taken and passed English
    language tests. The dispute was whether or not the Claimant had allowed
    somebody else to take the test on his behalf.  Ultimately,  since  that
    was the core of the refusal, the evidence provided to the Tribunal  was
    directed at the tester and  the  Claimant's  good  faith.    The  judge
    decision tried to work out the extent  the  Home  Office  evidence  was
    reliable in establishing that the Claimant had not taken the  necessary
    language test but had allowed somebody else to take it.
3.   A number of problems arise from this exercise but not least  the  judge
    failed to address the evidence of a Miss Rachel Collings whose  general
    evidence was served along with that of a Mr Peter Millington  which  it
    was intended should be  read  together  as  to  establish  the  general
    principle of the likelihood being that the Claimant had allowed a third
    party to take the test. It  may  be  when  the  full  Judgment  of  the
    President's (IAC) decision (23 March 2015) is published in the case  of
    IA/31380/2014 and another that the  sustainability  of  the  ETS  voice
    recognition testing systems will become clearer.
4.   It is  clear  that  that  ETS  evidence  can  be  open  to  significant
    criticism as to its sufficiency albeit an expert opinion provided by Dr
    Harrison of 5 February 2015 disputes over the  technical  evidence  and
    the sufficiency of ETS material. It may not be as great as is sometimes
    thought. The Upper Tribunal, in IA/31380/2014 and another, accepted  in
    full Dr Harrison's evidence in all material respects.

 5.    Be that as it may the judge did not  address  the  evidence  of  Miss
    Collings but went on to conclude with  unchallenged  findings  of  fact
    that the Claimant was a truthful witness of fact and  the  judge  found
    that as a fact the Claimant had undertaken the disputed tests  himself.
    In the circumstances, whether or  not  the  ETS  evidence  is  properly
    reliable to secure the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  somewhat
    sidestepped by the findings of  fact  the  judge  made  concerning  the
    Claimant not least "the Appellant did  not  submit  unreliable  English
    test certificates to the Respondent and I am satisfied he has not  used
    dishonesty in an application to remain in the UK".   In  addition,  the
    judge made some positive findings in support of  the  Claimant's  case,
    namely the  rapidity  and  willingness  with  which  the  Claimant  had
    undertaken, when requested, a second test.
5.   Ultimately,  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not  challenge  the  judge's
    findings of fact upon the reliability of  the  Respondent  and  in  the
    circumstances, even if  I  too  have  significant  concerns  about  the
    provision  of  evidence  about  the  format  and  reliability  of   the
    assessments made, the fact is that the Claimant succeeded  irrespective
    of reservations about the sufficiency of that evidence. The  fact  that
    for the Claimant there was the  expert  report  of  Dr  Harrison  which
    raised concerns over the  investigative  methodology  which  ultimately
    makes no difference to the outcome of the  appeal  today.   It  is  not
    suggested that the judge's decisions were perverse, irrational  or  had
    failed  to  take  into  account  material  evidence  relating  to   the
    Claimant's undertaking of the disputed test.  In those circumstances  I
    am satisfied that it has not been demonstrated that there was an  error
    of law by the judge.
6.   The Original Tribunal's decision stands.
7.   The appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION
The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed
No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date25 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
