
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02003/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2nd June 2016                           |On 23rd August 2016            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                             Mr Tanveer Hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini (Counsel)
For  the  Respondent:     Ms  A  Brocklesby-Weller   (Senior   Home   Office
Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Monson ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on  25th
    September 2015.

2.    The  appellant  applied  for  leave  in  August  2014,  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system.  His  application
    was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  29th  December  2014.   She
    concluded that the application fell to be refused under the Immigration
    Rules ("the rules") as the appellant had not shown  that  he  genuinely
    intended and was able to establish a  business  or  that  he  genuinely
    intended to invest funds, as required and that funds relied  upon  were
    genuinely available to him.  These adverse  findings  were  "non-points
    scoring reasons for refusal".  So far as Appendix A (attributes) of the
    rules is concerned, the Secretary of State awarded  no  points  in  the
    "Access to funds", "Funds held in regulated financial institutions" and
    "Funds disposable in the United Kingdom" categories,  with  the  result
    that the appellant was unable to  show  that  he  was  entitled  to  be
    awarded the minimum of  75  points  under  Appendix  A.   Overall,  the
    appellant was unable to meet the requirements  of  paragraph  245DD(h),
    with particular reference to paragraph 245DD(i) and paragraph 245DD(k).



3.    In  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the   appellant's
    solicitors compiled a bundle which included a  considerable  amount  of
    new evidence which was not before  the  Secretary  of  State  when  she
    interviewed the appellant or at the date of  decision,  including  bank
    statements, invoices and similar items.  Having taken into account  the
    Upper Tribunal decision in Ahmed [2014] UKUT  00365  (IAC),  the  judge
    decided to make an assessment in the light of the  prohibition  on  new
    evidence in section 85A(4) of the  2002  Act,  before  then  separately
    considering the impact of the new  evidence.   He  concluded  that  the
    Secretary of State reached  the  correct  conclusion  on  the  evidence
    before her, and that the adverse decision under paragraph 245DD(h)  was
    properly made.  So far as the new  evidence  is  concerned,  the  judge
    concluded that this did not avail the appellant and, in  the  light  of
    broadly adverse findings  in  relation  to  that  evidence,  the  judge
    concluded that it did not undermine the lawfulness or integrity of  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse the Tier 1 application and then
    make the adverse immigration decisions which followed.

4.   In detailed grounds in support of  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, it was contended, first, that the judge made  an  unlawful  and
    irrational assessment of the  appellant's  entrepreneurial  intentions,
    secondly, that he failed to make findings and give reasons in  relation
    to  paragraph  245DD(h),  thirdly,  that  he  failed  to  account   for
    documentary evidence supporting the genuine nature of  the  appellant's
    business, fourthly, that he failed to  put  matters  to  the  appellant
    regarding compliance with the terms of the contract  relied  upon  and,
    finally, that he failed to properly assess  the  business  against  the
    requirements of the rules.

5.   Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes,
    in a thorough analysis of those  grounds.   So  far  as  the  first  is
    concerned, the judge was well aware that the rules did  not  require  a
    claimant to have had experience in the field.  He was entitled to  find
    that as the appellant claimed in his  business  plan  to  have  it,  it
    counted against him that he did not use  leave  to  remain  to  acquire
    relevant experience for the business.   The  judge's  finding  in  this
    context was not perverse.  There was no merit  in  ground  two  as  the
    judge adequately explained his findings in  relation  to  the  evidence
    before the Secretary  of  State  as  at  the  date  of  decision.   The
    appellant's witness statement and oral evidence  were  not  before  the
    respondent at that time.  On the other hand, if, as contended in ground
    three, the judge erred by failing to take into account  evidence  which
    he appeared to accept was admissible, including the appellant's witness
    statement, the  decision  in  fact  showed  that  the  judge  did  take
    sufficient account of  this  evidence.   So  far  as  ground  four  was
    concerned,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find,  overall,   that   the
    entrepreneurial intentions and activities lacked commercial credibility
    and, so far as ground five was concerned,  the  appellant  fell  within
    paragraph 245DD(h)(i)(2) as he had formed a company, become a  director
    and continued to operate the  business.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider whether in all the circumstances the appellant's actions since
    the date of decision were  indicative  of  someone  who  was  genuinely
    continuing to operate a business.

6.   The application for permission was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal.  The
    appellant had no need to obtain yet more experience  to  act  upon  his
    business plan, as  he  stated  in  it  that  he  already  had  specific
    experience, for the purposes of ground one.  In relation to ground two,
    the judge failed to take into account the appellant's rebuttal  of  the
    Secretary of State's case, as it appeared in the decision  letter,  and
    his oral evidence was not found to be in any way  false  or  incorrect.
    The appellant's oral evidence was intended to enable him  to  challenge
    the Secretary of State's application of the rules to his case  and  the
    overall assessment plainly had to take that evidence into account.  The
    new evidence had  some  impact,  as  showing  the  appellant's  genuine
    intentions, and as corroborating his case, for the purposes  of  ground
    three.  The new documents assisted the appellant in  demonstrating  the
    genuineness of his  contracts,  the  documents  were  genuine  and  the
    trading activity  correctly  audited,  so  that  ground  four  remained
    arguable.  So far as ground five was concerned, the judge assessed  the
    business in the light of paragraph 245DD(h)(i)(1), whereas  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge refusing permission  based  it  upon  sub-paragraph
    (2).  Moreover, the judge criticised the appellant  for  not  "growing"
    the business and although this was something  that  might  occur  under
    (2), it is not required by the rules.  All the rules  require  is  that
    the business be established and operated and those  facts  were  beyond
    question given the bank account and invoices which were  deemed  to  be
    genuine.

7.   Permission to appeal was then granted by an Upper  Tribunal  Judge  who
    referred briefly to grounds one to four and found that it was  arguable
    that the judge may have erred "in failing to give adequate reasons  for
    his findings on material matters" and that he may have  "made  mistakes
    of fact about matters relevant to this appeal that may well have led to
    a different outcome".  The Upper Tribunal Judge  appeared  to  be  less
    persuaded by ground five but permission was granted on all grounds.

8.   In a rule 24 response given on 3rd May 2016,  the  Secretary  of  State
    opposed the appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  directed  himself
    appropriately and provided  sustainable  reasons  why  the  appellant's
    credibility was damaged.  The evidence before the judge, including  the
    new evidence which was not before  the  Secretary  of  State,  was  all
    properly considered.

Submissions on Error of Law

9.   Mr Saini said, dealing with the first ground, that it  was  paradoxical
    for the judge to find against the  appellant  that  he  had  not  begun
    preparation to establish a business, or  acquired  experience,  in  his
    previous grant of leave, in the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) category.  The
    judge found that if  an  applicant  does  not  have  the  foresight  to
    undertake work in a previous grant of  leave,  then  he  cannot  be  an
    entrepreneur but the rules do not require any long-term goals  of  this
    sort.  The judge's adverse finding was perverse.

10.  Ground two was not simply a "reasons" challenge.  The appellant's  oral
    evidence fell to be properly taken into account and section 85A of  the
    2002 Act imposed a restriction on written  evidence.   The  appellant's
    witness statement was adopted and he was cross-examined and  the  judge
    appeared to make no adverse findings.  He failed to weigh that evidence
    when considering the adverse findings made by the Secretary of State in
    her decision letter.  The appellant was  able  to  effectively  counter
    these and the labelling of the business as disingenuous  in  some  way.
    The rules required the  appellant  to  show  that  he  could  genuinely
    establish a business and it was important for the  judge  to  focus  on
    precisely that and not just on what happened thereafter.

11.  The judge accepted  the  evidence  as  genuine  but  his  approach  was
    paradoxical, for the purposes of ground  three.   If  the  judge  found
    against the appellant in the  light  of  the  new  evidence,  this  was
    inconsistent with Ahmed in the Upper Tribunal.  If, however, a  further
    assessment were made on  the  new  evidence,  it  was  clear  from  the
    decision that  this  formed  the  brunt  of  the  adverse  findings  in
    paragraphs 25 to 33 of  the  decision  and  dwarfed  the  rest  of  the
    analysis.

12.  The terms of the contract and the billable hours were  matters  forming
    part of the assessment of the new evidence and did not form part of the
    Secretary of State's decision.  This again showed, in support of ground
    four particularly, that the judge erred in basing his assessment on the
    new evidence.  At paragraph 23 of the  decision,  the  judge  erred  in
    giving adverse weight to the appellant's failure to gain experience  as
    a post-study work migrant.  Mr Saini said  that  Ahmed  clearly  showed
    that the new evidence should not have formed part of the assessment.

13.  So far as ground five is concerned, Mr Saini said that this was a  case
    which fell within paragraph 245DD(h)(i)(1) and not (2).

14.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller said  that  the  judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for
    upholding the Secretary of State's overall conclusions.  So far as  the
    post-study work leave was concerned, this was something  the  Secretary
    of State was entitled to take into account, as part of the  appellant's
    immigration history and his previous activity and business  experience,
    as she clearly did so, as was plain  from  the  decision  letter.   The
    appellant  had  a  degree  but  no  practically  based  knowledge.   At
    paragraph  22  of  the  decision,  the  judge  drew  attention  to  the
    appellant's work in Asda and as a parking control  enforcement  officer
    for a local authority.  At paragraph  23,  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant  had  claimed  expertise  and  experience  as  a   management
    consultant, which underpinned  the  business  plan.    The  credibility
    assessment was a holistic one and it was clear from paragraph  24  that
    the judge, having weighed the evidence, came to similar conclusions  to
    those reached by the Secretary of State.

15.   The  assessment  of  the  new  evidence  from  paragraph  25  on   was
    irrelevant, in the light of Ahmed.  However, paragraphs 1 to 24 of  the
    decision stood alone  and  contained  the  assessment  required  to  be
    undertaken.  It was also clear from Olatunde [2015] EWCA Civ  670  that
    the  new  evidence  concerning  ongoing  business  activities  was  not
    relevant to the assessment required under paragraph 245DD(h).  Although
    the judge  undertook  a  "belt  and  braces"  approach,  that  did  not
    undermine the earlier findings.

16.  Although the rules did  not  require  the  appellant  to  use  previous
    periods of leave to gain business experience or take steps to establish
    a business, the judge was entitled to take  into  account  the  earlier
    activity as relevant to the overall assessment of  the  credibility  of
    the entrepreneurial scheme.

17.  In brief reply, Mr Saini said that the appellant was  not  required  to
    show earlier practical experience.  In any event, he had  a  degree  in
    business management.  The rules did not require him  to  show  business
    experience.  Paragraph 23 of the decision  showed  that  the  judge  in
    effect was seeking more than the rules required.  One had  to  look  at
    the overall purpose of the rule, which was to root out those  who  were
    not entrepreneurs and who were  unable  to  show  that  they  genuinely
    intended or were able to  establish  a  business.   There  was  nothing
    dubious in the appellant, with his degree  in  management  consultancy,
    seeking to set up a business in the same field.

Conclusion on Error of Law

18.  Dealing first with the overall structure of the decision, it  is  clear
    that the judge first made an assessment in the light  of  the  evidence
    before the Secretary of State, concluding  at  paragraph  24  that  the
    appellant had not made out his case and that the Secretary of State was
    correct to make the adverse finding she did under  paragraph  245DD(h).
    Thereafter the judge made a careful assessment of the new evidence  but
    in the light of Ahmed, this was not required.

19.  The first part of the  decision  is  thorough,  cogently  reasoned  and
    shows that the judge had in mind all the salient features of the  cases
    advanced by the parties.  So far as ground one is concerned, the  judge
    was clearly aware that the rules did not require the appellant to begin
    to prepare his business as an entrepreneur  in  the  earlier  grant  of
    leave.  The criticism made of this part of the analysis  overlooks  the
    clear finding by the judge  that  in  the  particular  context  of  the
    appellant's case,  his  failure  to  acquire  relevant  experience  was
    capable of counting against him in the  overall  assessment,  precisely
    because he claimed expertise and experience as a management consultant,
    this being an important component  in  the  business  plan.   Far  from
    seeking to impose a requirement not present in the rules, the judge was
    doing no more and no less than weighing the evidence before him and his
    adverse finding was  not  remotely  perverse  or  irrational.   On  the
    contrary, it was a finding open to him.

20.  Ground two is also not made out.  The judge carefully  noted  that  the
    appellant gave evidence and was  cross-examined  extensively,  both  in
    relation to the evidence before the Secretary  of  State  and  the  new
    documents.  The judge carefully summarised  the  Secretary  of  State's
    case, as it appeared in the decision letter, at paragraphs 9 to  13  of
    the decision and there was no need for him  to  repeat  the  particular
    findings she made.  Paragraph 22 maintains the focus on the appellant's
    business experience as a management consultant, in  the  light  of  the
    claim he made in the  business  plan  to  have  such  experience.   The
    appellant's work for Asda and as a parking control enforcement  officer
    was  not  related  to  management  consultancy  and   the   appellant's
    employment in the latter role was  full-time  before  the  company  was
    established and continued for 25� hours a week, as at the date  of  the
    hearing, as the appellant confirmed in  oral  evidence.   All  of  this
    shows that the judge did, in  fact,  properly  assess  the  appellant's
    case, as it emerged in the relevant documentary evidence and  his  oral
    evidence, in the light of the Secretary  of  State's  decision  letter.
    The culmination of the  assessment  appears  at  paragraph  24  of  the
    decision and the  conclusion  contained  in  it  is  sustainable.   The
    judge's findings were open to him in the light of the evidence.   There
    is no contradiction, still less a paradox, in the judge  accepting  the
    evidence before  him  and  yet  making  an  adverse  finding  that  the
    requirements of the rules were not met.  I do  not  accept  Mr  Saini's
    submission that the assessment of the new evidence at paragraphs 25  to
    33 is such that it dwarfs the rest of the analysis or  that  it  is  in
    those paragraphs that the assessment of the documentary evidence is  to
    be found.  Ground three of the written grounds in  the  application  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (at paragraph 14) appears to suggest  that  the
    judge erred by making findings without taking  the  new  evidence  into
    account but Ahmed shows the correct approach.  Ground three is not made
    out and I agree with Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  that  the  assessment  made
    earlier in the decision, leading to the conclusion in paragraph  24  is
    cogently reasoned.

21.  Similarly, ground four is not made out as the  new  evidence,  although
    separately assessed, was not to be taken into account  in  relation  to
    the lawfulness of the decisions under  appeal.   I  do  not  accept  Mr
    Saini's submission that the paragraphs devoted to the new evidence show
    that the judge's overall conclusion was based on the view  he  took  of
    it.  The concluding sentence of paragraph 24 and the first sentence  of
    paragraph 25 show otherwise.

22.  So far as ground five is concerned,  the  judge  focused  on  paragraph
    245DD(h)(i)(1),  whereas  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   refusing
    permission considered that  (2)  applied.   It  is  apparent  from  the
    written grounds that a  challenge  was  made  on  the  basis  that  (1)
    applied, and this accords with the stance in the Secretary  of  State's
    decision letter. The written grounds focus on whether the  "prospective
    business" is genuinely run and referred to the appellant's  explanation
    that he was unsure of enforcing his rights because his status was up in
    the air.  Those matters were  carefully  considered  by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 33 of the decision and he reached a clear conclusion, open to
    him on the evidence, that the appellant could not  show  that  he  fell
    within (1).  In reaching that finding, I conclude that the judge had in
    mind the evidence before the Secretary of  State,  notwithstanding  the
    location of paragraph 33 in what might be described as the second  part
    of the decision.   The Secretary of State's decision letter deals  with
    the same matters, particularly on page 4 of that document.   I  observe
    that, in any event, the appellant's previous  business  experience  (or
    lack  of  it)  is  a  relevant  matter  in  the  assessment   of   both
    245DD(h)(i)(1) and (2), as is clear  from  paragraph  245DD(i)  of  the
    rules.  The adverse findings made by the Secretary of State in refusing
    the application for leave, and by the judge, are capable of bearing  on
    both parts of the rule.

23.  In summary, with great respect to Mr Saini's  careful  presentation  of
    the case, I conclude that the judge was entitled to make  the  findings
    of fact that he did and to conclude that refusal of the application for
    leave and the adverse immigration decisions made on the  same  occasion
    were lawful.  Insofar as the separate assessment of  the  new  evidence
    amounts to an error, in the light of Ahmed, the error is not  material.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no  material  errors  of
law, shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 23rd August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date 23rd August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

