
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02615/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 June 2016                               |On 6th October, 2016          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          GEETHAPRIYAN SELVANAYAGAM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel, instructed by Immigration
Chambers
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting publicity  about
 this Decision.

2. This Decision perfects the extempore judgment I gave at the  end  of  the
 hearing on 27 June 2016.

3. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  the  decision  of
 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  present
 respondent, who I will call "the claimant", against the  decision  of  the
 Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
 According to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  the  Secretary  of
 State refused him leave to remain as an asylum seeker and a student.

4. The Judge's decision concludes clearly  enough  with  the  words  "appeal
 allowed" but I cannot discern why it was allowed.  It may be that  it  was
 allowed with reference to Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
 Rights but that is not clear. If it was allowed on Article 8 grounds  then
 the reasons are inadequate reasons. The very least the Judge  should  have
 done was to have regard for Section 117  (in  its  amended  form)  of  the
 Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  because  that  puts  an
 obligation on a Judge dealing with an Article 8 claim to consider  certain
 factors. It is very desirable that these are addressed expressly.

5. It is not necessarily fatal to fail to address them expressly  if  it  is
 plain from the determination that they have  indeed  been  considered  but
 that is not plain on the face of this determination.

6. It is possible to discern certain points that impressed the  judge.   The
 claimant came to the United Kingdom as  a  young  lad  aged  13  years  or
 thereabouts.  He has lived there since 2009.  It is not his fault that  he
 was brought to a country other than his  country  of  nationality  and  it
 seems, without making any findings, that he has behaved  creditably,  that
 he has done well and has opportunities open to him if he can remain in the
 United Kingdom. These  things  are  generally  not  enough  to  support  a
 decision to allow an appeal on human rights grounds.

7. As Mr Bramble said, correctly, that there is an asylum  appeal  here.  If
 there had been proper findings of fact on the asylum appeal  it  would  be
 possible to discern how it may (I emphasise the word "may")  be  the  case
 that the claimant, if not a refugee, would find return  to  Sri  Lanka  so
 burdensome that the appeal should be  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds.
 However, Mr Bramble was certainly not suggesting that  that  ought  to  be
 outcome. He merely made the point that even that possible route cannot  be
 read into this Decision because  the  essential  findings  of  fact  about
 conditions in Sri Lanka have not been made.

8. Mr Syed-Ali presented a thoughtful Rule 24 response  which  I  considered
 and I commend him for doing the best that he could with the hand that  had
 been dealt to him but with respect to Mr Syed-Ali this really will not do.
 This is a Decision that is wholly deficient and I must set it aside.

9. I cannot go on to make the decision today. I cannot  see  on  the  papers
 before me any proper basis for allowing or dismissing the  appeal  without
 having heard considerable evidence. As the First-tier Tribunal, I have  to
 say, has wholly failed to make proper findings it is only right  that  the
 claimant is given the opportunity of  a  new  hearing  in  the  First-tier
 Tribunal where all his appeal rights are preserved.

10. It is unfortunate that this young man's case was not treated  in  a  way
 that showed more regard to the requirements of the Rules. It must be  very
 puzzling and frustrating for him to be told he has won an appeal  to  then
 watch a different judge set aside the decision that assisted him.  I  find
 that  I  must  do  that  because  the  Decision  is,  frankly,  completely
 inadequate.

11. I set aside the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I  rule  that  the
 appeal be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal. To that extent  the
 Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.



Notice of Decision

Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. Appeal to be reheard in  the  First-
tier Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 October 2016                 |





