
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02957/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 September 2014                          |On 20 October 2014           |
|Prepared 22 September 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JABER AHMED

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Aupoo, Legal Representative, SEB Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the respondent is referred as the claimant.

2.   The claimant, a national of Bangladesh, date of birth 8 December  1988,
    made an application on 17 October 2013 for leave to remain as a Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant. The application was refused by the Secretary
    of State on 15 November 2013 on the basis that  the  Claimant  had  not
    provided the requisite  documents  and  in  particular  had  failed  to
    provide evidence required as to his birth certificate or other material
    evidence.

3.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Harrington (the Judge) who, on 18 July 2014, dismissed the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal on human rights grounds to
    enable the Claimant to complete a BA management course.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision was given to the Secretary of  State
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on 5 August 2014.

4.   At the hearing before me I was satisfied that as a fact in relation  to
    the grounds on which permission  was  granted  that  the  Judge  whilst
    reciting the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT  640  (IAC)  had  nevertheless
    failed to  put  her  mind  to  the  relevant  considerations  under  MF
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and MM
    (Zimbabwe) [2009] UKIAT and Patel and Patel [2011] UKUT157.  Rather the
    Judge having in her own way expressed the exercise that she was looking
    at, having satisfied herself that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM  and paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (the Rules) concluded that there were compelling circumstances to
    show why Article 8 was engaged outside of the Rules.

5.   In the circumstances, in paragraph 32 of the  determination  the  Judge
    said

         "... In my opinion there are compelling circumstances such that  it
         is necessary to consider Article 8 outside the  Rules,  namely  the
         Rules do not specifically consider a case such as  this  where  the
         interference is with an almost completed course of  study  embarked
         upon at considerable expense to the appellant."

6.   As a matter of approach, as Mr Deller points out,  it  would  be  quite
    exceptional to find Rules couched in such terms to enable  someone  who
    has embarked on a course and carrying it on without leave covering  the
    course, to then turn round and say "Well I have nearly finished it  and
    therefore I ought to succeed either under the Rules  or  under  Article
    8". It is hard to imagine  factual  circumstances  of  this  kind  that
    provision could be made for under the Rules in any event.  Be  that  as
    it may, the fact of the matter was the Judge had  really  not  put  her
    mind to the issue of how a student under  an  obligation  to  make  the
    necessary and  correct  application,  who  failed  to  do  so,  through
    entirely his own fault, can therefore fall back on  Article  8  to  say
    "Well, in any event allow me to remain".  The Judge has not  cited  CDS
    (Brazil) [2010] UKUT 305 but it  could have been in her  mind.  However
    even CDS (Brazil) was not directed at the situation the appellant found
    himself in at the material times and nor was CDS (Brazil), even  if  it
    stands as originally stated, enabling people to remain for the purposes
    of completing a course of  which  they  never  had  any  permission  to
    undertake.

7.    I find the Judge's reasoning  falls  far  short  of  showing  how  the
    appellant's circumstances  engaged  consideration  of  Article  8  ECHR
    outside of the Rules.

8.   The Judge in fact in giving  her  reasoning  for  concluding  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was disproportionate appears to rely upon
    three matters.  First, the fact of  delay  in  removing  the  appellant
    between the hearing and the end of his course is very  limited.  It  is
    hard to see how that can amount to a material consideration  of  weight
    when assessing the individual's circumstances and the public  interest.



9.   Secondly, the Judge regarded the fact that the appellant had  paid  for
    his evidence as material but the fact is there is nothing  to  outweigh
    the general public expectation that an appellant  will  pay  for  their
    education. The fact that  this  appellant  has  done  so  really  added
    nothing to the matter and certainly did not  to  show  why  the  public
    interest was outweighed.

10.  Thirdly, the  Judge  looked  at  the  matter  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had undertaken the majority of the course while waiting for a
    decision. The fact of the matter is the delay was, certainly  in  part,
    the result of the appellant exercising his right of appeal. The benefit
    of the delays has enabled  him  able  to  complete  the  BA  management
    course. How the Judge thought that  her  decision  to  extend  time  to
    complete the course, for which there was no  permission  to  undertake,
    amounted to a the exercise of  private  life  rights  is  not  properly
    reasoned.

11.  The original Tribunal's decision cannot stand and it will  have  to  be
    remade.

12.  Having heard representations from the parties as to whether it  can  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal on the basis of the finding of facts made,
    and in respect of the  Judge's  findings  on  the  reliability  of  the
    appellant's recollection as to the documentation and its  nature  which
    he submitted, it seems to me that  it  is  appropriate  the  appeal  is
    remade in the Upper Tribunal and on the basis  of  the  findings  made.
    Subject  to  any  further  submissions  within  14  working   days   of
    promulgation in writing on that issue I shall remake the appeal on  the
    papers before me.

Signed                                  Date 22 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

