
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02351/2014
     IA/02368/2014
     IA/02373/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2014                          |On 8 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                     EM
                                     SM
                                     JM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan, Counsel

For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   On 19 October 2012 the principal appellant.  EM,  made  an  application
    for an EAA residence card as the primary carer of an EEA national child
    who is exercising free movement rights in the UK as  a  self-sufficient
    person.  EM and JM are the mother  and  stepfather  of  RF,  who  is  a
    Portuguese national and has lived with them in the UK since 2006.  They
    lived together as one family together with their son,  SM.  EM  is  his
    primary carer.  His father, a Portuguese national, also lives in the UK
    and we are told that RF has strong ties with him.

2.   The application was  made  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area)  Regulations  2006,  specifically   Regulation   15A,   but   the
    application  also  raised  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights.    The
    application was refused by letter dated  16  December  2013.   In  that
    refusal letter the respondent noted that  the  appellants  have  stated
    that they wished to rely on family and private life established in  the
    UK under Article 8 ECHR.  The letter then went on to point out that  no
    valid application  for  Article  8  consideration  had  been  made  and
    consideration had not been given as to whether  or  not  their  removal
    from the UK would breach Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   That  decision  was
    appealed and came before Judge Caswell in the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The grounds of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  included  an
    additional ground to the effect  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to
    consider Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and  the
    appellant wished the Tribunal to consider the family ties  involved  in
    this matter in order to reach a reasonable decision akin  to  the  five
    step process in Razgar.

4.   Judge Caswell  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  application  under
    Regulation 15A had been correctly refused and  refused  the  appeal  on
    that ground.

5.   In respect of Article  8  she  considered  the  Article  8  ground  but
    concluded that no Article 8 appeal had properly been  made  before  her
    and she refused that part of the appeal as well.

6.   When the matter came before us we pointed out to Mr  Bramble  that  the
    Rule  24  response  included  the  following.  "The  FtTJ  declined  to
    determine the appeal in respect of Article 8.  If it was  raised  as  a
    ground of appeal then the FtTJ ought  to  have  considered  Article  8.
    However it may be that it would not have made  any  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal."  We asked Mr Bramble whether or not that  meant
    that he was conceding that there had been an error of law. He  informed
    us that he had now departed from what was  contained  in  the  Rule  24
    response. In  doing  so  he  referred  us  to  two  cases,  R  (on  the
    application of) Weiss v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [201] EWCA Civ 803, and Rabindrer Jung Lamichhame v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 260.  He pointed  out  that  no
    one-stop notice had been served by the Secretary of State under Section
    120.  These authorities, he said, were effectively binding upon us.

7.   For the appellants Mr Khan conceded that on the face of  it  Weiss  was
    against him but he went on to submit that the Article 8 ground had been
    raised by the appellants in both the application  and  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  As we understood it he was  submitting  that  in  effect  this
    ought to be seen as equivelant in some way to the Section 120 process.

8.   Secondly, he submitted, that in any  event,  given  that  there  was  a
    young child involved here the interests of  justice  demanded  that  we
    consider the Article 8 issue. He suggested that it ought to  be  looked
    at by us or possibly, and preferably, remitted back to the Secretary of
    State to consider the Article 8 issues.

9.   We note that in Weiss at paragraph 9 of the judgment  of  Lord  Justice
    Longmore  in dealing with a similar issue said this:

         "The first difficulty is that no application for  indefinite  leave
         to remain on the grounds of  continuous  residence  has  ever  been
         made. There is a prescribed form  for  such  applications  and  the
         Regulation which I have set out in that prescribed form  have  been
         made under Section 31A of the Immigration Act 1971  which  provides
         (1) if a form is prescribed for a particular  kind  of  application
         under this Act any application of that kind must  be  made  in  the
         prescribed form.  (2) If procedural or other steps  are  prescribed
         in relation to a particular kind  of  application  under  this  Act
         these steps must be taken in respect of  any  application  of  that
         kind.  (3) Prescribed means prescribed in Regulations made  by  the
         Secretary of State."

10.  It is clear that there was in this case no application under Article  8
    to the Secretary of State. Accordingly the procedural  steps  have  not
    been complied with.

11.  In Lamichhame at paragraph 41 Lord Justice Stanley Brunton said:

         "I conclude therefore that the Secretary of State's contentions  as
         to the effect of Section 85(2) are well-founded and an appellant on
         whom no Section 120 notice has been served may not raise before the
         Tribunal any ground for the grant of leave to remain different from
         that which was the subject of the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
         State appealed against."

12.  We accept that these authorities are binding upon  us  and  accordingly
    we are of the view that  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Caswell must be upheld.  In any event, we consider that the  impact  of
    Article 8 has to be seen in the context of the decision which was being
    made.  This was a refusal of an application for a  residence  card.  It
    was not a decision about a right to remain. That point is made  in  the
    decision letter where the respondent says: "Additionally it is  pointed
    out that a decision not to issue a residence card does not require  you
    to leave the United Kingdom if you can otherwise demonstrate  that  you
    have a right to reside under the Regulations."

13.  Accordingly we shall  refuse  the  appeal.   It  remains  open  to  the
    appellants now to make the appropriate application under Article  8  to
    the Secretary of State should they so wish.







                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber


