
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02607/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 December 2013                         |On 10 December 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                     L S
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr E Akohene a
           solicitor from Afrifa and Partners
          For the Respondent: Mr S Whitwell a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who  was  born  on  16  May
      1936. She has been given permission to  appeal  the  determination  of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge Kelsey ("the FTTJ") who dismissed her appeal
      against the respondent's decision of 2  January  2013  to  refuse  her
      application for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  14  years
      residence under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules and  on  human
      rights grounds.


   2. The appellant entered the UK on 14 may 1992 and was granted six months
      leave to enter as a visitor. Since that expired she has had no  lawful
      leave to remain here. She submitted her application to the  respondent
      on 24 May 2006 claiming that  she  had  achieved  at  least  14  years
      continuous residence. The respondent did not make the decision on  her
      application until 2 January 2013. By that  stage  the  long  residence
      provisions of paragraph 276B were no longer part  of  the  Immigration
      Rules but the respondent applied them because they were  in  force  at
      the time of the application.


   3. The respondent concluded that the appellant had failed to establish 14
      years continuous residence. While she had registered with her GP there
      were periods during which she had not been treated and could have left
      the country. The three passports she had  submitted  covering  periods
      from October 1991 to October 1996, December 2001 to December 2006  and
      October 2007 to October 2012 did not cover the whole of the period  of
      claimed continuous residence. The application was  refused  under  the
      Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


   4. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard her appeal on 15 April 2013.
      Both parties were represented and  oral  evidence  was  given  by  the
      appellant and her sponsor who said that she was the appellant's niece.


   5. The FTTJ found that there was little documentary  evidence  about  the
      appellant's claimed period of  residence.  There  was  no  documentary
      evidence and conflicting oral evidence as to the relationship  between
      the appellant and the sponsor. There was no evidence  from  any  other
      relatives or friends. The documentary evidence was that obtained  from
      the appellant's GP's surgery and three  passports.  After  considering
      this documentary evidence and the oral evidence as well as  the  delay
      by the respondent the FTTJ concluded that the appellant had failed  to
      show on the balance of probabilities that she  had  lived  in  the  UK
      continuously for the required period without ever leaving the country.


   6. The FTTJ went on to  consider  the  Article  8  human  rights  grounds
      concluding that it would be  a  proportionate  interference  with  her
      human rights to remove her from the UK. He dismissed the appeal.


   7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was refused by  a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. However, on  renewal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal permission was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  FTTJ  "has
      arguably not taken proper account of the seven years  residence  which
      the appellant has subsequently accrued, in  assessing  the  Article  8
      aspects of her appeal."


   8. I allowed Mr Akohene to argue all the grounds  of  appeal.  These  are
      that the FTTJ erred in law by applying an incorrect standard of proof,
      reached  perverse,  illogical  and  unreasonable  conclusions  on  the
      evidence, failed to take into account all the relevant evidence,  took
      into account irrelevant evidence, failed properly to take into account
      the respondent's delay in dealing  with  the  application,  failed  to
      recognise that the long residence rule was designed to deal with those
      who had managed to stay in the UK for 14 years or more without  lawful
      authority and failed to apply relevant policies.


   9. There is a Rule 24 response from the respondent which submits that the
      FTTJ did not err in law and there  was  no  demonstrable  significance
      arising from the delay in dealing with the application.


  10. Mr Akohene relied on the grounds of appeal. He submitted that  in  his
      findings and reasons the FTTJ did not accurately reflect the  evidence
      given which he had set out earlier in the determination.  He  appeared
      to have concluded that the appellant had been issued with  a  passport
      for a period not covered by the three passports she had  produced.  In
      the alternative he had not reached a clear conclusion  as  to  whether
      the appellant had been issued with a passport for the five-year period
      referred to in paragraph 20 of the determination.


  11. Mr Akohene submitted that the FTTJ had not applied the correct  burden
      and standard of proof. I drew his attention to what was  said  in  the
      first sentence of paragraph 16 and asked whether there was any passage
      in the determination which indicated that this had not  been  applied.
      He was not able to point me to any particular passage but argued  that
      this was a conclusion that should be  drawn  from  the  tenor  of  the
      determination. The FTTJ had not looked at the evidence in  the  round.
      For example, if he had looked at the whole of the extensive GP records
      he would have seen that there was a pattern which indicated that there
      were periods during which the appellant did not  need  to  go  to  her
      doctor. They were not only during  the  periods  not  covered  by  her
      passports. He submitted that the FTTJ failed to take into account  the
      evidence that the sponsor's children looked after the  appellant  when
      the sponsor visited Sierra Leone. As the children had not  given  oral
      evidence or provided witness statements I asked him to point out where
      this evidence could be found. He drew my attention to paragraph  7  of
      the sponsor's witness statement dated 18 March 2013. The only relevant
      passage is; "she relies on my support and that of my children for  all
      her needs including emotional support".


  12. Mr Whitwell submitted that the appellant and  the  sponsor  had  given
      conflicting evidence about whether the appellant  had  always  renewed
      her passport. There were several periods during  which  the  appellant
      had not visited her GP. He argued that the  FTTJ  reached  conclusions
      open to him on all the evidence. The respondent  had  dealt  with  the
      question of exceptional circumstances in paragraph 31  to  33  of  the
      refusal letter. There was an inconsistency between the evidence of the
      appellant and the documentary  evidence.  A  letter  from  Chase  Farm
      Hospital dated 23 September 2008 indicated that the appellant came  to
      the UK in 1996 not 1992.


  13. Mr Whitwell  accepted  that  the  FTTJ  referred  to  Appendix  FM  in
      paragraph 17 of the determination but submitted that he dealt with the
      Article 8 grounds under the Strasbourg jurisprudence in  reaching  his
      conclusions.


  14. I reserved my determination.


  15. I find that the FTTJ did not apply an incorrect burden or standard  of
      proof. This is correctly stated in paragraph 16 and there  is  nothing
      in the determination to indicate that it was not applied. It was  open
      to the FTTJ to say that there was  very  little  documentary  evidence
      which made the decision difficult. An individual who had been  in  the
      UK for as long as the appellant claimed, since 1992,  would  often  be
      able to produce more documentary evidence to support  the  claim.  The
      FTTJ did consider the reasons given by the appellant  as  to  why  she
      claimed not to be able to do so and he gave detailed consideration  to
      the documentation she did  produce;  the  passports  and  the  medical
      records, in paragraphs 19, 20 and  21.  The  FTTJ  did  not  say  that
      because there were periods during which the appellant did not  go  and
      see her GP this meant that she was not in the UK. What  he  said,  and
      was entitled to say, was that the lack of records of visits meant that
      she was unable to show that she was in the UK during these periods.


  16. There is no  evidence  to  support  the  contention  that  all  non-EU
      nationals entering the UK have to fill out entry cards at the port  of
      entry or  that,  if  they  do,  the  respondent  has  access  to  this
      information covering the period since 1992.


  17. Whilst the grounds allege that there was evidence that  the  sponsor's
      children looked after the appellant whilst the sponsor was out of this
      country visiting Sierra Leone I find that the only passage relied  on,
      in paragraph 7 of the sponsor's witness statement, do not support  the
      contention. The sponsor could have dealt with this in more detail. Her
      children could  have  supplied  witness  statements  or  attended  the
      hearing to give oral evidence. None of this was done.


  18. I can find no inconsistency between the evidence recorded by the  FTTJ
      and the factors taken into account in his  findings  and  conclusions.
      The reference to "the missing passport" in paragraph  20  is,  as  the
      context makes clear, no more than  shorthand  for  the  period  during
      which the appellant could have had another passport.


  19. Whilst the grounds allege that the FTTJ failed to  take  into  account
      all the relevant evidence and failed to make proper  findings  on  all
      the evidence this has not been particularised beyond the matters which
      I have already addressed. I can  find  no  indication  that  the  FTTJ
      failed  to  recognise  that  the  long  residence  provisions  in  the
      Immigration  Rules  were  designed  to  grant  leave  to   remain   to
      individuals who had managed to stay here for 14 years or more  without
      lawful authority.

  20. In paragraph 17 the FTTJ refers to taking into account the  provisions
      of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. I accept that in paragraph 24
      the FTTJ deals  with  the  Article  8  grounds  under  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence and makes no mention of Appendix FM. However, if this is
      an error it is an error without consequence because the  date  of  the
      application means that these grounds fell to be considered  under  the
      Strasbourg jurisprudence rather than Appendix FM. Furthermore, it  has
      not been suggested that the appellant could succeed under Appendix FM.


  21. There is no indication that the appellant's representative argued  the
      point relating to the respondent's policies at the hearing but it  was
      raised in the written submissions at pages 1 to 3 of the bundle before
      the FTTJ. What are said to be extracts from the relevant policies  are
      between pages 11 and 14. The extract at page 12 relates  to  delay  by
      the respondent. The extract at page 14 relates to  "Elderly  Persons".
      It reads; "In terms of removal, ministers have agreed that a  person's
      age is not, by itself, a realistic or reliable indicator of a person's
      health, mobility or ability to care for  himself/herself.  Many  older
      people are able to enjoy active and independent lives. Cases  must  be
      assessed on their individual merits. The onus is on the  applicant  to
      show that there are extenuating circumstances,  such  as  particularly
      poor health, close dependency on family members  in  the  UK,  coupled
      with a lack of family and care facilities in the  country  of  origin,
      which might warrant a grant of leave".


  22. Whilst the grounds allege that the respondent failed to  consider  her
      policy on delay this is incorrect. It was addressed at paragraph 31 to
      33 of the refusal letter. The grounds do not address these  paragraphs
      or suggest that they  are  flawed  in  any  way.  The  FTTJ  did  make
      reference to the delay by the respondent in paragraph 23  and  I  find
      that, in the context of the facts of this case that was sufficient.


  23. Whilst neither the respondent nor the FTTJ made specific reference  to
      the policy in relation to elderly persons the  relevant  factors  were
      addressed. Whilst there was evidence of some ill-health there  was  no
      indication that this amounted to particularly poor health.  Dependency
      on the sponsor and to some extent her children was addressed and there
      was no suggestion of any other dependency on family members in the UK.
      In relation to family and care facilities in Sierra Leone the FTTJ was
      not persuaded that these would not be available.

  24. The Upper Tribunal judge who granted permission to  appeal  said  that
      the FTTJ "has arguably not taken proper account  of  the  seven  years
      residence which the appellant has subsequently accrued,  in  assessing
      the Article 8 aspects of her appeal." I  infer  that  this  may  be  a
      reference to the period since the appellant made  her  application  in
      1996 during which her passports were with the respondent. However,  if
      the appellant had another passport or passports she  would  have  been
      able to leave the UK during  that  period.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ's
      reasoning in relation to the Article 8  grounds  adequately  addresses
      the whole of the period during which the  appellant  claimed  to  have
      been in the UK.


  25. I find that the FTTJ reached  conclusions  open  to  him  on  all  the
      evidence. Neither his findings nor his reasons are remotely  perverse.
      There is no error of law.


  26. The anonymity direction made by the FTTJ should continue in  force.  I
      make an order under rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of  any  matter
      likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.


  27.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
      determination.






      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 4 December 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

