
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA023332015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th June 2016                         |On 14th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI



                                   Between

                            LINA VICTORIN BELASSE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Uko, Counsel, instructed by Joseph Mynah & Co
For the Respondent:    Miss N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1.  This  is  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal;  however  for  ease  of
    comprehension, I will refer to the parties according  to  their  status
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wylie allowing the Appellant's appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to remove her under section 10 of the Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.

 3.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth.  The grounds upon which permission  was  granted  may  be
    summarised as follows.

      i) It is arguable that the judge erred in relation to the question  of
         exceptional circumstances granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
         Rules.



Error of Law

 4. At the close of  submissions  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision which I shall now give. I find that there is no error  of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  My reasons for so  finding  are
    as follows.

 5. In relation to the  consideration  of  exceptional  circumstances,  the
    Respondent's complaint as encapsulated in her grounds,  is  in  essence
    that "The fact that an Appellant has a court case ongoing in the United
    Kingdom cannot be  an  exceptional  circumstance".   In  my  view  this
    complaint in of itself displays the nature of the  ground  which  is  a
    disagreement with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  nature
    of the exceptional circumstances  criterion,  as  supported  by  higher
    court authority (see MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, for example), is  that  if  there  are
    matters which do not fall within the purview of the  Immigration  Rules
    they are for all intents  and  purposes  exceptional,  and  having  not
    enjoyed consideration under the Immigration Rules,  are  matters  which
    naturally fall for consideration outside of those Rules  otherwise  the
    decision of the Secretary of State solely taken under the  Rules  could
    render a decision non-compliant with Section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998.

 6. In this determination the judge has made particular findings concerning
    the Appellant's private life outside of the Rules from paragraphs 26 to
    29 and the circumstances  outlined  at  paragraph  28  are  typical  of
    matters which would not  normally  fall  for  consideration  under  the
    Immigration Rules and therefore required consideration outside of  them
    under the exceptional  circumstances  criterion  which  the  judge  has
    righty pursued.

 7. As to the question of what forms an exceptional  circumstance,  I  find
    that the judge reached findings upon the evidence that were open to her
    and which she was entitled to reach. It might  be  that  another  judge
    would not have reached the same conclusion on these facts; however  the
    findings are neither perverse nor irrational in a Wednesbury sense  for
    that reason.  In that respect, I remind myself of the dicta of Baroness
    Hale in Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan)  &  Ors
    [2007] UKHL 48, wherein the following was stated inter alia at [30]:

         "... This is  an  expert  tribunal  charged  with  administering  a
         complex area of law in challenging circumstances ... and they alone
         are the judges of the facts.  It is not enough that their  decision
         on these facts may seem harsh to people who have not heard and read
         the evidence and arguments which they have heard and  read.   Their
         decisions should be respected unless it is quite  clear  that  they
         have misdirected themselves in law.  Appellate  courts  should  not
         rush to find such  misdirection  simply  because  they  might  have
         reached a different conclusion on the facts or  express  themselves
         differently."

 8. Regarding Judge Wylie's consideration on the exceptional circumstances,
    they do not reach the level of perversity or irrationality  that  would
    be necessary for one to find a material  error  of  law.   Consequently
    that ground is not made out.

 9. Turning to the remaining ground that was not mentioned in the grant  of
    permission but which I consider at any rate,  the  Secretary  of  State
    generally complains that the  judge  has  allowed  the  appeal  without
    giving consideration to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  In my  view  the
    judge gives due regard to the statutory considerations at paragraph  26
    of the determination.  This is plainly so given that the  judge  states
    in terms that she has "had regard" to Section 117A and 117B of the 2002
    Act and that she also has taken into account the consideration that the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest,
    and furthermore that the family and private life of the Appellant  were
    established whilst she was present in the UK  unlawfully.  Consequently
    to my mind the judge has given the due regard required of  her  to  the
    statutory considerations under Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

10. Finally the Secretary of State attempted to further  argue  that  there
    was an inadequacy of reasoning in the determination. I  made  clear  to
    the Presenting Officer that the Grounds of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal upon which permission was granted,  did  not  complain  of  an
    inadequacy of reasoning but went towards the Article 8  assessment  and
    the consideration of 117B of the 2002 Act.  I  therefore  informed  the
    Presenting Officer in  clear  terms  that  if  there  were  to  be  any
    consideration of a reasons challenge, the Secretary of State  would  be
    required to make an application seeking permission  to  appeal  out  of
    time and an application for an extension of time for that ground to  be
    considered with explanation for the delay in  seeking  permission.   No
    application was forthcoming and consequently I have not  had  cause  to
    consider any complaint concerning the adequacy of reasons given in  the
    determination. At any rate, in my view the judge has  given  sufficient
    reasons for her determination and has clearly formed a  view  that  was
    open to her based upon the evidence heard and seen by her firsthand and
    having formed a view as to the proportionality of the scenario  as  she
    was entitled to do.  This was particularly so given that the  Secretary
    of State chose not to attend the hearing and consequently there was  no
    cross-examination to contradict the Appellant's oral evidence  nor  any
    submissions made that could counteract the Appellant's  evidence  heard
    by the judge.

11. Consequently I do not find that  there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    determination such that it should be set aside.



Notice of Decision

12. The appeal of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed and the  Respondent's
    appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 10 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

