
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/02038/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 15 November 2016                      |On 22 December 2016       |
|                                         |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              Miss AYRA SALMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel
      (instructed by D J Webb & Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Pedro on 11 April 2016 against the  determination
           of First-tier Tribunal Judge R Hussain  who  had  dismissed  the
           Appellant's appeal seeking settlement on Article 8 ECHR  grounds
           as the de  facto  adopted  child  of  a  British  Citizen.   The
           decision and reasons was promulgated on 12 October 2015.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  Born on 20 July  2006,
           she had entered the United Kingdom as a visitor with her British
           Citizen mother on 18 January 2013 and has never returned.  On  9
           April 2013 she had applied through her mother for ILR on Article
           8 ECHR grounds.  On 15 October 2014 a judge  of  the  First-tier
           Tribunal  had  found  that  the  Respondent's  original  refusal
           decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The  fresh
           decision, from which the present  appeal  stems,  was  dated  18
           December 2014.  The Secretary of State considered  that  it  was
           proportionate to  expect  the  Appellant  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom and  to  make  a  fresh,  Immigration  Rules  compliant,
           application.  Judge R  Hussain  dismissed  the  appeal  on  that
           basis,  finding  that  any  interruption  in   the   Appellant's
           education would be temporary and would in effect  cause  her  no
           harm.  She could be accompanied by her mother.  Section 117B  of
           the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied as  the
           Appellant's status had always been precarious.   There  were  no
           special  difficulties  faced  by  the  Appellant's   mother   in
           Pakistan. Hence the appeal was dismissed.


      3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable that the judge had failed to  consider  paragraph  309A
           and  311  of  the  Immigration   Rules,   which   vitiated   his
           proportionality  assessment.   An  allegation  about  procedural
           fairness was refused permission to appeal.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.




      Submissions


      5.    Mr Sharma for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary he argued that  the  judge  should
           have considered the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to  de  facto
           adoptions, paragraph 309A and 311.  The  requirements  of  those
           rules were met by the Appellant.  It was a material error of law
           to have failed to do so, because the Article 8  ECHR  evaluation
           could only be conducted in that way.  It had been wrong  of  the
           judge  to  in  effect  blame  the  Appellant  for   an   adverse
           immigration history for which she was  not  responsible.   There
           had been  a  change  of  circumstances  which  had  led  to  the
           overstay.  The decision and reasons  should  be  set  aside  and
           remade in the Appellant's favour.


      6.    Ms Brocklesby-Weller for the Respondent submitted  that  it  was
           plain that the relevant Immigration  Rules  had  not  been  met.
           Bringing a child into the United Kingdom on a visit visa was not
           the route for an in country application for leave to remain  and
           was not possible.  Appendix FM was the  main  prescribed  route.
           The Article 8 ECHR claim had to fail because there was  a  route
           within the Immigration Rules.


      7.    In reply, Mr  Sharma  submitted  that  the  possibility  of  the
           alternative possibility remedy of a fresh application was not an
           answer.  Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 was relevant.   There  was  no
           legitimate objective in requiring an out of country application.
            In any event the section 55 duty to safeguard  the  Appellant's
           best interests should have been  applied.   The  mother  of  the
           child had been placed in an impossible situation, i.e., to  wait
           indefinitely in Pakistan for an adoption order or to  bring  the
           child to the United Kingdom.   The  appeal  must  succeed  under
           Article 8 ECHR.




      No material error of law finding


      8.    The tribunal considers that the arguments advanced by Mr  Sharma
           were ultimately specious, all smoke and mirrors.   The  argument
           that the judge should have  considered  the  de  facto  adoption
           provisions of the Immigration Rules is  mistaken  and  had  been
           sufficiently addressed  by  him  at  [5]  of  the  decision  and
           reasons.  There was no argument at any stage that the  Appellant
           was able  to  satisfy  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE.   No
           application had been made under any relevant  provision  of  the
           Immigration Rules.


      9.    As Ms Brockelsby-Weller  pointed  out,  the  Appellant  was  not
           eligible under the de facto adopted children provisions  in  any
           event:


            "311. The requirements to be met in the case of a child  seeking
           indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the  adopted
           child of a parent or parents present and settled in  the  United
           Kingdom are that he: ...


            (i)  (e) in the case of a de facto adoption  one  parent  has  a
           right of abode in the United  Kingdom  or  indefinite  leave  to
           enter or remain in the United Kingdom and is  seeking  admission
           to the United Kingdom on the same occasion for  the  purpose  of
           settlement...                                                  "










      10.   The  provisions  relating  to  adopted  children  are  obviously
           intended to promote the welfare and protection of children.   As
           the First-tier Tribunal Judge found, in effect  the  Appellant's
           mother simply took the law into her own hands after the  failure
           of her marriage in Pakistan and brought  the  Appellant  to  the
           United Kingdom on  a  visit  visa  rather  than  troubling  with
           formalities in either country.  As the judge  found  for  secure
           reasons (see  [12]  onwards  of  the  decision),  there  was  no
           "pleasure trip", and no intention to  return  the  Appellant  to
           Pakistan.  The Appellant's mother commenced work in  the  United
           Kingdom immediately.  She was, of course, free to  do  so  as  a
           British  Citizen.   But  she  had  no  right  to  disregard  the
           Immigration Rules in so far as they applied to the Appellant,  a
           Pakistani national.  It is also significant, as  the  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge, found, that the Appellant had not  been  legally
           adopted in Pakistan: see [14] of the  decision,  which  was  not
           challenged.  That  underlines  the  potential  child  protection
           issues in such appeals.


      11.   It is difficult to see how it could ever be proportionate  under
           Article 8 ECHR for such  conduct  to  be  condoned.   The  judge
           approached the Article 8 ECHR assessment through the lens of the
           Immigration Rules and found that there was no  Immigration  Rule
           which the Appellant was able to satisfy.  The judge  found  that
           there were no compelling or exceptional circumstances, as he was
           entitled to do.  There was nothing to  prevent  the  Appellant's
           mother from returning with the Appellant to Pakistan and  making
           any settlement application for which  the  child  was  eligible.
           This appeal was always going to fail on proportionality  grounds
           under Article 8 ECHR.  It remains  open  for  the  Appellant  to
           apply for entry clearance under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
           Rules, which is the step she must take through her mother unless
           the Secretary of State permits another approach.


      12.   The tribunal finds that there was no material error  of  law  in
           the First-tier Tribunal's decision. The appeal is dismissed.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.


      Signed                                  Dated 22/12/2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


