



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/02184/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 July 2014                            |On 26 August 2014          |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before
                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                                MR HAMAD KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE

   Representation:
   For the appellant:      In person
   For the Respondent: Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  His  date  of  birth  is  10
      August 1989. His application for leave to remain in the UK as a tier 4
      (General) Student Migrant made on 21 October 2013 was refused  by  the
      respondent for reasons given in her decision letter dated 17  December
      2013. Judge Tootell at Hatton Cross heard his appeal on 27 March 2014.
      The First tier judge dismissed the appeal for  reasons  given  in  his
      determination which was promulgated on 29 April 2014. The judge  heard
      oral evidence from the appellant. The Judge found the appellant to  be
      a credible witness. The Judge said, "I  further  accept  that  he  was
      hoping to supplement his original  application  with  a  further  bank
      account statement and better  English  language  results  due  to  the
      mistaken advice which he had been given by the college and  a  lawyer,
      that he could do so. Regrettably  that  advice  was  quite  wrong  for
      reasons which appear above at Paragraphs 30-32 of this  determination"
      In the said paragraphs the Judge has referred to Section 85 (A) of the
      2002 Act which was brought into force  on  23  May  2011,  Section  85
      (A)(4)( and the decision of the Court of appeal in Khatel [2013]  EWCA
      Civ 754. On the evidence before  him  the  Judge  concluded  that  the
      appellant did not hold his funds in a bank account  for  the  required
      period and secondly that he was not in a position to  submit  adequate
      English language certificate results as at  October  2013.  The  Judge
      said, "I  have  no  alternative  but  to  find  that  the  Appellant's
      application did not meet the requirements of  Paragraph  245ZX(c)  and
      (d) of the Immigration Rules. I therefore dismiss the appeal".

   2. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the Upper
      tribunal  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had  "not  considered  the
      application of Gulshan or whether the gateway can be passed through to
      consider whether there has been a breach of Article 8....."

   3. Permission to appeal was granted on 11  June  2014  by  Judge  P  J  M
      Hollingworth, a Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal.

   4. On 18 June 2014 the respondent put in her response to  the  appellant'
      grounds of appeal under rule 24, opposing the  appeal  and  submitting
      that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself  appropriately  and  his  non
      consideration of the appellant's claim was not in  material  error  of
      law as it had not been raised and in the  alternative  it  would  have
      made no difference to the outcome of the  case  as  there  is  nothing
      exceptional or compelling about  the  appellant's  circumstances  that
      would warrant this case being granted outside of the rules.

   5. At the hearing before me the appellant was once again unrepresented as
      he was before the First-tier Tribunal. I explained  the  procedure  to
      him and asked him if he felt that he needed legal  representation.  He
      said he understood the procedure  and  that  he  did  not  want  legal
      representation. He repeated his grounds and said that a solicitor  had
      wrongly advised him that he did not need to  prove  that  he  had  the
      funds needed by submission of bank statements. He said that he had the
      money in cash at the time. Ms Pal argued that the  requirements  under
      the Rules had not been met at the time when the application  was  made
      and therefore its refusal was perfectly justified as Judge Tootell had
      concluded. She said that as far as Article 8 claim  is  concerned.  It
      had not been pleaded  and  in  any  case  as  required  by  the  legal
      principles established by the decision in Gulshan  there  was  nothing
      exceptional or compelling in the facts of this case to  warrant  grant
      of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

   6. Having given careful consideration to all the relevant facts  and  the
      law, I find that the decision of Judge Tootell  was  not  in  material
      error of law for the reasons argued by Ms Pal. The principles set down
      in Gulshan are  of  no  avail  to  the  appellant.  This  appeal  must
      therefore be dismissed.

   7. However given the positive credibility findings made by Judge  Tootell
      regarding the appellant's claim that he fell foul of the rules because
      of wrong advice by college and a professional, I respectfully  suggest
      that the respondent should consider grant of leave on  an  exceptional
      basis to enable him to complete his studies.



FEE AWARD
Appeal having been dismissed there can be no award.

ANONYMITY DIRECTION
None has been sought and circumstances of the case do not warrant such
direction.




Judge Drabu CBE
Judge of the First Tier Tribunal sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper
Tribunal.
17 August 2014


























