
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02907/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On  31st October 2014                |On 6th November 2014                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr P Haywood, Counsel instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The Secretary of State is the appellant in this matter  but  I  will
       refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in April 1981. She came  to
       the UK for the first time in December 2003 using a  false  identity.
       She left the UK in  March  2011  but  re-entered  with  leave  as  a
       business visitor in her correct identity on 1st September 2011,  and
       was granted leave to  enter  until  24th  February  2012.   On  21st
       February 2012 the appellant made an application for an EEA residence
       card on the basis of a derivative right of residence. The  appellant
       argues that she is the primary carer for her three  children:  N,  W
       and B who are all British citizens  and  thus  she  is  entitled  to
       remain  under  regulation  15A  (4A)  of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
       Regulations 2006. It is argued that the father, Mr A is not involved
       with the upbringing of  the  children  and  had  committed  acts  of
       domestic violence on the appellant.

    3. This application was rejected on 20th March 2012. She  reapplied  on
       11th April 2012, but the application was rejected on 26th June 2012.
       She re-applied on 10th October 2012. The application was refused  on
       16th December 2013, and the appellant appealed. Her  appeal  against
       the decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shanahan in  a
       determination promulgated on the 18th August 2014.

    4. The Secretary of State appealed and permission to appeal was granted
       on 25th September 2014 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pedro  on
       the basis that it was arguable that the First-tier judge  had  erred
       in law in misdirecting herself legally and failing to give  adequate
       reasons as to why the children could not remain in  the  UK  if  the
       appellant was required to leave the UK.

    5. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    6. Mr Armstrong relied upon the grounds of appeal.

    7. He argued that the children could remain in the UK if the  appellant
       was required to leave because there was evidence that the father was
       willing to look after them. It was recorded at paragraph  7  of  the
       determination that when the children's births were registered  their
       father, Mr A, had attended so that he could  obtain  benefits  (this
       would have been in 2004, 2008 and 2009), and that he  had  tried  to
       obtain the children to  make  a  benefits  claim  in  2011.  It  was
       therefore incorrect to find that there was no  one  who  could  take
       responsibility for them at paragraph 24 of  the  determination,  and
       therefore Regulation 15A(4A)(c) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
       2006 had been dealt with  incorrectly.   MA  and  SM  (Zambrano:  EU
       children outside the EU) Iran [2013]  UKUT  380  is  authority  that
       Article 20 of the TFEU would not be infringed if there was: "another
       ascendant relative who has the right of residence in the UK, and who
       can and will in practice care for the child".

    8. Orally Mr Armstrong added that it was an error  for  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to have concluded that Mr A was not able to  care  for  the
       children without any evidence  directly  from  him  in  terms  of  a
       witness statement or other evidence. The school  evidence  and  that
       from the local Social Services was all based on what  the  appellant
       had told them.

    9. The Secretary of State also argued that the determination was flawed
       because there was a fourth child of the appellant, whose father  was
       Mr A's cousin, who is not  able  to  be  cared  for  by  his  father
       according to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal. However  there
       was no evidence that this father would not assume responsibility for
       that child if the appellant had to leave the UK.

   10. Mr Haywood submitted that he relied upon his skeleton  argument  and
       that I should dismiss the appeal. In summary  in  this  document  he
       submits that the Secretary of  State  accepts  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was entitled to find  the  appellant  a  credible  witness.
       Further  there  is  no  dispute  to  the  finding  that  the   other
       documentary evidence supported the appellant's account that  she  is
       the primary carer  for  the  three  British  citizen  children.  The
       challenge by the Secretary of State addressed only  whether  someone
       else could look after the children if the appellant was removed, not
       whether the appellant  was  the  primary  carer:  the  issue  to  be
       determine  under  Regulation  15A(4A)  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
       Regulations 2006. It is  therefore  submitted  that  she  could  not
       demonstrate a material error of law.

   11. Further it is contrary to the evidence before the Tribunal  to  find
       that the three children could be cared for by their  father,  Mr  A.
       The evidence at paragraph 7 is of a man who only wanted to have  the
       children to make a benefits claim and who had not  been  in  contact
       with the children or the appellant since  2011.  The  appellant  had
       described Mr A as a person who has sexually, physically and mentally
       abused her. She has sought advice from MK Act (a  domestic  violence
       intervention service)  and  the  local  Social  Services  about  his
       violence, and her fears  that  he  would  abuse  the  children;  and
       provided letters from these organisations. This evidence  was  found
       to be plausible by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph  20  of  the
       determination. It  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  duty  of  the
       Secretary of State to act in the best interests of the  children  in
       safeguarding and promoting their welfare in accordance with s.55  of
       the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 to find that Mr  A
       was a suitable carer for the children. It could not  be  right  that
       the appellant was obliged to call evidence from Mr A, who would be a
       hostile witness and in the context of what he had  done  to  her  in
       terms of domestic violence. It would have been for the Secretary  of
       State to call Mr A if they felt this was the right thing to do.

   12. As the three older children are British citizens and  the  appellant
       has been found to be their primary carer the position of the  fourth
       child (who did  not  form  part  of  the  original  application)  is
       irrelevant. Any error in relation to this child cannot be  material.



   13. At the end of the hearing I told the parties that I found  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal had not erred in law but that I would set out my
       full reasons in writing.

Conclusions

   14. I find that Judge Shanahan directed  herself  correctly  as  to  the
       legal requirements  of  Regulation  15A  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006. She specifically sets out Regulation 15A(7)  which
       defines primary carer as a person who  has  "primary  responsibility
       for that person's care" and then looks at the  evidence  before  her
       and concludes in the final paragraph of her determination, paragraph
       24, that this appellant is the primary carer for her children.

   15. The case of MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside  the  EU)  Iran
       does, in a review of previous authorities,  look  at  a  case  which
       states that the rights of an EU child under Article 20 of the Treaty
       on the  Functioning  of  the  European  Union  (TFEU)  will  not  be
       infringed if another ascendant relative with the right of  residence
       in the EU "can and  will  in  practice  care  for  the  child".  The
       Tribunal did not consider Regulation 15A of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2006 as it was agreed by the parties  that  it  did  not
       apply to the appellants in that appeal as  they  and  their  British
       children were not at that time in the UK.   However  in  determining
       the appeal of MA the Tribunal found that the father in that case was
       not  able  to  care  for  the  EU  child  without  "more   than   an
       insignificant risk" to the child's essential well-being due  to  his
       mental health issues, and thus that the appellant  was  entitled  to
       come to the UK in accordance with Article 20 of the TFEU  to  ensure
       that her British child  had  the  benefit  of  his  British  and  EU
       citizenship.

   16. In this appeal Judge Shanahan finds the appellant to be  a  credible
       witness. The appellant has given evidence that the  British  citizen
       father of the children had subjected her to verbal, physical, sexual
       and emotional abuse. She had provided documentary evidence that  she
       had sought advice about  him  from  relevant  agencies  including  a
       domestic violence charity, MK ACT, and the local Social Services and
       the dangers she felt he posed to her and the children. The fact that
       the appellant gave evidence that up  to  2011  that  the  children's
       father had had an interest in the children  on  the  basis  that  he
       could obtain extra state benefits using their existence (as recorded
       at paragraph 7 of her determination) does not alter  the  fact  that
       the evidence put to Judge Shanahan was that this father was one  who
       would pose "more than an insignificant risk" to the essential  well-
       being of his children.

   17. Judge Shanahan was therefore entitled to find that the appellant was
       the primary carer for her three oldest British citizen  children  as
       the  evidence  before  her  was  sufficient  to  conclude  that  the
       children's father was not someone who could  or  would  in  practice
       care for the children, particularly given his history of violence to
       their mother and the fact that he had not actually had contact  with
       them since 2011.

   18. There is no requirement in the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006
       that specific evidence (such as from the other parent)  of  "primary
       responsibility" be adduced and Judge Shanahan made her decision in a
       lawful way based on relevant evidence  before  her  which  she  very
       carefully considered to be credible, looking at the reasons why  the
       respondent alleged  it  was  not  at  paragraph  18  to  20  of  her
       determination. In this case there were strong reasons  (his  history
       of violence and lack of contact over the past three  years)  why  it
       would not have been at all reasonable to  expect  the  appellant  to
       call the children's father as a witness.

   19. The appellant has a younger fourth child with another man (a  cousin
       of the father of her three older children) and her evidence is  that
       he could not care for this child because he had returned to his wife
       and could no longer help her (see paragraph 7 of the determination).
       I note that this child did not form part of the original application
       by the appellant. It is clear that the appellant is in practice this
       child's primary carer from the totality  of  evidence  before  Judge
       Shanahan.

   20. However if this evidence was not sufficient for  Judge  Shanahan  to
       make her findings in relation to him (that the  appellant  was  also
       his primary carer at paragraph 23)   as  she  did  not  have  enough
       evidence that his father could not and would not  in  practice  care
       for him if the appellant had to leave, this could not be a  material
       error of law in allowing the appeal as  the  appellant  had  clearly
       properly satisfied the test at  paragraph  15A  of  the  Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2006 (for the reasons set out above)  in  relation
       to her three older British citizen children.

Decision

   21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law.

   22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  under
       the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 is upheld.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

4th November 2014
