

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02295/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Determination Promulgated            |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 23rd March 2015                   |On 25th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR THOMAS MUCHERU
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:  Miss E Rutherford (instructed by Usman Khan
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Respondent,  with
    permission, against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge O  R
    Williams promulgated on 22nd  August  2014  by  which  he  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain on the basis of his private and family life and  to
    remove him to Kenya.

2.   For the purposes of continuity I shall refer in this  determination  to
    the Secretary of  State  as  the  Respondent  and  Mr  Mucheru  as  the
    Appellant.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  the
    basis that he found it arguable  that  the  Judge  may  have  erred  in
    failing to provide proper reasons  why  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    were exceptional or  compelling  or  whether  they  simply  amount,  as
    submitted by the Secretary of State to 'an ordinary family life claim'.

4.   The facts of this case are that the Appellant entered the  UK  in  2010
    as a T4 student.  Whilst in the  UK  lawfully  he  met,  in  2011,  and
    married, on 11th October 2013, Katie Jones, a British citizen by birth.
     Their child was born on 2nd May 2014.  Both the Appellant's  wife  and
    child are British.

5.   The Secretary of State in the grounds asserted that the Judge erred  in
    considering the appeal under Article 8 outside the  Rules  and  further
    erred in  finding  that  removal  of  the  Appellant  would  sever  his
    relationship with his wife and  child  when  the  separation  could  be
    temporary while he sought entry clearance.

6.   The Judge found, with reasons that the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his  child  and  that  the  child
    could not reasonably be expected to live in Kenya.  The  child  is  too
    young to have been inoculated against Malaria and his wife is white and
    the child mixed race. The child is entitled to grow up in  the  UK  and
    enjoy the educational, health and other benefits of his nationality.

7.   There is a reference in the determination  to  a  criminal  conviction.
    However that was disclosed to the Secretary of State in the application
    and did not form any part of the refusal.  The Judge  was  entitled  to
    consider it of no significance therefore and Mr Harrison accepted  that
    to be correct.

8.   I do not find that the determination  contained  an  error  of  law  to
    warrant it being set aside.  The finding as to the relationship between
    the Appellant and his child and that it would be unreasonable to expect
    the child to move to Kenya were findings properly open  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and sufficient to warrant the appeal being allowed.



9.   In a consideration of proportionality a Judge must  take  into  account
    the provisions of s.117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as inserted by  s.19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.  S117B  (6)
    provides that:-

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

10.  In this case,  based  on  the  Judge's  findings,  s.117B  (6)  clearly
    applied and absent the public interest in removal there  is  no  reason
    left to remove the Appellant.

11.  On the findings of the Judge, which were  based  on  the  evidence  and
    properly reasoned, the Appellant was entitled to succeed.

12.  Mr Harrison did not make any submissions to the contrary.

13.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed        Dated 25th March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
