
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/02117/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons promulgated
On 2 September 2014    On 15 January 2015


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                                     ZK
                       (Anonymity direction order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson of Counsel instructed by Morgan  Mark
                    Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW


      1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Ross promulgated on 13 June 2014, dismissing the Appellant's appeal
         against the Respondent's decision dated 19 December 2013 to  refuse
         to issue a Residence Card as the extended family member of  an  EEA
         national.




    Background


      2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 27 September  1985.
         He entered the UK on 8 May 2010, pursuant to entry clearance  as  a
         Tier 4 Student valid until 30 January 2015. On 3 September 2013 the
         Appellant applied for a Residence Card as confirmation of  a  right
         to reside in the UK on  the  basis  that  he  was  the  nephew  and
         dependant of Mr Shahid  Iqbal,  a  Portuguese  national  exercising
         'Treaty rights' in the UK.


      3. The Appellant's application was refused for reasons set  out  in  a
         'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated  19  December  2013.  A
         Notice of Immigration Decision was issued on the same date.


      4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


      5. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal for
         reasons set out in the determination promulgated on 13 June 2014.


      6. The Appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales  on
         8 July 2014.




    Error of Law


      7. I am persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  law  in
         what  was  otherwise  a  carefully  written  and  closely  reasoned
         determination, by in effect requiring dependency to  be  proved  by
         the production of  documentary  evidence  when  there  is  no  such
         requirement under EEA law or in the Immigration (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006.


      8.  The  Appellant  claimed  a  dependency  on  his  Portuguese  uncle
         predating  his  arrival  in  the  UK.  The  supporting  documentary
         evidence was limited. Otherwise the Appellant relied upon  his  own
         testimony (supported by his oral evidence at the hearing), and  the
         testimony of his uncle (who also gave evidence at the hearing).


      9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge determined the issue in the following
         terms at paragraphs 14 and 15 of the determination:


         "14.     However, the appellant told me that  he  has  never  lived
             with his uncle in  Pakistan.  It  follows  that  in  order  to
             satisfy the requirements the appellant  would  have  to  prove
             that he was a dependent of  his  uncle  in  Pakistan.  As  was
             pointed out in Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
             340 if an applicant chooses not to apply  from  abroad  for  a
             family permit under regulation 12  of  the  2006  regulations,
             thereby denying the UK authorities  an  opportunity  to  check
             documentation in the country concerned, he cannot  expect  any
             relaxation in the burden of proof that  applies  to  him  when
             seeking to  establish  an  EEA  right.  Had  he  applied  from
             Pakistan he would have had  to  produce  documents  certifying
             dependency. Dependence means  not  just  occasionally  sending
             some money to  a  person,  it  means  that  the  dependent  is
             dependent upon the third party for his everyday needs.


         15.      The evidence of dependency in this case consists of  money
             orders, which had been  sent  to  the  appellant's  father  in
             Pakistan. There is one money order on 12 May 2012, one  on  17
             December 2012. There are money orders  in  April,  May,  June,
             August 2013, and further money orders  in  2014.  These  money
             orders do not establish that the appellant was a dependent  of
             his uncle before he came to the UK, since at the time when the
             money orders were sent he  had  already  arrived  in  the  UK,
             having arrived here in 2010. There is  no  evidence  that  the
             appellant was a dependent  of  his  uncle  when  he  lived  in
             Pakistan, or that his uncle was sending money  from  Portugal.
             Furthermore, the appellant came to the UK as a student, and he
             has produced no evidence that his uncle has paid for his  fees
             as he claimed.  I  therefore  conclude  that  the  appellant's
             appeal based on his  being  an  extended  family  member  must
             fail."


     10. The Judge was correct to identify that there was no  difference  in
         the burden of proof as between  an  in-country  and  out-of-country
         application. In using the word 'burden'  I  acknowledge  the  Judge
         must have had in mind both 'onus' and 'standard' of proof. Be  that
         as it may, neither the burden of proof nor the  standard  of  proof
         equate to, or inevitably dictate, the method of  proof.  The  Judge
         was in error to state that there was no evidence of dependence:  in
         effect, what the Judge was saying was that there was no documentary
         evidence of dependence, which was to disregard the oral evidence of
         dependence. There is no finding on the credibility of the Appellant
         and his uncle, and as such no finding  as  to  the  reliability  or
         otherwise of their assertions of dependence.


     11. I  entirely  accept,  consistent  with  the  Judge's  reference  to
         Ihemedu, and perhaps more pertinently paragraph 17 of  Dauhoo  (EEA
         Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC) that a  decision-maker
         is entitled to have regard to the absence of supporting  documents.
         But, in my judgement, this does not obviate the requirement also to
         determine the issue of fact by reference to all  of  the  available
         evidence, which necessarily requires a finding  on  oral  testimony
         even when unsupported by satisfactory documentary evidence.


     12. It follows that the Judge materially erred in law, and his decision
         must be set aside.


     13. In all the circumstances, and in  particular  because  it  will  be
         necessary for a full rehearing to take  place,  it  is  appropriate
         that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to a
         Judge other than Judge Ross, for the decision in the appeal  to  be
         remade.


     14. It is not necessary to make any specific directions in  respect  of
         the rehearing: standard directions will suffice whereby any further
         materials must be filed and served within seven  days  of  the  new
         hearing.




    Notice of Decision


     15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained an error of
         law and is set aside.


     16. The decision in the appeal is to be remade  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     14 January 2014
