
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02539/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 September 2014                           |On 16 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                             MR Mohammad Hossain
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Z. Khan, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. No application has been made for anonymity  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is no reason why such an order should be made.

 2. The appellant, born 13 August 1988, is a citizen of Bangladesh.

 3. He made application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier
    4 (General) Student and for a biometric residence permit.

 4.  The  respondent  refused  that  application  and  the  appellant  duly
    appealed.  An appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N  M
    K Lawrence who, following a hearing at Hatton Cross, in a determination
    promulgated on 30 June 2014, dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 5. On 23  July  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly  granted
    permission to appeal.  His reasons for so doing were:-

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lawrence) who, in a
             determination promulgated on 30th  June  2014,  dismissed  his
             appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse   his
             application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
             Migrant and to remove him from the United Kingdom.

         2.   The application contends that the Tribunal misinterpreted  and
             misapplied the requirements  of  paragraph  245ZX(ha)  of  the
             Immigration Rules  [paragraph  9  of  the  determination]  and
             failed to give any reasons for finding  that  the  appellant's
             IELTS scores did not meet the requirements of the  Rules  when
             in  fact  they  plainly  did   so   [paragraph   10   of   the
             determination].  The grounds are arguable."

 6. Before me today  both  representatives  sought  time  to  consider  the
    position between themselves.

 7. In particular they considered two documents.  The first being the  Home
    Office Tier 4 Guidance based on the Immigration  Rules  valid  from  17
    January 2014.  In particular my attention was drawn to the following:-

         "Applications made on or after 6 April 2012

         For applications made on or after 6 April 2012, paragraph 245ZX(ha)
         of the Immigration Rules restricts Tier 4 (General) Students  to  a
         maximum of five years' study at degree level or above.  Any  period
         studying at degree level or above in the  student  route  in  place
         before 31 March 2009 also counts  toward  the  maximum  five  years
         permitted at this level.  Degree level courses are defined as those
         at:

           . National Qualification Framework (NQF) level 6

           . Qualifications and Credit Framework (QCF) level 6

           . Scottish Credit and Qualification Framework level 9."

 8. My attention was also drawn to  page  8  of  the  appellant's  original
    bundle placed before the First-tier Tribunal where it is shown  that  a
    band score under the IELTS scheme of 5.0/5.5/6.0 is  equivalent  to  B2
    under the Common European Framework of Reference levels.

 9. The grounds effectively assert that the judge erred in not  recognising
    that the appellant was able to meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules.

10. Ms Everett conceded that the respondent's own guidance  concluded  that
    scores between 5.0' 5.5 and 6.00 on a relevant module  were  equivalent
    to B2 as per the documentation within the appellant's original  bundle.
    Also that the judge materially erred in concluding that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules by  reason  of
    miscalculating that the pre-sessional English course that the appellant
    undertook did not count toward the five year maximum period.

11. In all the circumstances therefore it was conceded that the  judge  had
    materially erred as detailed within the grounds seeking  permission  to
    appeal.

12. That concession, I find to be correctly made, as my own analysis of the
    materials put forward  in  this  appeal  suggest  that  the  judge  has
    materially erred for all the reasons put  forward  within  the  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal.

Conclusions

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

14. I set aside the decision.

15. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

16. Anonymity direction not made.






Signed                                  Date 16 September 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard








TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In light of my decision to remake the decision in  the  appeal  by  allowing
it, I have considered whether to make a fee award (Rule 23A (Costs)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and Section  12(4)(a)
of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).

I have regard to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).  I make a whole fee award.  This is  an
appeal that has succeeded  and  on  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's
position and concession today the  evidence  should  have  resulted  in  the
original application being granted by the respondent.






Signed                                  Date 16 September2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


