
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02957/2013
     IA/02960/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the Papers at Field House       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th February 2014                          |On 7th March 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MRS DEEPTI WADHAWAN ARORA
                               MR KARAN ARORA

                                                                 Respondents



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The claimants are citizens of Indian and are  husband and wife.

2.   The first claimant sought to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant by an application dated 4 April  2012.   This
    was refused by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  in  a
    notice of refusal dated 15 January 2013.

3.   She did not obtain the award  of  her  qualification  until  after  her
    application was made but before the decision.

4.   The application  was  refused  because  it  did  not  accord  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 245ZH(c).  The  claimants  sought  to  appeal
    against that decision which  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Morgan on 15 May 2013.  At that time there had been a decision of
    the Upper Tribunal in Khatel and Others  (Section 85A;  any  effect  of
    continuing application) [20123] UKUT 44 (IAC).   It  provided  for  the
    appeal to be a continuing one until the decision was  made.   In  those
    circumstances the appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

5.   The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  sought  to  appeal
    against that decision on the basis that Khatel had been   overruled  in
    Raju and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 754.  Thus the decision was reinstated,
    namely that the first claimant would fail to meet the conditions of the
    Immigration Rules in the circumstances of her application.

6.   Leave to appeal was granted to the SSHD on that basis  and  the  matter
    came before Lord Justice Bannantyne and myself on 12 September 2013.

7.   Mr  Khan,  who  then  represented  the  claimants,  accepted  that  the
    Tribunal should follow  Raju.   Nevertheless  he  indicated  that  that
    decision was in the process of being appealed to the Supreme Court  and
    that permission to appeal against that decision had been  granted.   He
    said that there was little practical point in the  panel  deciding  the
    appeal as an application would simply be made to  stay proceedings.

8.   The second issue arose concerning Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  a  matter
    which had not been dealt with by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  He
    indicated that he was in difficulties in not  having  the  material  to
    properly present to the Tribunal in  support  of  that  aspect  of  the
    matter.

9.   Miss Kiss, who represented the SSHD on that  occasion,  invited  us  to
    determine the appeal without delay, but did concede  that  the  judge's
    approach to Article 8 was defective in that  that  aspect  should  have
    been considered as part of the overall determination.

10.  The panel decided that, in the interests of justice  ,there  should  be
    an adjournment of the appeal to be listed For Mention on the first week
    of January 2014.

11.  Thus the matter stood as such. There has been  received  correspondence
    from Work Permits Experts who have been duly appointed  and  authorised
    to represent the claimants in the  appeal.   They  were  instructed  to
    withdraw the appeals on an immediate basis and a letter to that  effect
    is in the Tribunal file dated 16th December 2013.

12.  Under the terms  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  a  party
    requires the permission of the Upper Tribunal in order to withdraw  any
    appeal.

13.  In a practical sense, however, this is not the  claimants'  appeal  but
    the appeal of the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.   That
    appeal is properly before the Upper Tribunal to determine. It  is  not,
    therefore, open to the claimants to withdraw that appeal .

14.  The matter had been adorned to await the outcome of any  decision  from
    the Divisional Court.

15.  What I understand from the letter  of  16  December  2013,  seeking  to
    withdraw the claimants' outstanding appeal, is that they no longer wish
    to proceed with the appeal as such before the Upper Tribunal.

16.  That being the understanding which I have of the letter,  it  seems  to
    me that it is in the interests of justice therefore not  to  allow  the
    appeal to drift on to await the outcome in the future.

17.  Given that the claimants are the respondents  in  this  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,  it  is  clear  from  the
    contents for the letter of withdrawal that the claimants no longer seek
    to contest that which is averred by the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department, namely that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was in  error  in
    allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules given the  decision  in
    Raju and Others.

18.  The claimants having made their  position  clear  in  that  letter,  it
    seems to me that no useful purpose is  to  be  served  by  calling  the
    parties together for the purposes of an oral hearing. It is clear  that
    the claimants wish to play no further part in the  proceedings  and  to
    terminate such participation in the appeal process as may be the  case.
    In those  circumstances  I  shall  proceed  to  deal  with  the  appeal
    forthwith upon the papers.

19.  In respect of the finding by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the
    award of the qualification after application but  before  decision  was
    properly to be considered under the Rules that position  has  now  been
    reversed by the decision in Raju and Others.

20.  Accordingly I find, therefore, that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was in error and that that decision should be set  aside
    to be remade.

21.  I proceed therefore to remake the decision in accordance with the  most
    recent jurisprudence of the Divisional Court, namely that of  Raju  and
    Others and find therefore that it  is  plain  that  the  claimants,  in
    particular the first claimant, did  not  meet  the  conditions  of  the
    Immigration Rules and therefore it follows that the  claimants'  appeal
    in respect of that matter is to be dismissed.

22.  It is clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  consider
    Article 8 of the ECHR and that is a material error as conceded by  Miss
    Kiss on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department.
    Therefore that aspect of the decision is also to be  set  aside  to  be
    remade.

23.  I commented to Mr Khan who represented the claimants  at  the   heading
    of 12 September 2013 that there was a paucity of  evidence  upon  which
    the basis of Article 8 could  be fairly decided.  That was one  of  the
    reasons for the adjournment  in  order  to  obtain  that  such  further
    evidence.  None has been  presented before me.

24.  I bear in mind what has been  said in  the  decision  of  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, in particular the relationship between Article  8
    of the ECHR and the Immigration Rules themselves.

25.  The Tribunal in MF held that the new Rules were themselves  a  complete
    code and that the exceptional circumstances to  be  considered  in  the
    balancing exercise involved the application of a  proportionality  test
    as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence.

26.  In  no  sense  seeking  to  import  the  exceptionality  test,  it  was
    recognised within the jurisprudence that if somebody fails to meet  the
    Immigration Rules it will be in very rare situations  that  they  would
    succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.  In this case there is  a  paucity
    of material for me to consider that any of the  claimants'  fundamental
    human rights have been breached by the decision that has been made.

27.  Indeed as a matter of practicality it is to be noted that although  the
    application for leave to remain was refused no removal directions  were
    set.  Thus until such directions are made it would be for the claimants
    to return to India voluntarily.  The alternative is for  them  to  wait
    until any removal decision is made which of itself  would  enable  them
    not raise any matters pertaining  to  their  human  rights  by  way  of
    appeal.

28.  In all the circumstances, therefore, the appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department is allowed.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside.  In respect of the immigration decision the
    claimants' appeal is dismissed.  In respect of any appeal  relating  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR as made by the claimants that also is dismissed


Signed                                  Date 05/03/2014

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
