

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02339/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 24th November 2015                    |               On 8th December 2015   |
|                                         |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                OZIOMA ERIUGO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Jones, Advocate, instructed by Haque &
                    Hausmann, Solicitors, Newcastle
For the Respondent:  Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant applied on 15th September 2014 for a residence card under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  Her application was based on a
    retained right of residence following her divorce from an EEA national.

 2. The respondent refused her  application  for  reasons  explained  in  a
    decision dated 23rd and served on 29th December 2014.   The  respondent
    said that the appellant required  to  provide  evidence  that  her  EEA
    national former spouse had been exercising free movement rights at  the
    date of the divorce, which was 27th January 2014, and continued:

         "You have provided no evidence as to whether the EEA  national  was
         exercising treaty rights in the UK at the date of  divorce  and  we
         have conducted further checks and this shows that from 2013 [actual
         date unspecified] until  present  your  [former  spouse]  has  been
         claiming benefits and therefore does not qualify."

 3. The respondent went on to say that there was also insufficient evidence
    that the appellant herself had been a worker or otherwise qualified  in
    terms of the Regulations.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In her grounds, she
    said she had submitted evidence that  her  former  spouse  had  been  a
    worker from 2008 to 2012 and from 2013 (actual date again  unspecified)
    had been on jobseeker's benefit.  She referred to evidence submitted of
    her own employment.  In additional grounds, she said that she  believed
    she had a basis of stay in the UK because she had "a child with my  ex-
    husband, who  is  6  years  of  age  an  EEA  national  with  Slovakian
    citizenship".  She had custody of the child.  She  mentioned  that  she
    also has another daughter, age 9, who had been in the UK since birth.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge McGrade dismissed the appellant's appeal by a
    determination promulgated on 20th May 2015.  At  paragraph  8  he  held
    that as the former spouse had been "in receipt  of  benefits  for  some
    time prior to the date of divorce" the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    terms of Regulation 10(5).  He did not deal with the  question  whether
    the appellant had any basis of  stay  in  the  UK  in  respect  of  her
    Slovakian national child.  That point was raised, although not focussed
    in terms of the Regulations, in the additional grounds.  He went on  to
    dismiss the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. The appellant was not represented at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
    She subsequently instructed solicitors  who  submitted  an  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, on three grounds:

         1. Definition of a 'qualified person' in Regulation  6(1)  includes
             (a) a jobseeker.  The judge failed to apply that provision.

         2. The judge failed to consider that the appellant is  the  primary
             carer of an EEA national child, under  reference  to  Zambrano
             case C/34/09.

         3. The judge failed to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7. It is clear that the first ground discloses legal error.  No doubt  the
    judge was led into that error partly by  the  wording  of  the  refusal
    letter, which is superficial and misleading, and partly by  absence  of
    the assistance he ought to have had from the presenting officer in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The respondent's decision and  the  determination
    are both insufficiently reasoned.  The  simple  fact  that  the  former
    spouse had been in receipt of benefits was not the end of the matter.

 8. Mrs Saddiq sought to repair the damage to the respondent's case in this
    respect by reference to the length of time for which the former  spouse
    had been in receipt of benefit prior to divorce, which appears to  have
    been just over six months.  That might have taken the remaking  of  the
    decision into another area, and  Mrs  Saddiq  was  ready  to  build  an
    argument from Yusuf (EEA - ceasing to be a jobseeker) [2015] UKUT 00433
    (IAC).  However, it is not necessary to explore  this  aspect  further,
    because the appellant was satisfied with the outcome which  emerged  on
    the basis of ground 2.

 9. Although the appellant did not bring this issue into sharp focus in the
    First-tier Tribunal, it should have been picked up  by  the  presenting
    officer and by the judge from the additional ground of appeal there.

10. The ground of appeal in the Upper Tribunal ought to have been  directed
    not to Zambrano but to Regulation 15A,  which  in  effect  incorporates
    Zambrano into the Regulations.  Only if the appellant  could  not  meet
    the terms of the Regulations would it be apt to consider  whether  they
    fully respect Zambrano and the relevant provisions of EU law, including
    the Directive on free movement.

11. The evidence filed by the appellant included her own statement and bank
    statements of her former spouse dating up to 2014.  That evidence shows
    that in terms of Regulation 15A (iii) the appellant's younger  daughter
    (a) is the child of an EEA national; (b) resided in the UK  at  a  time
    when the EEA national parent was residing in the UK as  a  worker;  and
    (c) is in education in the UK and was in education there at a time when
    the EEA national parent was in the UK.  The appellant accordingly shows
    entitlement to a derivative right of residence in terms  of  Regulation
    15A.

12. I think the judge was correct to  dismiss  the  appeal  in  respect  of
    Article 8.  There were no removal directions, and it was  open  to  the
    appellant to apply on the basis of family life, if she thought she  had
    such a case.  However, as the appellant succeeds under the Regulations,
    the third ground is of no importance.

13. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
    following  decision  is  substituted:  the  appeal  is  allowed   under
    reference to the terms of Regulation 15A(iii).

14. No anonymity order has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            30 November 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




