
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02383/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 July 2016                               |On 28 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                    Ms HELANA ABDELSHEHID MORCUS YOUSSEF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Record, Counsel for David A Grand, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt born  on  10  November  1940.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 31 December  2014
    refusing to vary her leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom and
    giving directions for her removal under Section 47 of the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Her appeal was heard by Judge of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Flynn  on  16  December  2015.   Her  appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds in  a
    decision promulgated on 11 January 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hollingworth  on  13  June
    2016.  The permission states that there is an arguable error of law  in
    relation to the Judge's finding that there is no family life, given the
    extent of the medical evidence and the significance  of  the  level  of
    care provided by the  Appellant's  son  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    permission states that it  is  arguable  that  the  Appellant`s  stable
    medical  state,  as  the  result  of  her  son's  care  and  attention,
    establishes a relationship between her and her son  which  goes  beyond
    the normal ties of affection.  The permission goes on to state that the
    Judge  should  have  conducted  a   fuller   proportionality   exercise
    explaining the weight to be attached to relevant factors.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response dated  29  June  2016.   This  states  that
    although paragraph 65 of the decision is short,  the  Judge  considered
    the  relevant  factors  in  the  Appellant's  case  in  terms  of   the
    proportionality assessment, at paragraphs 41 to  58  of  the  decision.
    These relate to a consideration of family and private  life  under  the
    Rules. The response states that the failure to meet the  terms  of  the
    Rules and the reasons given by the Judge would  be  applicable  in  any
    assessment outside the Rules.  The Judge balances these factors against
    public interest and finds they are not sufficient to  demonstrate  that
    the decision to remove is disproportionate.

 4. The Appellant attended the court in a wheelchair.

 5. There were no preliminary matters.

 6. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the terms of paragraph  276ADE
    of the Rules, relating to reintegration in Egypt  have  been  satisfied
    based on the medical reports produced on  the  Appellant  in  2014  and
    2015. She submitted that the Appellant  has  problems  with  her  daily
    functions. She takes medication and her son helps with  both  of  these
    things.  She uses a stick  to  walk  and  she  has  impaired  cognitive
    function which was accepted by the Judge.  Counsel  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 56 of the  decision  the  Judge  states  that  he  finds  the
    Appellant has not demonstrated that  there  are  any  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration  in  Egypt.   She  submitted  that  this
    conflicts with the medical reports and the Appellant's son's  evidence.
    It was submitted that the Appellant cannot establish a private life  in
    Egypt as she has no-one there to  care  for  her  and  her  health  has
    deteriorated considerably since the last time she visited  her  son  in
    the United Kingdom.  Counsel submitted that the Judge's  decision  goes
    against the weight of the evidence and the Appellant's health.  She  is
    dependent on her son.

 7. Counsel submitted that the Judge considered the claim outside the Rules
    and she referred to the Rule 24  response.   At  paragraph  65  of  the
    decision the Judge did not accept that Article 8 was  engaged  but  she
    submitted that the relationship between the Appellant and her son  goes
    beyond a normal adult relationship.  She submitted that  her  son  pays
    for her medical treatment and care and the Judge has  made  a  material
    error of law, as the terms of paragraph  276ADE  have  been  satisfied.
    She referred to the Appellant's dependence on her son.

 8. I asked about the medical reports and  she  referred  me  to  the  2014
    reports and the subsequent reports carried  out  in  2015.   These  are
    referred to in the  decision.   At  paragraphs  41  and  42  the  Judge
    considers Dr Foale's report.   The  doctor  refers  to  osteoarthritis,
    hypertension and diabetes.  He states "It should be emphasised that her
    very stable medical state is a result of the  care  and  attention  she
    receives from her son and this is proving effective".

 9. Counsel then referred to paragraph 43 and the report by Mr Winer in his
    Osteopathic and Diagnostic Clinic.  She submitted that this states that
    the Appellant has to be supported by her son and  she  uses  a  walking
    stick.  The report also states that she can only visit the toilet  with
    the assistance of her son.  She submitted that her  son  pays  for  her
    medical treatment in the United Kingdom.  I asked about this and he has
    paid for hearing aids for the Appellant.  Counsel submitted that all of
    the Appellant's medical care is paid for privately by her  son  and  he
    has paid for all the medical reports and consultations,  prescriptions,
    etc.

10. Counsel referred me to paragraph 45 of the decision in which the  judge
    states that there is no other evidence to show that  the  Appellant  is
    unable  to  walk  without  assistance  and  she  referred  me  to   the
    Appellant's statement and her son's statement.

11. Counsel then referred me to the two psychiatric reports referred to  at
    paragraph 47 of the decision.  Counsel  submitted  that  these  medical
    reports must go to her private and family life and are  sufficient  for
    her claim under the Rules to be successful.

12. I referred Counsel to paragraph 8 of the decision in  which  the  Judge
    notes that the Appellant applied for a visit visa in 2014 and told  the
    Judge that she intended to return to Egypt.  She now states she has no-
    one to go back to there and I pointed out that that must have been  the
    situation when she applied for the visit visa.  Counsel submitted  that
    her son was worried about the deterioration in  her  health  since  the
    last time he saw her, and that is why she made  the  application.   She
    submitted that the Appellant`s condition had changed by  the  time  she
    visited in July 2014.  She submitted that this is referred  to  in  the
    decision at paragraph 22.

13. I referred Counsel to paragraph 57 of the decision in which  the  Judge
    states that the  Appellant  has  also  failed  to  show  that  she  has
    sufficient financial resources to support herself in the United Kingdom
    without recourse to public funds.  He stated that Mr Asad's (her son's)
    three payslips are not sufficient evidence of his financial means.  The
    paragraph goes on to state that it is not clear that the Appellant  and
    her son have sufficient resources to support her  indefinitely  in  the
    United Kingdom.  Counsel submitted that  the  Appellant's  son  owns  a
    drinks company and I was referred to his statement in which  he  states
    that he takes full care of the Appellant and works nearby and his hours
    are flexible.

14. I was asked to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response.

16. He referred to the  Judge's  decision  at  paragraph  39  onwards.   He
    submitted that the decision makes it clear that the Judge had  all  the
    medical evidence in mind when he reached his decision.   He  refers  to
    all the reports in detail and once he has considered these comes to his
    conclusions. He refers to the Appellant's son leaving the Appellant  on
    her own from two  to  six  hours  a  day  and  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that in the decision the Judge has built a  picture  and  has
    considered all the oral evidence, not just the  medical  evidence.   He
    submitted that the Judge does not need to set out every document.  What
    he has to do is understand all  the  evidence  and  weigh  it  up.   He
    submitted that what Counsel is stating is that  the  Judge  interpreted
    the evidence in the wrong way.

17. I was referred to paragraph 48 of  the  decision  in  which  the  Judge
    refers to Dr Elias stating that the Appellant's mental  status  remains
    unchanged with a result of 22 out of 30, with possible early stages  of
    dementia.  At paragraph 49 the Judge accepts  that  the  Appellant  has
    impaired cognitive function  but  that  the  condition  appears  to  be
    stable.  The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge then  goes  on
    to consider all the factors in the round.  At paragraph 50  he  accepts
    that the Appellant's son cares for the Appellant  but  he  goes  on  to
    refer to Dr Foale's report which indicates that the Appellant has  been
    treated for her conditions in Egypt and there is no evidence  that  she
    would not be able to continue  receiving  appropriate  treatment  there
    which could be supplemented by  her  medical  advisors  in  the  United
    Kingdom on future visits.  At paragraph 52 the  Judge  makes  it  clear
    that the Appellant has failed to demonstrate  that  she  is  unable  to
    perform daily living tasks without assistance.  He accepts that she has
    no family member in Egypt but finds that she could arrange for  someone
    there to help her and continue to receive financial help from  her  son
    in the United Kingdom and perhaps her son  in  America  as  well.   The
    Judge also found that she will have friends in Egypt who can help.  She
    is a member of the church and the church community  are  likely  to  be
    able to help.  The Judge states that he is satisfied that the Appellant
    has sufficient financial resources to help  her  to  pay  for  whatever
    services she requires in Egypt.

18. The Presenting Officer at paragraph 55 refers to the Appellant being  a
    Christian in Egypt but submitted that no evidence has been provided  to
    show that she has had any problems because of this.

19. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has considered all  the
    factors in this claim and has found  against  the  Appellant.   He  has
    given proper explanations for his findings.  He submitted that for  the
    Appellant to be unable to return  to  Egypt,  there  have  to  be  very
    significant  obstacles  and  he  submitted  that  there  are  no   such
    significant obstacles in this case.

20. The Presenting Officer referred to the problematic financial  situation
    and submitted that he does not find this to be material.

21. The Presenting Officer then went on to deal with the  Judge's  findings
    on Article 8, at paragraphs 64 and 65 of the  decision.   He  submitted
    that the Judge refers to the  relevant  case  law  and  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that at  paragraph  65  he  states  that  he  is  not
    satisfied that the interference to the Appellant`s  family  or  private
    life is  sufficient  to  engage  Article  8,  notwithstanding  the  low
    threshold.   He  submitted  that  all  the  Judge's  findings  on   the
    Immigration Rules, the medical evidence and Article 8 within the  Rules
    apply when Article 8 outside the Rules  is  considered.   He  submitted
    that all the relevant evidence has been taken into account.   The  case
    of Razgar is quoted and Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act  2002  is  also  referred  to  in  connection  with  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control in the United Kingdom  and
    public interest.

22. He submitted that the Judge finds  that  the  necessity  for  effective
    immigration control outweighs this Appellant's  Article  8  rights  and
    when proportionality is assessed, the fact that the terms of the  Rules
    cannot be satisfied has to be taken into account.

23. The Presenting Officer submitted that this Appellant came to the United
    Kingdom as a visitor and still  states  that  she  always  intended  to
    return to Egypt but he submitted that it is clear that  the  Judge  did
    not believe that that  was  the  case  and  the  Judge  has  considered
    everything that was before him.  He submitted that his decision  should
    be upheld.

24. Counsel referred me to paragraph 49 of the decision in which the  Judge
    accepts that the Appellant has impaired cognitive function.  The  Judge
    states that this appears to be stable  and  states  that  there  is  no
    evidence that the Appellant is unable to live alone or function without
    constant supervision.  Counsel submitted that what the  Judge  did  not
    take into account is that because of her medical conditions, which  are
    dealt with in detail in the medical reports, paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules can  be  satisfied  as  because  of  her  health  she  will  have
    difficulty reintegrating on return to Egypt.

25. She submitted that at paragraph 52 the Judge states that the  Appellant
    failed to demonstrate that she is unable to perform daily living  tasks
    without assistance and that her son cooks for her  sometimes.   Counsel
    submitted that the medical reports are  clear.   She  cannot  do  daily
    tasks without assistance.  She cannot walk on her own.  She can be left
    alone when her son is at work but that is very different to leaving her
    on her own in Egypt.

26. Counsel submitted that the  medical  tests  and  reports  are  directly
    applicable to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules  and  that  the  Article  8
    assessment outside the Rules should have weighed in her favour  because
    of her dependence on her son in the United Kingdom.  She submitted that
    because of their special relationship the threshold of  Article  8  has
    been satisfied.  She submitted that paragraph 65  of  the  decision  is
    wrong.

27. With regard to the Appellant`s son`s financial situation, she submitted
    that he showed the Tribunal payslips and a receipt for the hearing aids
    he has purchased.  She submitted that there are material errors of  law
    in the decision and that the Appellant's intention on arriving  in  the
    United Kingdom on a visit visa was to return to Egypt. It was only when
    her son saw the deterioration in her health since the last time he  saw
    her a year ago, that she applied to remain here.   She  submitted  that
    the medical reports should be found to form very compelling  obstacles,
    preventing her return.

28. I was asked  to  set  aside  the  First-tier  decision  and  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal.

29. The grounds of application state  that  the  IDI  on  Family  Migration
    (August 2015) state that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  would  be  met  "if
    establishing a private life in the country of return would entail  very
    serious hardship for the Applicant".  The grounds state that  based  on
    the medical evidence and the oral evidence before the  Judge,  that  is
    the case here and the evidence discloses a  degree  of  dependency  and
    overall environment that would entail  very  serious  hardship  if  the
    Appellant has to go back to Egypt.   The  grounds  also  refer  to  the
    Appellant's stable medical state being as a  result  of  the  care  and
    attention she receives from her son.  The medical reports refer to  him
    being a devoted and capable carer.  The grounds state that the  Judge's
    decision is irrational and against the weight of the evidence.

30. I have carefully gone through the decision and in paragraphs 41  to  49
    the Judge has adequately considered in detail all the  medical  reports
    and the consequences of the Appellant's health.  He  is  not  satisfied
    that the evidence shows that the Appellant is unable to live  alone  or
    is  unable  to  function  without  constant   supervision   which   the
    Appellant`s  son  states  is  the  case.   Her  son  stated  that   the
    Appellant's health had deteriorated significantly around the  beginning
    of 2014 but the Judge points out that there is no evidence  to  support
    this in any of the medical or psychiatric evidence provided.  Paragraph
    51 significantly refers to Dr Foale stating that the Appellant has been
    treated for her conditions in Egypt.  There is  no  evidence  that  she
    would not be able to continue receiving  appropriate  treatment  there.
    He finds that her evidence that she could not  get  any  assistance  in
    Egypt is not credible.  She has lived there  all  her  life.   She  has
    friends there.  Her son financially can support  her  when  she  is  in
    Egypt and can get help for her there.  The Judge finds at paragraph  54
    that the Appellant has no family member in Egypt but refers to friends,
    people from the church and a sufficiency of financial resources to help
    her to pay for whatever services she requires.

31. The Judge has carefully considered all  the  evidence  before  him  and
    finds that there are no very significant obstacles to her reintegration
    in Egypt.  He has properly explained this finding  and  based  on  this
    finding he finds that paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) cannot be  satisfied  and
    so this Appellant's claim must fail under the Immigration Rules.

32. There was also an issue about the lack of evidence of  the  Appellant's
    and her son's financial resources but based  on  the  Judge's  findings
    this is not material.

33. The Judge then goes on to deal with Article 8  outside  the  Rules  and
    refers to the relevant case law.  He has considered Section 117B of the
    2002 Act relating to public interest and effective immigration control.
     He has applied the five step test laid down  in  Razgar.   He  accepts
    that she and her son have a strong bond but does not find that it  goes
    beyond normal ties of affection between mother and son. At paragraph 63
    he finds the Appellant has not  established  a  significant  degree  of
    private life in the United Kingdom and he has explained this finding in
    his decision.  He refers to her precarious status.

34. At paragraph 64 he finds that for her to return to Egypt would not be a
    disproportionate interference with her family or private  life  and  at
    paragraph 65 states that any interference would not  be  sufficient  to
    engage Article 8 notwithstanding the low threshold.  It has been argued
    before me by Counsel that this has not been properly explained but  the
    Judge's findings relating  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  in  particular
    paragraph 276ADE and all the medical reports, are clearly the reason he
    has come to this conclusion at paragraph 65.  It is not  necessary  for
    him to repeat all these findings at this point in his decision. He  has
    already explained everything throughout the  decision.   He  has  found
    that the terms of the Immigration Rules cannot be  satisfied  and  this
    has to be taken into account in his proportionality assessment and must
    weigh against the Appellant.

35. At paragraph  69  the  Judge  states  that  the  Respondent's  duty  of
    maintaining effective immigration control  outweighs  any  interference
    with Article 8.  Counsel submitted that the Appellant's  son  pays  for
    all her medical treatment. I know that he has purchased  hearing  aids,
    he has probably paid for the private medical reports  but  we  have  no
    other evidence of  him  paying  for  medical  treatment.   This  is  an
    important issue when public interest is being dealt with.

    Notice of Decision

36. I find that there are no  material  errors  of  law  in  Judge  Flynn's
    decision promulgated on 11 January 2016 and that  his  decision  should
    stand.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules
    and on human rights grounds.

37. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 28 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray




