
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02541/2014
                                                               IA/02546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2016                  |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                              Mrs Maryam Kaleem
                              Mr Shahid Hassan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Nasim, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants,  citizens  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decisions of the Secretary  of  State  dated  18th
    December 2013 to refuse their applications for leave to remain  in  the
    UK, the first Appellant under the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) scheme and  the
    second Appellant as her dependant. Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Pears  dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  Appellant  now  appeals   with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 2. In the Grounds of Appeal to this Tribunal the Appellant  contends  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in failing  to  decide  that
    the decision of the Respondent is not in accordance with the law. It is
    contended that the first Appellant was invited  by  the  Respondent  to
    attend an interview to determine whether she was a genuine entrepreneur
    and, following the  interview,  her  application  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent without granting her any opportunity to address the concerns
    raised by the Respondent following the interview. It is contended  that
    the first time the Appellant was aware of these concerns was  when  she
    received the Reasons for Refusal letter.

 3. Although the grounds  go  on  to  elaborate  the  contention  that  the
    Respondent failed to exercise discretion pursuant to paragraph 245DD(j)
    and relies on an unreported case to similar effect the appeal  was  put
    in the general terms set out in the first paragraph of the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  it  is
    arguable that the Tribunal erred in law in that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge may have misdirected himself in relation to paragraph 245DD(j) of
    the Immigration Rules (as applicable at the time of the decision).

 4. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Nasim  expanded  upon  that  ground  by
    highlighting the background to the case and submitted that in this case
    paragraph 245DD(j) and the principle  of  fairness  required  that  the
    issues raised by the Respondent  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    should have been put to the Appellant to give  her  an  opportunity  to
    respond prior to the decision being made.

 5. The Appellant applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) on
    20th  November  2012.   Mr  Nasim  submitted  that  at  that  time  the
    genuineness requirement currently in the Immigration Rules was  not  in
    existence.  Those provisions came  into  force  in  January  2013.   He
    accepted  that  this  part  of  the  Rules  was  retrospective.    This
    submission was not disputed by Ms Savage.

 6. The Appellant was invited for interview and attended interview in  June
    2013.  A summary of the interview  is  contained  in  the  Respondent's
    bundle.  The refusal was then issued in  December  2013.   It  was  not
    disputed and I accept that the reasons for refusal letter did not  take
    any issue with the mandatory documents required  under  the  Rules  but
    issue  was  taken  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  around   the
    genuineness assessment set out in paragraph 245DD(h) of the Immigration
    Rules.  The reasons for refusal letter highlights that  the  Respondent
    was not satisfied that the Appellant genuinely intends  to  invest  the
    money she has in the business or businesses.

 7. Mr Nasim went through the reasons for refusal  letter  and  highlighted
    the issues upon which the Respondent made the decision.   For  example,
    at page 3 of the reasons for refusal letter the Respondent  said  that,
    as the Appellant had not submitted a business plan, the Respondent  was
    unable to assess what  the  Appellant  was  hoping  her  company  would
    achieve over the  coming  period.   Also  it  was  indicated  that  the
    Appellant had not provided any evidence of the lease and the Respondent
    was unable to assess whether the landlord permitted  the  Appellant  to
    run the business from her home.  It was further noted at page 4 of  the
    reasons for refusal letter  that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  a
    transcript of her qualification and the modules she studied  could  not
    be assessed.

 8. The reasons for refusal letter also points out that the  Appellant  has
    not registered her business with HMRC which it states  is  a  mandatory
    requirement and that she had not provided evidence that she is  covered
    by public liability insurance or public indemnity insurance and as none
    of these had  been  provided  the  viability  and  credibility  of  her
    business was being questioned  (page  5  of  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter).  The Respondent concluded:

         "Based on  the  above  consideration  the  Secretary  of  State  is
         therefore  refusing  your  application   because   you   have   not
         satisfactorily demonstrated that you are a genuine entrepreneur, as
         set out at paragraph 245DD(h) and when assessing, on the balance of
         probabilities, the points  listed  at  paragraph  245DD(i)  of  the
         Immigration Rules."

 9. Mr Nasim submitted that the matters referred  to  in  the  Reasons  for
    Refusal letter as set out above were not required documents  under  the
    Immigration Rules and noted that the application form did not refer  to
    these  additional  documents  or  require  the  submission   of   these
    documents.  He referred to various parts of the application form  which
    indicated that these documents were not being asked for  and  were  not
    required.  For example, the  HMRC  registration  was  not  a  mandatory
    requirement on the application form.  He also referred to G18, G20, G22
    and G23 of the application form and said that the application form  did
    not ask for more documents than those submitted by  the  Appellant.  Ms
    Savage did not dispute these submissions.

10. Mr Nasim referred to paragraph 245DD(j) of the Immigration Rules  which
    gives the Secretary of State power to request further documents and  to
    refuse  an  application  if  those  documents  are  not  provided.   He
    submitted that this relates to paragraph 245DD(h) which  sets  out  the
    genuineness requirements.  He therefore submitted  that  the  power  at
    paragraph 245DD(j) relates specifically to the genuineness requirement.
     He submitted that the Appellant was interviewed and asked a number  of
    questions but nowhere  in  this  interview  was  she  asked  about  the
    specific documents later referred to in the reasons for refusal letter.
     Ms Savage was unable to point to any  question  asking  for  documents
    later referred to in the Reasons for Refusal letter apart from question
    10 where the Appellant was asked if she had brought any documents  with
    her that she wished the interviewer to see.

11. Mr Nasim submitted that the exercise of the power at paragraph 245DD(j)
    depends on the facts of the case.  He submitted that in this  case  the
    Secretary of State was required to ask the Appellant for the  documents
    because these were documents required under  paragraph  245DD(h)  which
    only came into force in January 2013.  He submitted that  an  issue  of
    unfairness arises as the Appellant  did  not  have  an  opportunity  to
    address concerns. He relied on the cases of Naved (Student - fairness -
    notice  of  points)  [2012]  UKUT  00014  (IAC)  where  the  Trinunal's
    conclusion was summarised in the head note as follows;

         "Fairness requires the Secretary of State to give an  applicant  an
         opportunity to address grounds for refusal, of  which  he  did  not
         know and could not have known, failing which the resulting decision
         may be set aside on appeal as contrary to law (without contravening
         the provisions of s. 85A of the Nationality, Asylum and Immigration
         Act 2002)."

12. Ms Savage remained of the position that no unfairness resulted  to  the
    Appellant and the  decision  was  in  accordance  with  the  law.   She
    submitted that paragraph 245AA  is  drafted  in  different  terms  from
    245DD(j).  Mr Nasim pointed out that 245AA relates  to  the  evidential
    flexibility in  relation  to  the  points-based  system  and  addresses
    concerns in relation to the substantive requirements of the  Rules  and
    it is not relevant here where paragraph 245DD(j) specifically refers to
    the requirements in 245DD(h) which go to the genuineness of  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) application.

13. I have considered all of the submissions put forward by the parties and
    I am satisfied that in the very particular circumstances of  this  case
    the Appellant was not informed  at  the  interview  of  the  additional
    documents that would be required  in  order  to  meet  the  genuineness
    requirements of the Rules.  As a result the first  time  the  Appellant
    would have been  aware  of  the  additional  documents  the  Respondent
    expected to see was in the reasons for refusal letter of 18th  December
    2013.  In these circumstances in considering  the  general  common  law
    principles  of  fairness  along  with  paragraph  245DD  (j)   of   the
    Immigration Rules the Appellant ought to have been given an opportunity
    to provide these documents.  This is particularly the case  because  in
    light of Section 85A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 the Appellant was precluded from producing any  further  documents
    at an appeal hearing.

14. Whilst I accept that this argument was not put in these terms to First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pears I note that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pears
    was directed to paragraph 245DD(j) of the Rules and the judge did  note
    at paragraph 21 that it was submitted that the Appellant had  not  been
    asked by the Respondent to provide documents which were now the  source
    of objections.

15. In these circumstances I conclude that the judge erred  in  not  giving
    proper consideration to the issue of fairness and  paragraph  245DD(j).
    I accept that the judge was  right  in  concluding  that  it  does  not
    require the Secretary of State to exercise her discretion when it is  a
    right reserved to the Secretary of State [27].  However, it is a  right
    to  reserve  to  the  Secretary  of  State  which  is  applicable   and
    exercisable in certain circumstances.  I am satisfied on the  basis  of
    the evidence before me that unfairness arose in this  case  because  of
    the very particular  circumstances  in  terms  of  the  timing  of  the
    application and the basis of the subsequent refusal being reliant  upon
    documents that were not asked for and that the Appellant could not have
    known would be required.

16. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside.  I remake the  decision  by  finding
    that the decision of the Respondent is not in accordance with  the  law
    and the decision in this application  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.  I remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  to  the
extent that the application remains  outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of
State.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 22nd January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable because the  Appellant  was
not given an opportunity to submit all documents required.


Signed   Date: 22nd January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
