
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02662/2014
                                                               IA/02668/2014
                                                               IA/02673/2014
                                                               IA/02681/2014
                                                               IA/02687/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th September 2014                          |On 13th October 2014       |
|Prepared on 25th September 2014                 |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                   MRS URMILAH BHEEKARRY (first appellant)
                MR MANISH RAI CALLEECHURN (SECOND APPELLANT)
              MISS VARSHINI DEVI CALLEECHURN (THIRD APPELLANT)
               MISS DEEPTI RAI CALLEECHURN (FOURTH APPELLANT)
              MASTER HIMANISH RAI CALLEECHURN (fifth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms J E Norman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidhyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are all citizens of Mauritius.  The first Appellant  who
    I shall refer to as the Appellant is married to  the  second  Appellant
    who I shall refer to as Mr Calleechurn.  The third,  fourth  and  fifth
    Appellants are the couple's children.  The Appellant's date of birth is
    12th July 1982, Mr Calleechurn's date of birth is 22nd March  1979  and
    the children's dates of birth are 29th December 2004, 6th October  2006
    and 17th July 2008 respectively.  The  Appellants  appealed  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 18th December  2013  to  refuse  their
    application for leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis of Article 8 (right to respect for private and  family  life)  of
    the Human Rights Convention.  Their appeals were allowed  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Thanki sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  10th  June
    2014.   The  Respondent  appeals  with  permission  against  the  first
    instance decision.  For the sake of convenience however I will continue
    to refer to the parties as they were referred to at first instance.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom with a  student  visa  on  4th
    January 2003.  She was granted leave to remain as a student  from  21st
    December 2003 until 31st January 2005 which  was  duly  extended  on  a
    number of occasions (despite a refusal in 2009) until 9th  March  2012.
    The other Appellants were granted leave to  remain  in  line  with  the
    Appellant's leave.

The Explanation for Refusal

3.   On 8th March 2012 a day before that last leave was due  to  expire  the
    Appellants made their present  application  for  leave  to  remain  the
    refusal of which has given rise to these proceedings.   The  Respondent
    considered the Appellants'  applications  for  leave  to  remain  under
    Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Appellant could not succeed under the partner route as  Mr  Calleechurn
    was not a British citizen and the Appellant did not have sole  parental
    responsibility for the third, fourth and fifth Appellants.  It was  not
    accepted that the Appellant had lost her  ties  to  Mauritius  and  she
    could not therefore succeed under  paragraph  276ADE.   The  Respondent
    considered the best interests of the children pursuant to Section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The family would be
    returning to  Mauritius  as  a  unit.   Whilst  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants had both been in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than  seven
    years it was reasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom with
    their parents and there would  be  no  breach  of  their  private  life
    rights.  The fifth Appellant whilst born  in  the  United  Kingdom  had
    lived here for less than seven years.

The Proceedings at First Instance

4.   The Judge found that the  Appellant  worked  at  a  care  home  and  Mr
    Calleechurn was a care assistant.  The  children  attended  school  and
    were well-settled there.  It was unreasonable to require the third  and
    fourth Appellants to leave the United Kingdom and relocate to Mauritius
    which would be a foreign county to them.  They had never  visited  that
    country.  They had deep roots through education and  friendships.   The
    children spoke English at all times and had  friends  and  cousins  and
    other relatives outside education.   It  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect them to leave the United Kingdom and it followed that the  fifth
    Appellant who was under the age of 7 could not be  expected  to  go  to
    Mauritius  without  his  two  older  siblings  the  third  and   fourth
    Appellants.  The parents should be allowed  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with their children. He allowed the appeal.

5.   The Respondent appealed against that decision arguing  that  the  Judge
    had erred in law by failing to consider the parents' immigration status
    as a relevant consideration when assessing whether  it  was  reasonable
    for the third and fourth Appellants to leave the United  Kingdom.   The
    child's best interests were not determinative of an immigration appeal.
     The Appellants had come to the United Kingdom for a temporary  purpose
    with no expectation of being able to remain in the United Kingdom.  The
    expectation was that they would all return once the Appellant's studies
    were completed.

6.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on  30th  July  2014.    In   granting
    permission to appeal she wrote that:-

     "The grounds assert that  the  Judge  erred  in  allowing  the  appeals
         without giving any consideration to the status of the  parents  who
         had no right to remain save as the parents of minor  children.   EV
         Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874 is relied on.  It is arguable  that
         the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining immigration control.  All grounds may be argued."

The Hearing Before Me

7.   At the outset of the hearing Counsel  raised  as  a  preliminary  issue
    whether the Respondent's appeal against the first instance decision was
    in or out of time.  The Judge's decision was promulgated  on  7th  July
    2014 but the Respondent did not lodge her appeal against that  decision
    until 21st July 2014 that is to day more than five working  days  after
    the date on which the Respondent would have been deemed  to  have  been
    served with the decision.  The Respondent contended that  she  received
    the determination on 15th July 2014 and  thus  the  appeal  was  lodged
    within time on 21st July.

8.   Perusing the Tribunal file I observed that there was a  date  stamp  of
    15th July 2014 on the  IA  212  form  which  enclosed  a  copy  of  the
    Tribunal's decision. This tended to indicate that that was the date  on
    which the Respondent received the decision. As time would not start  to
    run until the date when the Respondent received the decision her onward
    appeal was in time.  Whilst it was arguably an error for Judge Grimmett
    not to deal with the out of time issue which had  been  flagged  up  on
    form IA 65 on the Tribunal file, I was in a position to deal  with  the
    out of time issue. I decided that the Respondent's appeal was  in  time
    and the appeal could therefore proceed.

9.   In her submissions the Presenting Officer indicated  that  the  grounds
    of onward appeal were detailed and clear as to what  the  issues  were.
    The Judge had concentrated on the two children  who  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years or more but the parents had been here on
    a temporary basis and they could return to Mauritius and continue their
    life  there.   The  Judge  had  sidestepped  the  issue  of   effective
    immigration control by concentrating on  the  children.   There  was  a
    factual error in the determination where a reference appeared referring
    to the children as British citizens.  That  misunderstanding  may  have
    influenced him in his assessment of proportionality.

10.  In reply Counsel indicated that as a result of the  coming  into  force
    of Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 had been amended by the insertion of Sections 117A,
    B, C and D.  By reason of Section 117B(6) the public interest  did  not
    require a person's removal where they  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying  child  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect that child to leave the United Kingdom.

11.  I indicated to the parties that although the Respondent had  relied  on
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and the Judge
    had referred to those provisions in  his  determination,  this  was  an
    application made in March 2012 that is to say before  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE came into force in July 2012.  Following the Court  of
    Appeal decision  in  the  case  of  Edgehill[2014]  EWCA  Civ  402  the
    provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE were  not  to  be  taken
    into account in deciding whether the appeal should  or  should  not  be
    allowed under Article 8.  It would also follow that  the  jurisprudence
    under those provisions such as Gulshan which stressed the weight to  be
    given in the proportionality exercise to the  fact  that  an  Appellant
    could not satisfy Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE would not apply.  In
    consequence the Respondent's arguments in the onward grounds of appeal,
    that the Judge had erred in law because he  had  not  carried  out  the
    proportionality exercise correctly, lost much of their force.

12.  Counsel further argued that the Judge had  done  what  he  should  have
    done in his assessment of the proportionality of the interference  with
    family life. It was one that was open to him.  Although EV  Philippines
    had been raised by the Respondent in the grounds of  appeal  one  still
    had to look at the best interests of the children.   At  the  close  of
    submissions I indicated that I would dismiss  the  Respondent's  onward
    appeal against the decision of the Fist-tier Tribunal and now  give  my
    reasons.

Findings

13.  The Judge  erred  in  law  when  he  stated  at  paragraph  34  of  his
    determination that the Appellants fell to be considered under  Appendix
    FM. For the reasons I have given above they did not.  If I  find  there
    was an error of law in the Judge's determination such that it  fell  to
    be set aside I would then have to  remake  the  decision  applying  the
    current law as stated in the 2002 Act.  If I find  the  Judge  did  not
    make an error of law the case does not reach that far and his  decision
    stands.

14.  The Judge did not accord  significant  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellants could not succeed under Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE.
    However since those provisions did not apply that in itself was  not  a
    material error of law.  The question is whether the Judge conducted the
    proportionality exercise correctly on the basis of  the  pre-July  2012
    case law.  The Judge considered the best interests of the children as a
    primary consideration that is to say  he  considered  them  first.   He
    found it would not be in their best interests to require them to return
    to Mauritius a country which none of them it appears had any  knowledge
    of.  Two of the children had lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom
    for at least seven years.  It was not in the children's best  interests
    to be removed.  It was not reasonable to expect the youngest child  who
    was born in the United Kingdom to be returned to Mauritius without  his
    two siblings.

15.  In those circumstances it was unreasonable to  expect  the  parents  to
    return  to  Mauritius  leaving  the  children  behind.   That  is   now
    specifically spelled out in the provision of the 2002 Act which I  have
    quoted above. The  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  37  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to exclude the Appellant and Mr Calleechurn from Article 8
    considerations just because they were husband and wife  and  had  joint
    responsibility for the three children.

16.  Had the applications for leave to remain been made after July 2012  and
    had the Respondent's onward appeal come before me before July 2014  the
    outcome of this case might have been different. On the  facts  of  this
    case, I find that what the Judge was required to do in this case was to
    consider the Article 8 rights of the Appellants  bearing  in  mind  the
    best interests of the  three  children.   On  that  basis  the  Judge's
    analysis of Article 8 albeit brief was not so significantly wrong as to
    be overturned and the matter to be reheard.  Had I found  an  error  of
    law and I overturned the Judge's decision I would have had to have gone
    on to remake the decision in the light of Section 117B(6).   Preserving
    the Judge's findings of fact, I would not have found it  reasonable  to
    have  expected  the  two  qualifying  children  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants to leave the United Kingdom and thus the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Calleechurn would have succeeded because they have a parental  relation
    with the qualifying children. It would not in those circumstances  have
    been reasonable to have removed the fifth  child  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on his own.  The public interest would not  have  required  the
    removal of the Appellants in those circumstances.  Thus whether or  not
    I had found an error of law in the Judge's  determination  the  overall
    result would still have been  the  same  namely  that  the  Appellants'
    appeals against the Respondent's decision fell to be allowed.

Fee Award

17.  The Judge made a fee award against the Respondent  on  the  basis  that
    all the relevant material was before the Respondent at the time of  the
    decision.   I  would  have  put  matters  slightly  differently.    The
    Respondent had erred  in  assessing  the  Appellants'  applications  by
    reference to Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE when case law  has  shown
    those provisions did not apply.  Arguably in  those  circumstances  the
    appeals fell to be allowed on the basis that the decisions were not  in
    accordance with the law.  That would also have resulted in a fee  award
    in the Appellants' favour.  In this case the Judge heard the matter but
    either way a fee award was appropriately.  I therefore do  not  disturb
    the Judge's fee award.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and I uphold the decision  to  allow  the  Appellants'
appeals against the Respondent's decision to refuse leave.

The Respondent's appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction as there is no public  policy  reason  for  so
    doing.


Signed this 10th day of October 2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

