










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02224/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|on 18 April 2016                  |On 12 May 2016                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                Mr Roshan Lal
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, counsel, instructed by M-R Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms N Wilcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of India,  born  on  16  March  1979.  His
      appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  22  December  2014
      refusing his application for a residence card  under  the  Immigration
      (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") was dismissed by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18
      September 2015.


   2. The Judge found at [22] found that the appellant's  evidence  did  not
      disclose a clear account of the uncle's money  being  used  for  basic
      living  needs  such  as  food,  water,  medicine,  rent  or  essential
      utilities. There was no '... firm evidential platform on which to rest
      a positive finding of relevant dependency'.


   3. In granting him permission  to  appeal  on  3  March  2016  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge McDade stated that  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge
      failed to give any consideration to Article 8 of the ECHR, as  Article
      8 was raised in the grounds of appeal but appears  not  to  have  been
      dealt with by the Judge.


   4. However, as noted by Mr Turner, who did not represent the appellant at
      the hearing and who was not responsible for drafting  the  grounds  of
      appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  Judge  had  in  fact  expressly
      considered Article 8 and had found that  he  had  no  jurisdiction  to
      consider an Article 8 appeal. The  Judge  expressly  referred  to  the
      Upper Tribunal's decision in  Amirteymour  and  Others  (EEA  Appeals;
      Human Rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC), which was upheld by  the  Court
      of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.


   5. In dismissing his appeal under the  2006  Regulations,  Judge  Norton-
      Taylor found with regard to  the  requirement  of  "prior  dependency"
      under the Regulations that the uncle's evidence was not supportive  of
      the appellant's claim. Given that his uncle  was  the  benefactor,  he
      would have expected a clear account of the remitted money  being  used
      for essential needs if that had taken place.


   6. However, the uncle told him "rather vaguely" that the money  was  used
      for "expenditure." When pressed, he later stated that  the  money  was
      for the purpose only of assisting the appellant to  come  to  the  UK.
      This was clearly stated to be the "one" reason. He again  stated  that
      he helped to fund the appellant's studies  whilst  he  was  in  India.
      Nothing was said about the essential needs of  the  appellant  or  his
      family in India. There was no evidence to that effect in  the  uncle's
      witness statement [23].


   7. First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted permission to appeal  on  the
      basis of the Article 8 ground. There was no ground raised against  the
      explicit findings at [22] and [23].


   8. Mr Turner accepted that there needed to be a review of the application
      for permission. It had not been contended that  the  Judge  failed  to
      give clear reasons for his findings.


Assessment


   9. It is not clear why  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge  failed  to
      give any consideration to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, as
      the Judge  had  expressly  directed  himself  at  [28]  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision in that respect.


  10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave proper reasons for finding that the
      appellant had not established direct dependency.  There  has  been  no
      contention that his finding at [23] that the  appellant's  uncle  gave
      him money for the purpose only of assisting the appellant to  come  to
      the UK constituted a material error.


  11. I accordingly find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
      not involve the making of any material errors of law.










      Notice of Decision


      The appellant's appeal is dismissed. The decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.














      Signed                             Date 7 May 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

