
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02770/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th December 2013                           |On 15th January 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J FRANCES


                                   Between

                          Mr ARJAN AVDABHAI KHUNTI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mehta, Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of India born on  3rd  January  1986,  appeals
    with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Monro)
    who in a determination promulgated on 11th September 2013 dismissed his
    appeal against the decision made on 22nd December  2011  to  refuse  to
    vary leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant
    under the points-based system.

 2. The history of the  appeal  is  as  follows.   On  9th  July  2009  the
    Appellant was granted leave to enter the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student until 30th October 2011.  He entered the United Kingdom on 28th
    July 2009.  Following the conclusion of his studies, the Appellant made
    a further application in time for further leave on 29th June 2011 as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant to study for  a  Graduate  Diploma  in
    Commercial Management, such course to run from 4th July 2011 until 30th
    June 2014.

 3. That application was refused by the Respondent in a decision dated 22nd
    December 2011 under paragraph 245ZX(c) of the Immigration Rules on  the
    grounds that the Respondent was not satisfied that the Tier  4  Sponsor
    had ensured that the Appellant was competent in the English language at
    a minimum of level B2 of the  CEFR  or  that  he  met  any  alternative
    requirement.  Thus the Appellant had not been awarded 30  points  under
    Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The  Appellant  submitted  Grounds  of  Appeal  on  26th  January  2012
    following that decision but for reasons that have been unexplained, the
    appeal did not come before the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  significant
    period until 11th September 2013 almost two years  after  the  decision
    made by the Respondent.  The appeal was determined on the papers by the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  a  determination  promulgated  on   13th
    September 2013, the appeal was dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules
    for the reasons set out in the determination at paragraphs 11 -  12  on
    the basis that the CAS made  no  mention  of  the  Appellant's  English
    language ability.  In respect of the Appellant's argument that  at  the
    time of the application and the decision that there was no  requirement
    for such an assessment to be carried out, the judge noted that that had
    not been set out in the Grounds of Appeal and that  the  Appellant  had
    not provided any evidence in support of that assertion.  The appeal was
    also dismissed on human rights grounds.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge on 14th November 2013.  Thus the
    matter came before the Upper Tribunal.  It appears that  the  Appellant
    had been unrepresented at the time of the application for permission to
    appeal but had secured representation for this hearing at a late  stage
    by Mr Mehta, who provided a recent letter of authority to the Tribunal.
     The  Respondent  was  represented  by  Mr  Walker,  Senior  Presenting
    Officer.  Mr Mehta relied upon the grounds  submitted  and  provided  a
    copy of the Appellant's witness statement which had been  submitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 11th June 2013 where at paragraph 5,  the
    Appellant made reference  to  his  position  that  there  had  been  no
    requirement for an English assessment at the time for the CAS  and  had
    not been part of the Immigration Rules at the relevant  time.   Neither
    representative had copies of the relevant Immigration Rule in force  or
    the guidance and thus the parties requested a short period of  time  to
    consider those documents.

 6. Mr Walker conceded that there was an error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    could not stand.  He stated that the requirement had not been placed in
    the Rules (which had not changed until 6th June 2012) that had been  in
    guidance.  For  the  reasons  given  in  the  decision  of  R  (on  the
    application of Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33 the requirement was one that
    amounted to a condition of succeeding under the Rule and as it had been
    in the guidance and not laid before Parliament the Secretary  of  State
    could not rely upon it.

 7. On the basis of the concession made by Mr Walker, it was further common
    ground between the parties that there had been no other reason advanced
    on behalf of the Secretary of State for refusing  the  application  and
    therefore the appeal should be allowed.

 8. For those reasons, and in the light of the concession made by Mr Walker
    we remake the decision allowing the appeal.

Decision

 9. The Tribunal made an error of law; the decision is remade as  follows:-
    the appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

