
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02416/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 November 2013                         |On 14 November 2013        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                         THE HON MR JUSTICE CRANSTON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                             MR JULIO STERMILLA
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:
                            For the Appellant: Mr B Lams of counsel
           instructed by Scudmores solicitors
          For the Respondent: Ms Z Kiss a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the determination of the Tribunal. The appellant is a  citizen
      of Albania who was born on 6 May 1990. He has been given permission to
      appeal the determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver ("the
      FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against the respondent's  decision  of
      16 January 2013 to remove him from  the  UK  following  his  claim  to
      remain here on human rights grounds.


   2. The appellant arrived in the UK illegally on 29 November  2007  hidden
      in the back of a lorry. He was not detected  until  28  December  2012
      when he was arrested on suspicion of handling stolen goods and illegal
      entry. He was detained but then granted temporary release.  There  was
      no prosecution.


   3. The appellant's solicitors wrote two  letters  to  the  respondent  in
      January 2013 asking that he be allowed to remain in the UK on  Article
      8 human rights grounds.  He  claimed  to  have  been  in  a  long-term
      relationship with his partner, Ms Valentina Lipovica for three  and  a
      half years and to have lived  with  her  since  2010.  The  respondent
      concluded that the appellant did not qualify for leave to remain under
      the provisions of Article 8 set out in Appendix FM to the  Immigration
      Rules  on  the  basis  of  private  or  family  life.  There  were  no
      exceptional circumstances. The application was rejected with  a  right
      of appeal.


   4. The appellant appealed and the appeal was heard  by  the  FTTJ  on  21
      March 2013. Both parties were represented, the appellant  by  Mr  Lams
      who appears  before  us.  The  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
      appellant, his partner and her mother and sisters.


   5. The FTTJ found that the appellant was  an  economic  migrant  with  no
      regard for the immigration rules. His credibility was damaged.  Whilst
      his relationship with his partner was probably  genuine  he  concluded
      that it had not "yet reached a depth which engaged  considerations  of
      family life". The appellant did  not  qualify  under  the  suitability
      requirements of Appendix FM because of his breach of  the  immigration
      rules and his lack of status in the UK. His partner  could  return  to
      Albania with him if he wished to make an application from  abroad.  If
      it came to  the  question  of  proportionality  then  it  would  be  a
      proportionate interference with the human rights of the appellant  and
      his partner to remove him from the UK. The FTTJ dismissed  the  appeal
      on human rights grounds.


   6. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was granted by  a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. There was a Rule  24  response  from
      the respondent dated 28 May 2013 on which she continues to  rely.  The
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal came before Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Woodcraft ("the DUTJ") on 20 June 2013. He found that the FTTJ did not
      err in law and upheld the decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal.


   7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.
      The application was considered by Upper Tribunal Judge King who was of
      the view that the DUTJ had erred in law and that his  decision  should
      be set aside under Rule 43 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008. Notice of the proposal that the determination of the  DUTJ
      should be set aside was sent to the parties and their  representatives
      on 20 August 2013 requiring a response within 14  days.  Subsequently,
      on 23 September 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge King set aside the  decision
      of the DUTJ. He gave directions and ordered that  the  appeal  against
      the decision of the FTTJ be reheard by the Upper Tribunal  in  ordered
      to consider whether he erred in law and if  so  whether  his  decision
      should be set aside and remade.


   8. The appellant's solicitors  have  resubmitted  the  bundle  which  was
      before the FTTJ. They  have  also  submitted  a  supplementary  bundle
      containing a further witness statement from the appellant's  partner's
      mother and other documents which were not  before  the  FTTJ.  On  the
      morning of the hearing  Mr  Lams  submitted  extracts  from  the  UKBA
      Operational Guidance Note dated 30 April 2013 and the COIS  report  on
      Albania dated 29 March 2012. These were not before the FTTJ.  They  do
      not need to be considered unless we set  aside  the  decision  of  the
      FTTJ. Mr Lams also submitted a skeleton argument.


   9. Mr Lams relied on the original grounds  of  appeal  and  his  skeleton
      argument. There are four grounds of appeal all of which  are  said  to
      identify errors of law. The first is that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  make
      sufficient  findings  of  fact  about  the  relationship  between  the
      appellant and his partner and in particular the  period  during  which
      they cohabited. It is argued that this is crucial  to  the  issues  of
      whether they were in  a  "genuine  and  subsisting  relationship"  and
      whether the relationship amounted to a family life. In the alternative
      it is argued that the FTTJ implicitly accepted the appellant's account
      of  the  period  of  cohabitation  and  that  the  finding  that   the
      relationship was not have a sufficient depth to engage  considerations
      of family life was irrational.  Finally,  that  the  judge  failed  to
      consider whether family life arose  with  the  other  members  of  the
      appellant's partner's family.


  10. We find that in relation to the first ground the FTTJ  erred  in  law.
      His findings as to the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
      partner are unclear. Whilst  accepting  that  their  relationship  "is
      probably perfectly genuine" there is no finding as to  the  length  of
      the relationship and a lack of clarity  as  to  what  is  meant  by  a
      relationship of "a depth which engages considerations of family life".
      It is not clear whether this involves duration,  durability  or  other
      factors. Whilst he does deal with the genuine element  of  "a  genuine
      and subsisting relationship" in Section EX he  does  not  address  the
      question of whether the relationship is subsisting. Findings as to the
      duration of the relationship between the appellant and his partner and
      whether the relationship was subsisting were needed but we cannot find
      them either in terms or by implication.


  11. The second ground argues that the FTTJ applied an incorrect test. This
      was not whether the appellant "would not qualify under the suitability
      requirements of appendix FM because of his breach of  the  immigration
      rules and lack of status in the  United  Kingdom".  The  correct  test
      should have been whether the appellant came within  the  exception  in
      Section EX to Appendix FM. The FTTJ failed to consider this.


  12. We find that the FTTJ erred in this way. The correct test was  whether
      the appellant could bring himself within the exception in  Section  EX
      to Appendix FM. This is within the part of  Appendix  FM  which  deals
      with eligibility for indefinite leave to remain as a partner. The FTTJ
      appears to have had in mind the provisions as to suitability for leave
      to remain in Section  S-LTR.  It  has  not  been  suggested  that  the
      appellant falls foul of these which relate to matters  such  as  being
      the subject of a deportation order, having a conviction which  results
      a sentence  of  imprisonment  above  the  minimum  duration,  being  a
      persistent offender, bad conduct or character or failure to attend  an
      interview or provide specified information.

  13. The third ground submits that the FTTJ did not make clear what test he
      was applying in his consideration of  Article  8  proportionality.  He
      should  have  applied   a   test   of   reasonableness   rather   than
      insurmountable obstacles. Had he done so it would not have  been  open
      to him on the evidence to come to the  conclusion  that  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect the appellant to return to Albania and to make an
      entry clearance application from there.


  14. We find that this ground does establish an error of  law.  In  dealing
      with Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules in paragraph  11  of  his
      determination the FTTJ did not say that he  was  applying  a  test  of
      whether there were insurmountable obstacles in considering whether the
      appellant's partner should be expected to return to Albania.  However,
      he did not say what test he was applying and dealt only  with  whether
      the appellant's partner could return with him in order for him to make
      an entry clearance application to return to the UK, not  the  position
      if it was necessary for her to remain with him in Albania on a  longer
      term or permanent basis.


  15. The fourth ground argues that the judge erred in failing to apply  the
      concession made by  the  respondent  in  Sanade  and  others  (British
      children - Zambrano - Dereci) India [2012] UKUT 48  (IAC)  that  where
      the appellant's partner was a British  citizen  and  therefore  an  EU
      citizen it would not be possible to require her  to  relocate  outside
      the EU or reasonable to expect her to do so.


  16. We find that this  ground  also  establishes  an  error  of  law.  The
      chronology and skeleton argument before  the  FTTJ  raised  the  issue
      which he did not deal with.


  17. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law  we  set  aside  his  decision
      which we now remake. We admit and consider the new evidence  submitted
      by the appellant's representatives to which we have referred. The only
      additional witness statement is that from  the  appellant's  partner's
      mother dated 30 October 2013. She  did  not  attend  the  hearing  and
      whilst we were told that there might be health reasons  there  was  no
      medical or other evidence to support this. There was no application to
      call other witnesses and Mr Lams accepted that his submissions covered
      all that he wished to say in relation to the question of error of  law
      and the remaking of the decision.


  18. There has been no attack on the FTTJ's findings of fact  except  where
      it is argued that further findings should have but were not  made.  We
      take his findings of fact as our starting point.


  19. We find that the appellant met his partner, who is a British  citizen,
      sometime in mid 2009. They started living  together  in  her  mother's
      home in Hampstead  in  early  2010.  The  accommodation  was,  as  the
      appellant admits, overcrowded, and he moved out  from  time  to  time.
      Subsequently the appellant and his partner rented a  flat  in  Denmark
      Hill and moved in together in January 2013. They are now living there.
      The FTTJ found that their relationship was probably genuine.  We  find
      that it is genuine and subsisting.


  20. The appellant's partner is an ethnic Albanian who came to this country
      from Kosovo when she was seven years old. She is now British  citizen.
      She and the appellant are engaged to  be  married  but  have  not  yet
      married. Before she moved in with the appellant  she  lived  with  her
      mother and five siblings. There are four sisters and two brothers. She
      is the eldest and the sisters are aged 21, 19 and 18. The two youngest
      sisters appear to be twins and one of them has cerebral  palsy.  There
      are two younger brothers. All the children, except for the appellant's
      partner, are living together in Hampstead. Their father is not  living
      with them and their mother's evidence is that there has  been  a  long
      history of domestic violence and that he was sentenced to  a  term  of
      imprisonment because of violence towards her and the  children.  There
      is some confirmation of the allegations  of  domestic  violence  in  a
      letter from the mother's  solicitors  dated  10  November  2012  which
      refers to a possible application for a non-molestation order.


  21. The appellant's partner met him whilst she was working at  a  souvenir
      shop in the West End  of  London.  She  still  works  there  part-time
      although her hours of work and pay are not clear. We accept  that  the
      sister who suffers from cerebral palsy requires considerable  personal
      care some of which cannot or should not be  provided  by  her  younger
      brothers. In the absence of oral evidence from the mother  and  either
      further witness statements or evidence from  the  appellant's  partner
      and the sisters who attended the hearing before us we  do  not  accept
      that the appellant's partner provides her sister with care  every  day
      or that there are good reasons why the other two adult  sisters  could
      not assist their mother to do so. The appellant's partner  is  working
      part-time and living on the other side of London. Her sisters  may  be
      in continuing education, as Mr Lams suggested, but we have no evidence
      about this and, unlike the appellant's partner, they are living in the
      same household as their sister who needs  the  care.  Both  are  young
      adults.


  22. The appellant has said that he applied for asylum after he arrived  in
      this country in November 2007 but did not pursue the claim.  There  is
      no documentary evidence to support this and we do not accept  that  he
      made a claim for asylum. We find that he entered the country illegally
      and remained here knowing full well that he had no right to  be  here.
      He also worked illegally washing cars. He did not  obtain  a  National
      Insurance number, has not paid tax or National Insurance contributions
      and has worked for "cash in hand" in the hope  that  he  would  remain
      undetected. He admitted that if he had not been detected he would have
      gone on living in this country illegally.


  23. We do not accept that the appellant was prevented  from  returning  to
      Albania through any genuine fear of what might happen to him there. We
      find that, contrary to the suggestion made by the respondent,  he  did
      not make a mistake as to his partner's date of birth. He has not  been
      charged with or convicted of  any  offence  whilst  in  this  country.
      Whilst we accept that the appellant's family in Albania  may  well  be
      displeased with his choice of partner and that she was not the  person
      of their choosing we do not accept that they would not accommodate  or
      assist the appellant and his partner were they to return  to  Albania.
      It is not clear exactly what the appellant means by the statement that
      his parents have "effectively disowned" him. The appellant  has  spent
      more of his life in Albania than he  has  in  the  UK,  including  his
      formative years.


  24. The appellant and his partner are both young and in  good  health.  He
      managed to find work, albeit illegally, and survive  in  this  country
      without having any family or support when he arrived. Clearly  English
      is not his first language and at the hearing before the FTTJ he  still
      preferred to give evidence through an interpreter. If  he  returns  to
      Albania will not be a strange country, he will be speaking  his  first
      language and his family will probably help him. It is  important  that
      they have no children, together or separately.


  25. The appellant's partner comes from Kosovo, not Albania, but  they  are
      both ethnic Albanians and both speak the same language.  There  is  no
      evidence before us to suggest that they  will  have  any  difficulties
      with different dialects. She has no family  in  Albania  and  all  her
      large family and her friends are in the UK. Neither the appellant  nor
      his partner have said anything about any religious difficulties.


  26. The Operational Guidance Note on Albania shows that  violence  against
      women is "very prevalent" in Albania, particularly in the North  East.
      There is societal discrimination against women who, if they  need  it,
      are not likely to obtain protection from the authorities. However, the
      appellant's partner would not be going to Albania as a female child, a
      single woman, a woman who has been subjected to  familial  or  spousal
      violence in that country  or  a  woman  who  is  at  risk  because  of
      trafficking or for some other reason. She would be going with  and  be
      protected by  the  appellant  who  knows  the  country.  There  is  no
      suggestion that he has ill treated her in any way.


  27. The question of whether the appellant can succeed on Article  8  human
      rights grounds under the Immigration Rules is governed by Appendix FM.
      The appellant cannot meet the requirements for leave to  remain  as  a
      partner because he has been in the UK in breach  of  immigration  laws
      unless paragraph EX1 applies. The relevant provision of paragraph  EX1
      is that; "(b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
      with a partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen,  settled  in
      the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection, and
      there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  that  partner
      continuing outside the UK". We have found that there is a genuine  and
      subsisting relationship  with  a  British  citizen  which  leaves  the
      question of whether there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life
      with his partner continuing outside the UK.


  28. The appellant's partner has said that if there was no  other  way  she
      would be prepared to go back to Albania with the appellant  "in  order
      to bring  him  back"  which  we  take  to  mean  whilst  he  makes  an
      application for entry clearance and settlement. Clearly this does  not
      mean that she is willing to go and live in Albania either for a longer
      period or permanently. However, it is an indication that she does  not
      think that there are considerations which would prevent her from going
      to that country at all. We  find  that  there  are  no  insurmountable
      obstacles to  family  life  between  the  appellant  and  his  partner
      continuing outside the UK. They have no children whose best  interests
      need to be considered. There are no serious threats to their  personal
      safety. The appellant knows the country well and  whilst  his  partner
      does not they are both of Albanian ethnicity and speak  the  language.
      Both have already shown an ability to acclimatise to a new country and
      a new culture, albeit that the appellant's partner did so at  a  young
      age. If the appellant's partner goes and lives with him in Albania she
      can keep in touch with her family by modern methods  of  communication
      and, as a British citizen,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  her  from
      visiting them as often as she wishes and can afford.


  29. In the light of our  findings  of  fact  we  also  conclude  that  the
      appellant has not established that there are exceptional circumstances
      as defined in paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules. Whilst  he  has
      not been convicted of any criminal offence he has  not  complied  with
      any conditions attached to any grant  of  leave  to  enter  or  remain
      because he never had any leave of any kind. He arrived in 2007 but has
      never been here legally.


  30. We do not consider that Sanade is authority for the  proposition  that
      because the appellant's partner  is  a  British  citizen  and  in  the
      circumstances of this case the respondent's concession means  that  it
      is not possible to require the appellant to relocate outside  the  EU.
      The proposition is encapsulated in paragraph 5 of the summary prepared
      by the author of the determination in the following  terms;  "Case  C-
      34/09 Ruiz Zambrano now makes it clear that where the child or  indeed
      the remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore a  citizen  of
      the European Union, as a matter of  EU  law  it  is  not  possible  to
      require the family as a unit to relocate outside of the European Union
      or for the Secretary of State to submit that it  would  be  reasonable
      for them to do so."


  31. This summary is derived from paragraphs 93 to 95 which state;


         93. Finally, we note that a further question on which we asked  for
         the respondent's assistance was in these terms:


            "Does the respondent agree that in a case where a  non-national
            parent is being removed and claims it is a  violation  of  that
            person's human rights to be separated from a child with whom he
            presently enjoys family life  as  an  engaged  parent,  that  a
            consequence of the CJEU's judgment is that it is  not  open  to
            the respondent to submit that an interference  can  be  avoided
            because it is reasonable to expect the  child  (and  presumably
            any other parent/carer who is not  facing  deportation/removal)
            to join the appellant in the country of  origin?   If  not  why
            not?"


         94. To this Mr Devereux replied on 24 November 2011:


            "We do accept, however, that in a case where  a  third  country
            national is unable to claim a right to reside on the basis  set
            out above it will not logically be possible, when assessing the
            compatibility of their removal or deportation with the ECHR  to
            argue that any interference with  Article  8  rights  could  be
            avoided by the family unit moving to a country which is outside
            of the EU".


         95. We shall take this helpful  submission  into  account  when  we
         consider the application of Article 8 to each appellant's case.  We
         agree with it.  This means that  where  the  child  or  indeed  the
         remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore  a  citizen  of
         the European Union, it is not possible to require them to  relocate
         outside of the European  Union  or  to  submit  that  it  would  be
         reasonable for them to do so. The  case  serves  to  emphasise  the
         importance of nationality already identified in the decision of the
         Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania). If  interference  with  the  family
         life is to be justified, it can only  be  on  the  basis  that  the
         conduct of the person to be removed gives rise to considerations of
         such weight as to justify separation."


  32. Taking together the question asked of the respondent and her  response
      we read her concession as applying  to  an  individual  who  would  be
      separated from a child with whom he or  she  presently  enjoys  family
      life as an engaged parent and that child's other parent or carer.  The
      conclusion of the Tribunal in paragraph 95 relates to a child  with  a
      remaining spouse, not a remaining spouse where there is no child.  The
      facts of the appeal  before  us  are  very  different.  There  are  no
      children.


  33. We find that there is a lack  of  current  authority  providing  clear
      guidance as to whether there should be any consideration of Article  8
      human rights grounds outside the provisions of the current Immigration
      Rules  and  if  so  whether  this  is  a  one  step   test   involving
      consideration of exceptional circumstances under or  independently  of
      paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules or a two step  test  involving
      consideration of Article 8 jurisprudence  as  it  evolved  before  the
      coming into effect of the new Immigration Rules.


  34. MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
      Civ 1192 was a deportation case which this appeal is not. However,  we
      find that the  principles  addressed  provide  sufficient  indication,
      particularly in paragraph 46, that we should  carry  out  a  two-stage
      process  and  consider  Article  8  jurisprudence  outside   the   new
      Immigration Rules.


  35. Applying Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Secretary of  State  for
      the Home Department  [2004]  UKHL  27  principles  we  find  that  the
      proposed removal of the appellant would be an interference by a public
      authority with the exercise of his and his partner's right to  respect
      for their private  and  family  lives.  The  interference  would  have
      consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of
      Article 8. The interference would be in accordance with  the  law.  It
      would be necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
      national security, public safety or the  economic  well-being  of  the
      country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for  the  protection
      of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and  freedoms
      of others. The issue turns  on  whether  such  interference  would  be
      proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be  achieved.  It
      is  for  the  respondent  to  establish  that  the   interference   is
      proportionate to the standard of the balance of probabilities.


  36. Whilst the appellant has a private life in this country which includes
      his relationship with his partner's family his only true  family  life
      is with his partner. If we were considering only  the  proportionality
      of the interference with his Article 8 human rights in the context  of
      our findings of fact including the fact that he  entered  the  country
      illegally  and  has  never  had  any  right  to  be  here   we   would
      unhesitatingly come to the conclusion that  his  removal  would  be  a
      proportionate  interference.  However,  we  must  also  consider   his
      partner's Article 8 human rights. In this  context  the  test  is  not
      whether there are insurmountable obstacles to her going to  live  with
      the appellant in Albania but whether, in the light of what is said  in
      VW (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA
      Civ 5 (paragraph 19) on a balanced assessment she  can  reasonably  be
      expected to do so in the light of all the material facts.


  37. In the light of all the material facts which we have found and for the
      reasons we have already given in relation to the question  of  whether
      there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  outside
      the UK we  go  further  and  find  that  the  appellants  partner  can
      reasonably be expected to go and live with him in Albania or,  indeed,
      should they choose anywhere else outside the UK and the EU.


  38. We have not been asked to anonymise this determination and can see  no
      good reason to do so.


  39. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ we substitute  our  decision
      and dismiss the appellant's appeal.










      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 9 November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
