

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02754/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 4th November 2014                         |On: 22nd January 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                          Adesewa Ifeoluwa Adebisi
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Charles, Leslie Charles Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of  birth  25th  September
      1994.  She appeals with permission[1] the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Designated Judge Baird) to dismiss her  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision to remove her  from  the  United  Kingdom.   The
      Respondent's  decision   followed   rejection   of   the   Appellant's
      application for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  her  long
      residence and Article 8 rights.


   2. The Appellant had made her original application on the 2nd March 2012.
      She completed a FLR(O) and asserted that her removal from the UK would
      be a disproportionate interference with her private life. She  claimed
      that she came to the UK aged 10 and that she had been here ever since.


   3. On the 8th August 2012 the Respondent  rejected  the  application  and
      certified it as clearly unfounded. There was  therefore  no  right  of
      appeal to the Tribunal. Judicial review proceedings were launched  and
      were  eventually  settled  by  consent,  the  Respondent  agreeing  to
      withdraw the certification, to give substantive consideration  to  the
      application and if a fresh decision was made,  to  make  it  one  that
      attracted a right of appeal.


   4. The Appellant issued a refusal letter on the 12th  December  2013.  It
      gave consideration to paragraph 276ADE, to Appendix FM and to  whether
      there were any "exceptional circumstances" warranting leave to  remain
      outside of the Rules.


   5. The matter came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  determination
      first addresses paragraph  276ADE.  It  is  noted  that  the  date  of
      application was March 2012 so to establish 7 years residence  at  that
      point the Appellant would need to show that she had  been  in  the  UK
      since March 2005. There was no evidence to show that she  had  arrived
      in the UK in March 2005. By her own account she arrived in  July  2005
      and the only supporting evidence started at that point.  She could not
      therefore succeed with reference to 276ADE(1)(iv). By the date of  the
      appeal  the  Appellant  was  an  adult  and  in  light  of  this   the
      determination goes on to address 276ADE(1)(vi). It is found  that  the
      Appellant had not shown herself to have  "no  ties"  to  Nigeria.  The
      appeal  is  therefore  dismissed  with  reference  to  the  Rules.  At
      paragraph 25 the Tribunal refers to  Gulshan  (Article  8-  new  rules
      correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). The determination  then  goes
      on to set out some of the factors in the  case,  including  a  finding
      that the Appellant cannot have been unaware that she had no status  in
      the UK. The determination concludes with the following: "I find  there
      are no exceptional or compelling circumstances that render her removal
      disproportionate" (at paragraph 27).


   6. The grounds are not clearly set out and in many  places  amount  to  a
      disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal but as far as I can tell the
      Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the following grounds:


         a) The Judge erred in fact when she found there  was  no  evidence
            that the Appellant had been here since July 2005;


         b) It was irrational and unfair to hold against a child  the  fact
            that she had no leave;


         c) That the finding that the Appellant has ties to Nigeria was not
            based on the evidence.


   7. Permission was granted on the 7th  August  2014  by  Designated  Judge
      Shaerf.  He was not  impressed  with  much  of  the  argument  in  the
      grounds. He did however grant permission in the following terms:


         "[the determination] was promulgated on 9 July, a month  after  the
         hearing. However on 7 July the Court  of  Appeal  handed  down  its
         judgement following a hearing on 4 and 5 March of the appeal in The
         Queen (oao MM and Ors) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  985.  At  paragraphs
         128-134 the Court found the judgement in The Queen  (oao  Nagre)  v
         SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) added nothing to the Article 8  debate
         and re-asserted the existing jurisprudence  flowing  from  Huang  v
         SSHD [2007] UKHL 11. The effect was to find what has  become  known
         as the 'Gulshan gateway" has no application. In  her  treatment  of
         the claim under Article 8 of the European  Convention  outside  the
         Immigration Rules, the Judge relied on the 'Gulshan  gateway'  test
         and so did not address the Article 8 claim outside the  Immigration
         Rules".


   8. Before me Mr Harrison adopted the permission grant of Judge Shaerf and
      conceded that the 'Gulshan gateway' had been  disapproved  in  MM.  He
      agreed that in this case the Judge's approach to Article 8 'outside of
      the rules' had clearly been taken with Gulshan,  and  the  Appellant's
      failure under the Rules, in mind. He pointed  out  that  this  was  of
      particular significance in this case since the Appellant had made  her
      application before the new rules,  which  seek  to  codify  Article  8
      within the Rules, had even been introduced. He agreed with Mr  Charles
      that in fact the Respondent, and  the  Tribunal,  should  simply  have
      approached this application as one made  'outside  of  the  rules'  to
      which the new rules, in whatever  form,  had  no  direct  application.
      This was a 'Huang/Razgar' Article 8 assessment. The only relevance  of
      the Rules as presently drafted was to offer a guide as  to  where  the
      Respondent considers the balance to be struck.   The parties therefore
      unanimously invited me to find an error of law in the determination of
      the First-tier Tribunal (per Judge Shaerf's grant of  permission)  and
      to remake the appeal by allowing it as 'not  in  accordance  with  the
      law'.


   9. I myself am not so confident that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  apply
      the 'Gulshan gateway'. Although the relevant  part  of  that  case  is
      cited it is not clear that Judge Baird did decline to consider Article
      8 'outwith the Rules'. It is at least arguable that paragraphs 26  and
      27 are an Article 8 consideration.  I accept however that if it is  an
      Article 8 consideration it was perhaps  excessively  coloured  by  the
      Appellant's failure to meet the new rules. In light of the  concession
      of Mr Harrison I therefore find  there  to  be  an  error  of  law  as
      identified by Judge Shaerf and set the decision aside.


  10. The grounds in addition take issue with some of the findings of  Judge
      Baird. There is no merit in the ground that there was  some  error  in
      finding there to be no evidence of residence from July 2005.  That  is
      because  that  is  not  what  the   determination   even   says.   The
      determination expressly acknowledges that there is evidence from  that
      period: the sentence at the end of paragraph 19 refers to March  2005.
      Nor is there any merit in the ground that the Judge acted unfairly  in
      finding that the Appellant must have known about her lack  of  status.
      That the Appellant was a minor for much of  that  period  was  clearly
      very much in her mind: "I have given a great deal of  thought  to  the
      fact that it was not the Appellant's decision to come here and build a
      private life but that does not outweigh the facts  looked  at  in  the
      round".


  11. I therefore set the decision aside  and  remake  it  by  allowing  the
      appeal as 'not in accordance with the law'. I do so  in  light  of  Mr
      Harrison's express concession that the  Respondent's  decision  should
      simply have addressed Article 8.   Whether or not that  concession  is
      correctly made, I note that as of today's date the  Appellant  is  now
      aged between 18 and 25 years and has spent at least half of  her  life
      living in the UK. She prima facie qualifies for leave to remain  under
      paragraph  276ADE  (1)(v).  No  doubt  this  is  something  which  the
      Respondent will  wish  to  consider  when  re-evaluating  this  Razgar
      Article 8 application.


  12. My apologies for the delay in promulgating this decision.




      Decisions


  13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does contain an error  of
      law and it is set aside.


  14. The decision is re-made as follows: "the decision is not in accordance
      with the law and the appeal is allowed on that limited basis".








                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           17th January 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 3rd October 2014 by Designated First-tier
Tribunal Judge French

