
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02698/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 December 2016                      |On 30 January 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                yasir rashid
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 21 May 1982.  He arrived
    in the UK on 9 January 2008 as  a  Tier  4  Student.   He  was  granted
    further periods of leave to remain up to and including 27 August  2014.
    He made an application for further leave to remain which was refused in
    a decision dated 24 December 2015.  The respondent  made  the  decision
    with reference to paragraph 322(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis that the application was made for a purpose not  covered  by  the
    Rules.  There was also a decision to remove the appellant  pursuant  to
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Abebrese ("the FtJ") on 12 February 2016.  At  that  hearing  the
    appellant did not attend and as far as the FtJ was  aware  he  had  not
    provided any reasons for his non-attendance.  In those circumstances he
    proceeded in the appellant's absence.  He dismissed  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The appellant applied for permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
    refused and then granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal ("UTJ").  The
    UTJ referred to a fax report which appeared to show  that  three  pages
    were transmitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  on  11  February
    2016, that is to say the day before the hearing.   The  UTJ  considered
    that there may have been a procedural mishap through no  fault  of  the
    FtJ, the mishap being that he was unaware  of  an  application  for  an
    adjournment of the hearing.

 4. That application for an adjournment was contained in the  letter  dated
    11 February 2016 headed "urgent request for adjournment" and in essence
    it was to the effect that the  appellant  had  injured  his  ankle  and
    lumbar spine and had been taken to hospital.  The letter states that he
    was unable to walk by  himself  and  required  assistance  and  was  on
    medication.  It said that he was in extreme pain and that it  would  be
    extremely difficult for him to attend the hearing.   He  asked  for  an
    adjournment for a few weeks to allow him to get  better.   That  letter
    was supported by  what  looks  like  scanned  copies  of  an  x-ray  or
    ultrasound result which, to summarise,  appears  to  support  what  the
    appellant said about his accident.  There is also  a  prescription  for
    medication which is not entirely clear but  it  is  dated  11  February
    2016.  The details of the medication cannot easily be  deciphered  from
    the scanned copy.

 5. It does seem to me that the FtJ  was  unaware  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had asked for an  adjournment  and  had  provided  supporting
    evidence in relation to that application.  Had the judge been aware  of
    the application for an adjournment and the evidence in support  of  it,
    it is probable that he would not have proceeded with the hearing in the
    appellant's absence.

 6. Before indicating my view upon whether the decision of the FtJ needs to
    be set aside, it is necessary to set out his decision and  his  recital
    of the respondent's decision on the application.  After having  recited
    the appellant's immigration history the FtJ referred to the appellant's
    application for leave to remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    referred to the appellant as having come to the  UK  as  a  student  in
    January 2008.  The respondent's decision letter which is referred to in
    the FtJ's decision refers to a grant of leave outside the  Rules  being
    appropriate where there are particularly compelling circumstances.  The
    respondent's decision also referred to the appellant's contention  that
    he had a  job  offer  from  a  Tier  2  employer  and  had  wished  his
    application to be held over until the first week of October  2014,  the
    application having been made on 27 August 2014.

 7. A letter was provided to the appellant on 24  October  2014  requesting
    that he submit a Tier 2 application with a  covering  letter  outlining
    that he wished to vary his leave.   Instead,  so  the  decision  letter
    states, he sent a letter dated 8  December  2014  requesting  that  the
    application be held over again for a period of at  least  three  weeks.
    The decision letter refers to the appellant having failed to  submit  a
    Tier 2 application as requested and the respondent stated that she  was
    unable to hold an application open indefinitely.

 8. The decision letter continues to the effect that it  was  open  to  the
    appellant to return to Pakistan and pursue his  studies  or  employment
    there.  If he wished to undertake employment in the UK it was  open  to
    him to make an application for  entry  clearance  under  Tier  2.   The
    conclusion was that discretion need not or ought not to be exercised in
    his favour in this case and that his application did  not  fall  for  a
    grant of leave outside the Rules, with reference to paragraph 322(1).

 9. Returning then to the FtJ's decision, he correctly set out  the  burden
    and standard of proof and referred to the appellant's grounds of appeal
    which, to summarise, were to the effect that the respondent's  decision
    was not in accordance with Article 8 of the ECHR or in accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules.  In the findings section of his decision the FtJ
    said as follows at [10]:

         "The appellant did not  provide  the  Tribunal  with  a  bundle  of
         documents for the purpose of the  hearing.   The  evidence  of  the
         appellant consists of his  application  form  and  his  grounds  of
         appeal, He has not provided any evidence to the Tribunal to support
         his  grounds  of  appeal.   The  appellant  at  Section  B  of  his
         application form states that he has a  job  offer  from  a  Tier  2
         employer.  He states that he is waiting for his degree to be issued
         to him at the end of September 2014 and once this is issued to  him
         he would submit his Tier 2 application.   The  appellant's  request
         that the  respondents  provide  him  time  to  submit  his  Tier  2
         application was granted.  The appellant wrote  to  the  respondents
         making a request that his application be  held  for  another  three
         weeks, no application was received  by  the  respondents  and  they
         therefore had no option but to proceed with the processing  of  the
         application."

10. After referring to submissions on  behalf  of  the  respondent  to  the
    effect that the appellant had family and ties in Pakistan and would  be
    able to reintegrate, the FtJ  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established that he could satisfy paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules  in
    relation to his private life because he had not resided in the UK for a
    period exceeding 20 years.  It was also concluded that  there  were  no
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant  returning  to  Pakistan,
    bearing in mind his social and  cultural  connections  to  the  country
    where he has resided for most of his life.  It was also  said  that  he
    had gained qualifications in the UK and had placed himself in a  better
    position than when he entered the country.  It  was  further  concluded
    that there were no compelling or compassionate circumstances such as to
    merit consideration outside the Article 8 Rules.

11. I quote the last sentence of the FtJ's decision at [12] as follows:

         "The appellant has provided absolutely no evidence to  support  his
         grounds of appeal and furthermore, the Tribunal and the respondents
         have not heard from him regarding this appeal."

12. That, it seems to me, is precisely the same situation  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal is in today.  There is no further information in  any  respect
    whatsoever from the appellant in support of the  application  that  was
    made to the respondent.  No bundle of documents has been provided,  and
    no letter or witness statement setting out his  grounds  for  appealing
    against the respondent's decision in more detail than  appears  in  the
    grounds of appeal, which themselves are scant and vague.

13. Because there was a procedural irregularity on the part of the  FtJ  in
    proceeding with the hearing  in  the  absence  of  the  appellant,  and
    notwithstanding that the position is no further advanced before me,  it
    is necessary to set aside the FtJ's decision,  because  the  procedural
    irregularity is a significant one.  Accordingly, the  decision  is  set
    aside.

14. However, I can proceed to re-make the decision immediately because,  as
    I have indicated, there is nothing before  me  and  there  was  nothing
    before the FtJ which advanced the appellant's  appeal  in  any  respect
    whatsoever, either in terms of an application  outside  the  Rules  and
    what is said about his wish to submit a Tier 2  application  or  having
    obtained employment from a Tier 2 Sponsor, or in terms of Article 8  of
    the ECHR, whether within or without the Rules.

15. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

    Decision


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. Its decision is set aside and the decision  re-made,
    dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules and under  Article  8
    of the ECHR.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            30/01/17





