
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
IA/02496/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 July 2019                         |On 10 September 2019               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                              mr guwinder singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Louis Kennedy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

    1. The appellant is an Indian  national.   He  arrived  in  the  United
       Kingdom in March 2012 with leave to enter  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
       Student valid until 14 July  2014.   On  2  July  2014  he  made  an
       application for leave to remain.  That application  was  refused  by
       the respondent on 9 June 2015.  Before refusing that application, on
       10 December 2014 the respondent wrote to the appellant informing him
       that on 6 October 2014, the Home  Office  had  made  a  decision  to
       revoke the licence of Cahro Academy Ltd and so the  Confirmation  of
       Acceptance for Studies ("CAS") submitted by the appellant  with  his
       application, is no longer valid. The respondent went on to state:


             "Before the final decision is made, and in line with our rules
             and  guidance,  we  will   suspend   consideration   of   your
             application for a period of 60 calendar days.




             During this 60-day period it is open to you to  withdraw  your
             application and submit a  fresh  application  in  a  different
             category or to leave the United Kingdom....




             However, if you wish to remain in the UK as a Tier 4  student,
             it is open to you to obtain a new CAS for a course of study at
             a fully licensed Tier  4  Educational  sponsor  and  vary  the
             grounds of your original application...."




    2. The respondent gave two reasons for refusing the  application  on  9
       June 2015.  First, there had been deception used in relation to  the
       application.  The application was therefore refused under  paragraph
       322(1A) of the  immigration  rules.   The  respondent  had  received
       information from City & Guilds indicating that the reading,  writing
       and listening tests taken by the appellant on 17  February  2014  at
       the  London  Institute  of  Management  and  Technology,  had   been
       cancelled by City & Guilds.  The  second  reason  for  refusing  the
       application was that the  applicant  had  claimed  30  points  under
       Appendix A of the immigration rules for a  valid  CAS,  assigned  by
       Cahro  Academy  Ltd,  but  the  respondent  declined  to  award  the
       appellant 30 points under Appendix A of the immigration rules.


    3.  In  referring  to  the  appellant's  immigration  history  in  that
       decision, the respondent simply says that "On 5 March 2012 you  were
       granted leave to enter the UK as a Tier 4 student migrant  until  14
       July 2014".  In the section that deals with the  points  awarded  to
       the appellant, the respondent states: -

             "... The CAS that you submitted with  your  application,  with
             reference number ..... was assigned by Cahro Academy Ltd.  The
             Tier 4 Sponsor register was checked on 16th February 2015  and
             Cahro Academy Limited was not listed as a Tier 4 Sponsor as of
             this date.

             On 10 December 2014 you were informed of this and  allowed  60
             days to obtain a new sponsor and CAS,  however  you  have  not
             provided a new CAS within that period.

             As such, you are not in possession of a valid CAS and  so  you
             have not met the requirements of  the  Rules.   Therefore,  no
             points have been awarded for your CAS".



    4. Before we turn to the decision of the Judge that is the  subject  of
       the appeal before us, we note from the papers before us  that  on  1
       February 2016, the respondent appears to have  issued  a  Notice  of
       Immigration Decision.  That is a Notice  of  Removal  in  which  the
       respondent stated:-

             "You are specifically considered a person who  has  overstayed
             their period of granted leave because you were issued  with  a
             student visa which was valid until 14  July  2014.   You  were
             landed in line with the visa on 05 March 2012.  However,  your
             leave was subsequently curtailed on 01 October 2013.  You  did
             not then attempt to regularise your stay until 02 July 2014".

    5. We referred to that decision and the  contents  of  that  Notice  of
       Removal, but Mr Melvin who  appears  before  us  on  behalf  of  the
       respondent, was unable to provide us with a  copy  of  any  decision
       made on 1 October 2013 to curtail the appellant's leave  to  remain.
       He was unable to provide us with any information as to whether,  and
       if so when, any such decision had in fact been made and served  upon
       the appellant.  That is unfortunate because an individual  receiving
       a Notice of Removal in those terms might well  have  done  what  was
       being asked of them by the Secretary of State.  That was,  to  leave
       the United Kingdom, when it is far from clear whether the  leave  to
       remain had been curtailed.


    6. Whether  or  not  the  curtailment  decision  was  served  upon  the
       appellant, on 2 July 2014, the appellant  made  an  application  for
       leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4  (General)  student  and  when
       that application was refused on 9th June 2015, he pursued his appeal
       before the First-tier Tribunal.  The decision, if there was one,  to
       curtail the appellant's leave to remain is not referred to at all in
       the respondent's decision of 9 June 2015.

    7. In any  event,  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
       decision of 9 June 2015 was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge
       on 26 June 2017, and the appeal was dismissed for  the  reasons  set
       out in a decision promulgated on 5 July 2017.  We  shall  return  to
       that decision again in a moment but before doing so,  we  deal  with
       the way in which the appeal has come before us.

    8. The appeal was dismissed by Judge Lodge and permission to appeal was
       refused by Judge O'Garro on 29 December  2017,  and  then  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 19 March 2018.  Undeterred, the appellant
       filed a claim for Judicial Review (CO/1438/2018).  At paragraphs [3]
       to [6] of the Grounds for Permission, the appellant claims:-

              "3. In summary, the Appellant entered the United Kingdom as  a
             Tier 4 Student and in July 2014, he  made  an  application  to
             remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  student.  The
             respondent refused the application on June 9th  2015  and  set
             out two specific grounds for refusal.  Firstly, it relied upon
             a  letter  of  curtailment  dated  December  10th  2014.   The
             Applicant claimed throughout that he  never  received  such  a
             notice and he emphasised this again in his  witness  statement
             which was served as part of the original grounds of appeal  to
             the FTT.
             4.   The second issue raised by the Respondent centred upon  a
             City & Guilds English language certificate. The applicant  was
             alleged to have produced a false certificate and therefore had
             used deception.
             5.   The Appellant's appeal came before FTT Judge Lodge in the
             summer of 2017 and the FTT determination is, in essence, split
             into two parts. The Appellant attended the hearing, gave  oral
             evidence and the Judge made the finding  that  the  Respondent
             has not discharged the burden in  relation  to  the  issue  of
             deception. The reasons for the decision are well reasoned  and
             adequately set out in the determination. That issue is not the
             challenge.


             6.   However, the FTT found that the Respondent  had  properly
             served the curtailment notice  in  December  2014  by  way  of
             record  delivery.   At  paragraphs  19  and  20  of  the   FTT
             determination, the Judge sets out his reasons  for  coming  to
             that conclusion. "


    9. It is apparent from the extracts  cited  above  that  the  appellant
       refers to the respondent's letter  dated  10  December  2014,  as  a
       "letter of curtailment" or "curtailment notice".  In the Grounds for
       Permission, at paragraphs [11], the appellant refers to the relevant
       statutory framework for the service of a notice in writing  relevant
       to the grant, refusal or variation  of  leave  as  set  out  in  the
       Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order  2000.   At  paragraph
       [16], the issue is identified:


             "The Court is asked to  consider  the  following  issues  when
             determining whether the UT has erred in considering the  issue
             of a material error of law.  The  question  for  the  FTT  was
             whether it is sufficient for the respondent to  show  that  it
             had validly served notice of a decision upon an Applicant if a
             recorded delivery is signed for  at  the  correct  address  by
             anyone else except the Applicant himself/herself?"


   10. The grounds for  permission  also  refer  to  the  decision  of  the
       Administrative Court in R (Javed) [2014] EWHC 4426 (Admin), and  the
       Upper Tribunal in R (Mahmood) -v  SSHD  (effective  service  -  2000
       Order)  [2016]  UKUT  00057  (IAC).   Those  decisions  concern  the
       obligation to serve a notice  in  writing  upon  an  individual,  in
       circumstances where the respondent is exercising the power to grant,
       refuse or vary their leave.


   11. On 13 June 2018, Mr  Justice  Turner  granted  permission  to  claim
       judicial review of the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  refuse
       permission to appeal.   In  the  observations  made  by  Mr  Justice
       Turner, he notes as follows:-

         "The requirements of the Civil Procedure Rules Part  54.7A(7)  are
         satisfied.  It is arguable, with reasonable  prospect  of  success,
         that  the  UTT  and  FTT  were  wrong  in  law  relating   to   the
         effectiveness of service of notice of curtailment of leave.

         The  issue  concerning  service  raises  an  important   point   of
    principle."

   12. The decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley refusing permission to
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal was quashed.  Permission to appeal  was
       granted, and the matter comes before us to determine  whether  there
       is an error of law in the decision of the FtT Judge,  and  if  there
       is, to remake the decision.


   13. We make one very important observation that the parties should  take
       heed of. It is singularly unhelpful, as has happened in the  context
       of this appeal, for both the Secretary of State and the appellant to
       use   terms   that   relate   to   entirely    different    matters,
       interchangeably.  Here, the Secretary of State and  the  appellant's
       representatives use the terms "curtailment" and "60-day  letter"  as
       being  one  of  the  same  things.   It  is  regrettable  that   the
       representatives do so, because that is unhelpful to the  Courts  and
       Tribunals that determine appeals such as  this,  and  on  any  view,
       cannot inspire confidence that an individual's  immigration  matters
       are being dealt with, with the care that they  should  receive.   We
       should not need to point out to representatives that there is a very
       important distinction between what has now come to be known as 'a 60-
       day letter' and a decision that 'curtails'  an  individual's  leave.
       We have set out the background to this appeal at some length, and it
       is plainly apparent that the  appeal  here,  does  not  concern  the
       effectiveness of the  service  of  a  Notice  of  Curtailment.   The
       respondent did not refer to any decision to curtail the  appellant's
       leave in the decision of 9 June 2015.  This appeal  centred  upon  a
       letter sent to the appellant informing him that the respondent  will
       suspend the consideration of his application  for  a  period  of  60
       calendar  days,  so  that  he  could  take  steps  to  withdraw  his
       application or vary it.


   14. The parties' representatives should not need to be reminded  that  a
       Notice of Curtailment has an impact upon the immigration  status  of
       an individual.  It is  a  decision  that  operates  to  vary  or  by
       curtailment, alter, any leave to enter or remain that an  individual
       enjoys.  It is a decision that has  serious  consequences  upon  the
       immigration status of that individual.  That is  very  different  to
       the consequences and status of a 60-day letter.  A 60-day letter  is
       given by the respondent to an appellant,  not  because  it  has  any
       direct impact upon the immigration status of that individual, but as
       a matter that arises out of the duty  of  fairness.   It  allows  an
       applicant to put matters that might otherwise weigh against them, in
       order, before a decision is made.  Here, the 60-day letter was  sent
       to the appellant because  the  CAS  that  was  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant was valid at the time that he made his  application  on  2
       July 2014, but by the time that the application  was  considered  by
       the respondent on 16 February 2015, the Cahro Academy  Ltd  was  not
       listed as a sponsor on the sponsor register.  That would  inevitably
       have resulted in the application being refused, but as a  matter  of
       fairness, the appellant was provided with a window of opportunity to
       vary his application and find a new Tier 4 Education Sponsor, if  he
       wished to do so.  It is clear from the  observations  that  we  make
       that the reference to the respondent's letter of 10th December  2014
       as a "letter of curtailment" to  which  the  Immigration  (Leave  to
       Enter and Remain) Order 2000 applies, was  in  fact  misleading  and
       caused Mr Justice Turner to consider that,  arguably,  the  FtT  and
       Upper Tribunal were wrong in law relating to  the  effectiveness  of
       service of the notice of curtailment of leave, when in fact no  such
       issue arose.


   15. With that observation made, we return to the decision of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Lodge.  The Judge notes, at paragraph [5],  that  the
       appellant's grounds of appeal have been  considered.   These  assert
       that the respondent  has  failed  to  establish  the  allegation  of
       dishonesty with independent supporting evidence; and  second,  there
       is no evidence of a 60-day letter  or  the  service  of  the  60-day
       letter as alleged.  The first ground was resolved in favour  of  the
       appellant.  The Judge found, at paragraph [17], that he could not be
       satisfied that the respondent has discharged the burden  of  proving
       dishonesty on the part of the appellant.

   16. The second of the grounds of appeal (i.e. the  60-day  letter),  was
       dealt with by the Judge at paragraphs [19] and [20] of the decision.
        The Judge considered the copy of the letter that  was  provided  to
       the Tribunal by the respondent.  In reaching his decision the  Judge
       also had regard to the evidence relied upon by the respondent of the
       'Track and Trace' by Royal Mail, which confirms that  the  item  was
       delivered from the Wolverhampton  delivery  office  on  13  December
       2014, and was signed  as  having  been  received  by  an  individual
       signing as "A Kaur".  The question for us is whether it was open  to
       the Judge to reach the conclusion that the document was delivered to
       the appellant's address and  received  by  the  appellant.   In  his
       submissions before us, Mr Bellara has been unable  to  identify  any
       requirement in law that requires a 60-day letter to be  served  upon
       the appellant in any particular way, before  it  has  legal  effect.
       There is for example, no requirement that such a letter must be sent
       to the appellant by way of recorded delivery.  It is sufficient  for
       it to be sent to the appellant's address as known to the respondent.
        It was in our judgment open to the  Judge,  having  considered  the
       evidence  that  was  before  the  Tribunal,  to  conclude  that  the
       signature on the Royal Mail track and trace does not  appear  to  be
       the appellant's, but nevertheless to be satisfied  that  the  letter
       was delivered to the appellant's address.  It was open to the  Judge
       to reject the appellant's claim that he did not receive the  letter.
       There is nothing irrational or unreasonable about that finding  made
       by the Judge.  It was a finding that was open to the  Judge  on  the
       evidence before him.


   17. In any event the Judge noted, at paragraph [20], that even if he did
       not receive the letter it must have been plain to the appellant that
       the college where he was purportedly  studying,  the  Cahro  Academy
       Ltd, was not a functioning institution.   Mr  Bellara  submits  that
       without a 60-day  letter,  the  appellant  could  not  find  another
       Educational Sponsor but that is simply incorrect.   It was  open  to
       the appellant to secure an alternative sponsor at any time when  for
       all intents and purposes, he had leave to remain in the UK,  without
       the need for any letter from the respondent.

   18. It follows that in our judgment, the decision of Judge Lodge is  not
       tainted by a material error of law capable of affecting the  outcome
       of the appeal, and the appeal before us is dismissed.

The Vice President, Mr C M G Ockelton

   19. I add only this.  As Judge Mandalia pointed out, this is a  case  in
       which an application for permission appears to have  been  made  and
       refused, and then there was an application for  judicial  review  of
       the Tribunal's refusal to grant permission.   As  we  have  decided,
       there is simply nothing in this appeal which could cause anybody  to
       think that the Judge erred in law.  What is of great concern is that
       in the grounds of judicial review, professionally prepared and  sent
       to the court under cover of letters from Louis Kennedy,  a  firm  of
       solicitors, it is stated several times that there was  a  letter  of
       curtailment dated 10 December 2014.  That letter  is  said  to  have
       been a specific ground of refusal,  and  in  conjunction  with  that
       assertion, there is reference to the authorities,  particularly  the
       decision of Mr Garnham QC (as he then was) in R (on the  application
       of Javed) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWHC
       4426 (Admin).  To refer to a letter of  curtailment,  and  then  the
       authorities on the service of a letter of curtailment, not only  was
       wholly misleading, wholly divorced from the facts, but also  did  in
       fact mislead Mr Justice Turner.  For those reasons it is very likely
       that the Tribunal will, under the Hamid process, wish to hear in due
       course orally from the Senior Partner of Louis Kennedy Solicitors as
       to how he came to mislead the High Court in that way.


Notice of Decision

   20. The appeal is dismissed, and the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Lodge shall stand.


   21. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date     6 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                                  Date     6 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
