
IAC-FH-AR-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02957/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Prepared at Field House           |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 December 2014               |On 13 January 2015                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR JABER AHMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer (on 22
                    September 2014)
For the Respondent:    Mr Aupoo, Legal Representative, SEB Solicitors (on
                    22 September 2014)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred as the claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of  Bangladesh,  dated  of  birth  8  December
    1988, appealed against the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  dated  15
    November 2013 to refuse his application dated 17 October 2013 for leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  and  to  make  removal
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006 as amended.

3.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Harrington who, on  18
    July 2014, allowed the appeal on human rights grounds (Article  8)  and
    dismissed the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.    Permission  to
    appeal that decision was given to the Secretary of State by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Heynes on 5 August 2014.

4.   In a determination promulgated 20 October 2014 I  found  there  was  an
    error of law made by the judge and accordingly  the  original  Tribunal
    decision could not stand. I gave directions but unfortunately the  file
    was only provided to me as a paper case on 19 December 2014. It is  now
    being remade upon the papers and the findings of fact set  out  by  the
    judge as well as the finding by the judge on  the  reliability  of  the
    Claimant's evidence stand.

5.   There is no challenge that the Claimant did not meet  the  requirements
    of either paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

6.   The purpose of the Claimant's application was to enable him to stay  to
    undertake a BA in management.  The period of the course was intended to
    be from 14 October 2013 to 19  December  2014.   That  application  was
    refused on 15 November 2013  and  the  Claimant  having  appealed  that
    decision remained in the United Kingdom pursuant to leave under Section
    3C of the Immigration Act 1971.

7.   As a fact at the time the matter was considered by the  judge  in  July
    2014 there was but a few weeks or so before the Claimant would complete
    the BA management course  and  complete  his  dissertation.   Also  the
    Claimant's final exams have now taken place, his dissertation has  been
    submitted, the Claimant expects success in those exams  and  would  now
    like to remain to undertake a MBA in  business  management,  a  further
    course which has yet to be found.

8.   The realities of the judge's decision  in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article  8  were  essentially  on  a  conclusion  that   it   was   not
    proportionate to remove the Claimant from the UK before the end of  his
    current course of study.

9.   Having considered the judge's reasoning at paragraph 32  to  37  it  is
    difficult to understand what could have been the reasons why the  judge
    found that there was a compelling case other than by working  backwards
    from the conclusion that the judge thought the  Claimant  ought  to  be
    allowed to complete  his  course  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her  very
    reasoning is demonstrated by her conclusion that if  the  Claimant  had
    already completed his course she  would  not  have  found  his  removal
    disproportionate.

10.  It seems to me that the judge's approach to the case law is  addressing
    the question of whether it is disproportionate in the judgment  of  the
    judge  to  remove  the  Claimant  rather   than   whether   there   are
    circumstances outside of the  Rules  unaddressed  by  the  Rules  which
    indicate that such  a  decision  is  required  because  of  exceptional
    circumstances or because refusal would lead to an  unjustifiably  harsh
    or disproportionate outcome.

11.  A student who has been  in the United Kingdom a number of  years  might
    reasonably be expected to understand the Rules and the requirements  of
    the Rules because they are so central to a student's presence.  Yet  in
    this case it is unarguable that the problem faced by this Claimant  was
    entirely  of  his  own  making  in  failing  to  provide  the  required
    documentation.  It is of interest that the  judge  noted  the  Claimant
    wished to undertake an MBA course starting in  January  2015  but  that
    does not feature in her reasoning for allowing the appeal under Article
    8 of the ECHR.  It is plainly not the case that the judge was  allowing
    the appeal in order to enable the MBA course to next be undertaken.

12.  In a way, as I have previously found, it is hard to see on  what  basis
    the Claimant's private life is to be given particular respect  when  in
    the light of the case law there no general expectation of  a  basis  to
    remain unlike that which may typically  arise  in  family  life  claims
    where relationships are more unique and cannot be replicated  once  the
    individual leaves the United Kingdom.  In  contrast  college,  friends,
    acquaintances made during a student's time in the  United  Kingdom  are
    inevitably on their own basis likely to come to an end  simply  on  the
    completion  of  studies  and  therefore  the  extent  to  which   those
    relationships are maintained at a distance is inevitably  going  to  be
    different.

13.   In  the  circumstances  of  this  case,  first,  I  do  not  find  the
    difficulties that the Claimant faced as a result of  his  own  failings
    indicated that it was an exceptional case. Furthermore, the  fact  that
    delay has occurred does not  seem  to  me  to  be  any  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances to show the Secretary of State's decision  was
    disproportionate.

14.  Secondly, the fact he has paid for his education is no more than  would
    be expected in any event  and  he  has  of  course  now  completed  his
    education; which  he  was  seeking  to  obtain  on  the  basis  of  the
    application that forms the basis of this appeal.

15.  Thirdly, the fact that he has undertaken the majority  of  his  course,
    indeed the whole of his course, while  awaiting  the  outcome  of  this
    appeal, may not be of his making  in one sense but it is a delay caused
    by him exercising his appeal rights.

16.  In the circumstances I find that the public  interest  particularly  in
    relation to a properly managed system of control is  important  and  as
    demonstrated by provisions of s.117A and B NIAA 2002  as  amended.  The
    Original Tribunal's decision did not stand. The following  decision  is
    substituted.

17.  The Claimant's appeal is dismissed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 19 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed        Date 19 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

