
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02970/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th August 2015                  |On 11th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                              OLUSEGUN KOLAWOLE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. On 6th July 2015 Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shaerf
    gave permission to the appellant to  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal North in which he dismissed the appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  leave  to  remain  in
    accordance with the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 2. Judge Shaerf noted that  the  grounds  of  application  challenged  the
    judge's findings about  his  relationship  to  claimed  family  members
    including his Irish daughter and partner Mariam Itua.  Designated Judge
    Shaerf thought it arguable that the appellant had not  been  given  the
    opportunity to explain, if he  could,  apparent  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence upon which the  judge  relied  in  reaching  his  conclusions.
    Further he thought that the judge had made no material mention  of  his
    reasons for refusing an adjournment decision.

 3. At the hearing before me the appellant  was  unrepresented.   In  these
    circumstances I explained the nature of the hearing,  particularly  the
    need to identify an error on a point of law in the judge's decision.  I
    assisted the appellant to make  submissions  by  asking  him  questions
    based upon his grounds of application which take the form of  a  letter
    dated 15th May 2015.

 4. The appellant said that he thought the judge should have adjourned  the
    hearing as he was "really ill and couldn't  speak".   He  also  claimed
    that he thought the judge had already decided his case and ignored  the
    documents submitted.  He also produced a letter from a doctor dated 8th
    May 2015 which postdates the hearing. This letter, signed  by  a  Dr  P
    Burns, sets out the appellant's past medical history  and  his  present
    conditions  namely:  stage  3  kidney  disease,  sciatica  and   benign
    prostatic problems.  It lists the medication  prescribed.   The  letter
    does not give any indication of the state of health of the appellant at
    the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on  15th  April
    2015.

 5. There are also other documents in the form of correspondence  to  which
    my attention was drawn and which have a label attached indicating  that
    they are proof of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    partner and her son since 2013.  The appellant emphasised that  it  was
    his illness on the day of the hearing which meant that he did not  have
    any extra documents with him.  He identified  these  documents  as  his
    daughter's identity and tax and trading documents would have shown that
    her partner was supporting him.  I indicated to the appellant that some
    of the documents now produced post-dated the hearing and so  could  not
    have been available to the judge when making his decision.

 6. The appellant then accused the judge of not allowing him  to  speak  at
    the hearing at all, at which point I indicated to him  that  the  judge
    had evidently spoken to him at the hearing about  the  adjournment  and
    the documents which he had produced and others he intended to  produce.
    I referred the appellant to paragraph 7 of the decision where  this  is
    recorded.  The appellant made no further relevant comment but proceeded
    to repeat his main claims in relation to the application.

 7. I asked Mr McVeety to address me.  He made reference to the  Presenting
    Officer's notes which contain six pages of  recorded  cross-examination
    of the appellant and an indication that the judge allowed the appellant
    to obtain more documents if he could by granting  a  short  adjournment
    and allowing him to submit additional documents which  the  judge  then
    refers to in detail in paragraph 7 of the decision.   He  thought  that
    the identity card for the appellant's daughter was  irrelevant  to  the
    application.  He also commented that the  reason  for  the  adjournment
    related to documentation and not the appellant's state of  health.   He
    submitted that the judge had dealt  with  the  relevant  provisions  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE before reaching  the  conclusion  that
    the Rules could not assist  the  appellant.   He  emphasised  that  the
    application could only have succeeded outside the Rules and  the  judge
    was entitled to dismiss the appeal.

 8. In conclusion the appellant said that he  thought  the  judge  did  not
    believe his partner.  He again emphasised  his  illnesses  which  meant
    that he was unable to cope  at  the  time  of  the  hearing.   He  then
    repeated his claim that he would be unable to survive  if  returned  to
    Nigeria.  He also said he had a relationship with his  partner's  child
    which the judge had not considered.  He concluded by  saying  that  the
    judge had not considered the documents he submitted after the  hearing.



Conclusion and reasons

 9. At the end of the hearing and after I had considered the matter  for  a
    few moments, I announced that I was not  satisfied  that  the  decision
    showed an error on a point of law and now  give  my  reasons  for  that
    conclusion.

10. The grounds of application criticise  the  judge  for  not  giving  the
    appellant a fair hearing and allege that he did not give  consideration
    to documents produced both at  and  after  the  hearing.   It  is  also
    implied that the judge reached the wrong decision in  relation  to  the
    appellant's relationship with his partner and her child.   The  grounds
    of application make no mention of ill-health as a reason for adjourning
    the hearing as opposed to the need to submit further documents.

11. The decision is comprehensive and cogently reasoned.   It  makes  clear
    reference  to  the  appellant's  request  for  an  adjournment  at  the
    commencement of the hearing.  As confirmation that the issue was before
    the judge I note that  there  is  also  reference  to  the  adjournment
    application in the judge's record of the proceedings. I accept that the
    presenting officer's notes also confirm this. The judge considered  the
    application on the basis that the appellant wanted more time to respond
    to arguments put  in  the  respondent's  refusal  which  the  appellant
    thought had nothing to do with his claim. The issue of illness was  not
    raised in  this  respect.  The  judge  was  not  wrong  to  refuse  the
    adjournment on the basis that the appellant had ample time  to  prepare
    for the hearing.  Nevertheless, the judge fairly put back  the  hearing
    in response to the appellant's claim  that  his  partner  was  bringing
    additional documents to the hearing centre which were relevant  to  his
    appeal.   After  hearing  reasons  for  the  appellant's  partner   not
    remaining at the hearing centre after she had transported the appellant
    there earlier in the morning, the judge reached the conclusion, open to
    him, that the appellant was  fabricating  his  reasons  to  request  an
    adjournment.

12. Additionally, in paragraph 7 of the decision, the judge records that he
    did give the appellant the opportunity  to  present  further  documents
    after the hearing had been concluded and that these would be taken into
    consideration.  The judge evidently considered the documents which were
    subsequently provided because he identifies and comments upon  them  in
    the  decision.   He  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  none   of   the
    documentation assisted him to find that the appellant was  living  with
    his partner at any time. He was entitled to  reject  the  human  rights
    claim on the basis that  the  appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  had
    established any private or family life.

13. It is also plain that the judge gave proper and detailed  consideration
    to the application of the Immigration Rules in Appendix  FM  (including
    section EX) and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  properly
    concluded that the provisions could not benefit the appellant.

14. The judge also  considers  the  appellant's  medical  condition  before
    reaching his overall conclusions as paragraph 13 of the decision shows.

15. I am unable to conclude that the comprehensive  and  cogently  reasoned
    decision shows any error on a point of law.  It is quite  evident  from
    the content of the decision that the  judge  gave  proper  and  careful
    consideration to the evidence put before him without  any  preconceived
    notions.  No error is shown.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested  nor  do  I  consider  it  appropriate  in  this
appeal.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
