
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
ia/02491/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9th March 2018                         | On 4th April 2018                |


                                   Before

            DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PROFESSOR SATVINDER JUSS

                                   Between

                               mr gurmit singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Trevaskis promulgated on 2nd October 2017, following the  hearing
    at  Columbus  House  in  Newport  on  27th  September  2017.   In   the
    determination, the judge allowed the appeal, whereupon  the  Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on 15th April
    1972.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  21st
    September 2016, refusing him leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of
    his family and private life.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The basis of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent is against the weight of the evidence, is not in  accordance
    with the Rules, and is not compatible with the Appellant's rights under
    the ECHR.  The Appellant had entered the UK on 26th  August  1995,  his
    asylum application was then in 1996 and  on  29th  September  2010,  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long  residency.
    However,  on  15th  August  2011,  he  was  sentenced  to  six  months'
    imprisonment for possession of a false document.  He was then  released
    from prison on 29th October 2011 (see paragraph 3).  The Respondent was
    not satisfied that the perpetrator accrued fourteen  years'  continuous
    residence,  because  it  had  been  disrupted  by   his   sentence   of
    imprisonment, which his sentence was not spent until 29th July 2018.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the Appellant's submission that he could  point
    to the decision of the Upper Tribunal promulgated on 18th August  2015,
    in which it was  found  that,  at  the  date  of  his  application  for
    indefinite leave in 2010, he had completed fourteen  years'  continuous
    residence, because his prison sentence  had  become  spent  in  January
    2012, before the final refusal decision  in  2014  (see  paragraph  9).
    Accordingly, the Appellant submitted that  he  had  satisfied  all  the
    requirements for grant of leave under paragraph 276B.  The judge  found
    that the Appellant had already passed the Knowledge of Life  Test,  and
    he had also passed the ESOL test (paragraph 14).  It was also concluded
    that, at the date of the decision by the Respondent, the Appellant  was
    not subject to an unspent conviction (paragraph 15).  This was  because
    the conviction was spent in January 2012 and that,  "It  is  no  longer
    reasonable to conclude that the fact of that conviction still  rendered
    him incapable of satisfying the  Rules  for  the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave, when the decision was made in 2014" (paragraph 16).

 5. The appeal was allowed.

 6. The grounds of application state that Judge Trevaskis  had  misdirected
    himself because the application was refused under paragraph 322(1C) and
    this type of refusal is mandatory, a  matter  that  was  overlooked  by
    Judge Travaskis, who has instead concentrated on  when  the  conviction
    became spent. The grounds  go  on  to  state  that  a  closer  look  at
    paragraph 322(1C) reveals that where a  person  is  seeking  indefinite
    leave to remain "they have been convicted of an offence for which  they
    have been sentenced to imprisonment for less than twelve months, unless
    a period of seven years has passed since the end of the sentence"  they
    could not succeed.  This is because on 15th August 2011 at Inner London
    Crown Court the Appellant was sentenced to six months' imprisonment and
    was released on 29th October 2011.  A period of  seven  years  has  not
    passed since the end of this sentence.  Therefore, the  Appellant  fell
    to be refused under general grounds by reference to  paragraph  322(1C)
    and subparagraph (iii).

 7. On 21st December 2017 permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal.



Submissions

 8. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Walker,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  submitted  that  he  had  first-hand
    knowledge of this appeal because he was involved as a Senior Presenting
    Officer in the earlier decision which went before Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Davey, when he considered how long the Appellant had been in  the
    UK; his criminal conviction of six months; whether that was extant; and
    under the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders  Act  2012,
    the relevant period that should  have  passed  after  the  end  of  the
    sentence, was not seven years, but 24 months.  This being so, Mr Walker
    submitted that the grounds of application,  as  drafted,  simply  "fall
    away".

 9. For his part, Mr Sharma submitted that the Legal  Aid,  Sentencing  and
    Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, was already a document  that  was  in
    the Appellant's and the Respondent Secretary of State's own bundle  (at
    tab B, from B1 to B8) and he helpfully handed up a copy, extracting  it
    from the Respondent's Secretary of State's bundle.  He  submitted  that
    since Mr Walker had stated that the grounds of  application  now  "fall
    away" there were two options before this Tribunal.  The first  was  for
    the Upper Tribunal to determine the appeal now in  Mr  Singh's  favour,
    given that the grounds of  application  were  not  being  relied  upon.
    Second, was to consider whether Mr Walker was in a position to withdraw
    the appeal before the Upper Tribunal today.

10. Mr Walker replied to say that he was not in a position to withdraw  the
    appeal.

11. Accordingly, I have determined the appeal on the basis, that since  the
    grounds of application are no longer sustainable, then the decision  of
    Judge Trevaskis below, that, "that the Appellant was not subject to  an
    unspent conviction" (paragraph 15), such that the appeal failed  to  be
    allowed, means that the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal cannot have
    been in error.

Decision

12. There is no material error of law in Judge  Trevaskis'  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

13. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 27th March 2018
