
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02740/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 September 2013                          |On 8 October 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           LOUIS-ALEXANDRE GIROUX

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Turner, instructed by Sunrise Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the respondent against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal allowing Mr Giroux's appeal against the decision refusing
    him a residence card as an extended family member.  In this decision  I
    will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    Mr  Giroux  as  the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Canada who was born on 24 June 1978.   He
    was involved in a serious motor vehicle accident on  15  July  1996  in
    which he sustained severe injuries leaving him partially blind and with
    brain damage. On discharge from hospital he lived with his brother, his
    sponsor,  in Montreal until August 1997 when his brother moved  to  the
    UK.   His brother is a Belgian citizen and continues to live in the  UK
    exercising treaty rights.  After he moved  from  Canada  the  appellant
    lived with his mother who took care of him with his  brother  providing
    financial support.

3.   The appellant visited  the  UK  in  2011  for  respite  care  with  his
    brother.  He returned to Canada but came back to the UK  later  in  the
    year to attend his  brother's  wedding  on  1  October  2011.   He  has
    continued to live in the UK since then.  The  matter  appears  to  have
    come to the attention of the authorities when  the  appellant  and  his
    family returned  for  a  trip  from  abroad  and  were  interviewed  by
    immigration officials at Coquelles on 4 May 2012.   The  appellant  was
    granted leave to enter the UK on compassionate grounds until  the  date
    of his return flight home to Canada on 26 June 2012.  This led  to  the
    application for a residence card on 20 June 2012.

4.   The respondent was not  satisfied  that  a  residence  card  should  be
    issued and the application was refused  on  10  January  2013  for  the
    reasons given in the Reasons for Refusal Letter of the same date.

5.   The appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    allowed.  The judge considered reg 8(2) and  8(3)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations")  and
    concluded as follows:

         "20. From the medical and independent social  worker's  evidence  I
             conclude that the appellant, the brother of an  EEA  national,
             requires the personal care of the  brother  and  his  wife  on
             serious health grounds.  In that claim I  also  conclude  from
             the medical evidence before me that  the  appellant's  mother,
             his sole relative in Canada, is  unable  because  of  her  own
             physical and mental handicap to care for the appellant.


         21.  There is also clear evidence in RB  [the  respondent's  appeal
             bundle] that after the appellant's discharge from hospital the
             brother provided for the appellant financially  and  continued
             to do so by regular transmissions of money from the UK  later.
             The brother and his wife  are  now  the  sole  carers  of  the
             appellant who is mentally handicapped.  I find  the  appellant
             is the extended family member under Regulation 8 of  the  2006
             Regulations and as such entitled to  a  residence  card  under
             Regulation 17.


         22.  In view of my findings under the 2006 Regulations  it  is  not
             necessary for me to consider Article 8 ECHR issues."


The Grounds and Submissions

6.   In her grounds of appeal the respondent argued that judge erred in  law
    by allowing the appeal outright when she should have allowed the appeal
    only to the extent that the matter be remitted  to  the  respondent  to
    consider exercising her discretion  under  reg.  17(4).  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 25 July 2013.

7.   At the hearing before me Mr Tufan adopted his  grounds  and  relied  on
    the Tribunal determination in Ihemedu (OFMs:  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 000340 (IAC).  Mr Turner submitted that there was no purpose in  a
    remittal to the respondent as the outcome was clear as the  facts  were
    overwhelmingly compelling.  He submitted that any  error  made  by  the
    judge would not be material to the outcome of the appeal  and  that  in
    any event the respondent  had  already  exercised  her  discretion.  He
    referred to and relied on the Tribunal decision  in  Ukus  (Discretion:
    when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC).

Consideration of the Issues

8.   The respondent has not sought to challenge  the  judge's  finding  that
    the appellant was able to meet the requirements of reg. 8 of  the  2006
    Regulations and therefore met the  definition  of  an  extended  family
    member.  The judge was clearly satisfied that the appellant came within
    reg. 8(3) as the relative of an EEA national  who,  on  serious  health
    grounds, strictly required the personal  care  of  that  national.   Mr
    Tufan submitted that the respondent had not exercised discretion  under
    reg. 17(4) and that the judge had erred in law by allowing  the  appeal
    simply on the basis that the appellant was an extended family member.

9.   In Ihemedu, UTJ Storey said:

         "12. There are also aspects of the IJ's reasoning  in  relation  to
             the claimant's claimed dependency in the UK and/or  membership
             of the EEA's principle household  in the  UK  which  are  also
             questionable, but it is  unnecessary  to  address  those.  The
             fact, however, that the IJ went on at para 17 to find that the
             claimant was entitled to a residence card for the sole  reason
             that he was an extended family member (see above  para  2)  is
             another plain error.  Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations
             confers on the  decision-maker  discretion  as  to  whether  a
             person found to be an OFM/extended  family  member  is  to  be
             granted a residence card.  In exercising that discretion  such
             as whether  an  applicant  has  entered  the  UK  lawfully  or
             otherwise  are  plainly  relevant  (although  not  necessarily
             determinative: see YB (EEA reg. 17(4): proper approach)  Ivory
             Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062 and Aladesulu and Others [2006]  reg.
             8 (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT 00253 (IAC)). But  in  this  case  the
             Secretary of State had not exercised that  discretion  and  so
             the most the IJ was entitled to do was to allow the appeal  as
             being not in accordance with the law, leaving  the  matter  of
             whether to exercise the reg. 17(4) discretion in his favour to
             the Secretary of State: see Yau Yak Wah [1982]  ImmAR  16;  MO
             (Reg. 17(4) EEA regs (Iraq) [2008]  UKAIT  00061.   Given  the
             fundamental nature of the two errors of law identified above I
             hereby set aside his decision."

10.  There is nothing in the determination in Ukus to  support  an  argument
    that where discretion has not been exercised, it is open to  the  judge
    to consider whether the discretion should be exercised differently.  To
    the contrary, Ukus supports the proposition that  where  the  decision-
    maker has failed to exercise a discretion, the result will be to  allow
    the appeal to the extent of deciding that the respondent needs to  make
    a fresh decision: see [22] and [23].

11.  Mr Turner submitted that in fact in the  present  case  the  respondent
    had exercised the  discretion  under  reg.  17(4).   I  note  that  the
    decision reads as follows:

         "You have applied for a  residence  card  as  the  extended  family
         member of an EEA national.  Your application has been considered in
         accordance with Regulation 8 of the Immigration (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006  but  there  are  insufficient  grounds  for
         issuing   you  with  a  residence  card.   It  is  also  felt   not
         appropriate  to  issue  a  residence  card  with  consideration  of
         Regulation 17(4)."

12.  The final sentence set out above is not entirely  clear  on  whether  a
    discretion has been exercised but any doubt is resolved by the  Reasons
    for Refusal Letter of 10 January 2013.   The  respondent  set  out  her
    reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of reg. 8(2) and (3) and then says at page 4:

         "Consequently the Secretary of State does not accept that  you  are
         (a  person)  who  falls  within  Regulation  8(2)  or   (3).   Your
         application is not, therefore an application for a  residence  card
         by an  extended  family  member  falling  to  be  determined  under
         Regulation 17(4) of those Regulations and is consequently refused."

13.  It is therefore  clear  that  the  respondent  has  not  exercised  her
    discretion under reg. 17(4) and I am satisfied that the judge erred  in
    law by proceeding on the basis that, as the appellant could   meet  the
    requirements of reg. 8, he was entitled to a residence card under  reg.
    17(4). It was also argued that this was a case where the outcome of the
    exercise of the respondent's discretion was clear in the light  of  the
    judge's findings of fact.  I am not satisfied that this the  case:  the
    respondent is entitled to take into account factors  not  arising  when
    considering whether the provisions of reg. 8(2) and (3) are met.

14.  I am therefore satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  and  the  order
    which should have been  made was to allow the appeal to the extent that
    the matter was remitted to the respondent to consider the  exercise  of
    discretion under reg. 17(4).  I fully accept that this further delay is
    a very unhappy state of affairs  for  the  appellant  and  his  family.
    There has been no challenge to the judge's findings of primary fact  on
    the issues relating to reg. 8 and they will  doubtless  be  taken  into
    account by the respondent when considering the exercise  of  discretion
    under reg. 17(4).  I also hope that the decision under reg. 17(4)  will
    be made by the respondent as speedily as possible in the light  of  the
    anxiety that the delay is causing to the appellant.

Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I  set  aside  the  decision  and
    substitute a decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law, it now  being
    for the respondent to decide whether to exercise discretion under  reg.
    17(4).





Signed                                  Date: 7 October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
