
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/02460/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 February 2016                       |On 8 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ms elisangela larson neto

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Willcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Pearse
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bradshaw)  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision taken on  25  November  2014  to
    refuse  the  respondent's  application  for  a  resident   card   under
    regulation 18 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the Regulations").

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of  Brazil  born  on  29  March  1975.  She
    entered the UK as a visitor on 15 June 2005. She has a son, Y, born  in
    2007. His father is a citizen of Portugal born in 1968 ("the  father").
    The respondent failed to leave the UK when her visa expired  but  later
    made several applications to regularise her stay.  The  respondent  has
    never lived with the father and Y lives with her. He  sees  the  father
    almost every day, stays some weekends and the father  provides  monthly
    child support.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that the father was not a worker. He was self-
    employed as the director of Vale Victoria Limited.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 28 July 2015.  She  was  represented  by  Ms
    Gunamal, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that the father was  an
    employee of Vale Victoria Limited and was therefore a  worker  for  the
    purposes of the Regulations. If the respondent were to be removed  from
    the UK then Y would leave with her. The respondent was adamant that  he
    would not be left with the father. The father suggested that  he  would
    apply to the courts to stop Y from leaving the UK.  If  the  respondent
    was required to leave the UK then Y, being in her sole custody and  she
    being his primary carer, would be unable to continue to be educated  in
    the UK. The appeal was allowed under the Regulations.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  by
    failing to have regard to the requirement in regulation 15A(4A)(c) that
    Y would be unable to reside in the UK  or  another  EEA  state  if  the
    respondent were required to leave. The respondent had not  demonstrated
    that Y would be compelled  to  leave  the  UK  if  the  respondent  was
    required to leave. The Secretary of State relied upon paragraph  41  of
    MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside  EU)  Iran  [2013]  UKUT  380.
    There also was no evidence that the father was unable to assume  caring
    responsibilities - disinclination  or  reluctance  did  not  reach  the
    threshold set out in the Regulations.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson
    on 31 December 2015 on the basis that the  issue  was  not  what  would
    happen in practice but whether the child would actually  be  unable  to
    remain in education in the UK. It  was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    applied the wrong test.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

 9. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submitted that the issue was the judge's  approach
    and the basis upon which the appeal was allowed. Paragraph  17  of  the
    decision asserts that the minor EEA child would have to leave with  the
    respondent but the judge did not engage sufficiently  with  the  issue.
    The judge had to consider whether the child could be cared for  by  the
    father. The judge did not consider the  relevant  authorities  and  the
    further bundle submitted on 23 February 2016 was not before the judge.

10. Mr Jesurum submitted that Zambrano rests on Article 20 and is about the
    rights of the child. Looking at paragraph 17 of the decision, there was
    a finding that Y would be unable to be educated in the  UK.  The  child
    would lose  the  benefits  of  his  right  to  EU  citizenship  if  the
    respondent is removed from the UK. The  issue  is  whether  the  father
    would or could care for Y in the UK. Paragraph 77  of  SSHD  v  AQ  and
    others [2015] EWCA Civ 250 points towards "would". The  fact  that  the
    father could look after the child is not a  reason  to  set  aside  the
    judge's decision.

11. I accept that the key paragraphs of the decision  are  10  and  17.  At
    paragraph 10, the judge found that Y had never lived  with  the  father
    and had only stayed with the father on some weekends. At paragraph  17,
    if the respondent were to be removed then Y would leave  with  her.  He
    would therefore be unable to continue to be educated in the UK.  It  is
    common ground that the judge did not consider whether the father  could
    care for Y, enabling him to remain in education in the UK.

12. I have considered MA and SM. At paragraph 41, the Upper Tribunal  cited
    Jamil Sanneh [2013] EWHC 793 in which Hickinbottom  J  held  that  even
    where a non-EU ascendant relative is compelled to leave  EU  territory,
    the article 20 rights of the EU child will not be infringed if there is
    another ascendant relative who has the right of residence  in  the  EU,
    and who can and will in practice care for the  child.  It  is  for  the
    national courts to determine as a question  of  fact  on  the  evidence
    before, whether an EU citizen would be compelled to  leave  the  EU  to
    follow a non-EU national upon whom he is dependent. In this appeal, the
    judge found as a fact that if the respondent left the UK then  Y  would
    leave with her. That finding closes the door on any suggestion that the
    father would in practice care for Y, because if he did so then Y  would
    not have to leave the EU.

13. Further support for Mr Jesurum's submissions can be  found  in  AQ.  At
    paragraph 77, the Court of Appeal stated that the domestic tribunal  is
    entitled to examine all of the circumstances provided that the focus is
    upon the practical effects of deportation. In this  appeal,  the  judge
    clearly  found  that  the  practical  effect  of  deportation  of   the
    respondent would be that Y would leave the EU and be unable to continue
    his education in the UK. That  finding  was  based  upon  the  previous
    findings of fact in paragraph 10 of the decision  -  particularly  that
    the father had no history of caring for Y  and  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that he would be willing to take full  parental  responsibility
    rather than the  current  arrangement  of  regular  contact  and  child
    support.

14. I am satisfied that Ajinde and Thinjom (Carers - Reg  15A  -  Zambrano)
    [2015] UKUT 00560 (IAC) does not assist the Secretary of State  because
    that case was about adult dependents  rather  than  children.  In  this
    appeal, the judge could have said more about the father's position  and
    willingness to become a sole parental carer in the  UK.  However,  that
    does not mean that the findings of fact made by the judge are perverse.
    They are soundly based upon the factual matrix that  emerged  from  the
    evidence. There is no conflict with established case law.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under the Regulations did not involve the making of an error  of
    law and its decision stands. I have not found it necessary to  consider
    the  further  bundle  of  evidence  submitted   by   the   respondent's
    representatives for the Upper Tribunal hearing.



Decision

16. Consequently, I dismiss the appeal of the Secretary of State.





Signed   [pic]                      Date  23 March 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
