
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/02934/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                 |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 February 2016                          |On 12 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MB

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms N Willcocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:      Mr Liam Doyle of M&K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant (hereafter the Secretary of State)  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge ) allowing the  respondent's
    appeal against a decision taken  on  2  September  2014  to  refuse  an
    application for leave to remain under Article 8  of  the  ECHR  and  to
    remove the respondent to Pakistan.

Introduction

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1953. She married SA in
    1971. It was an Islamic marriage. He is a UK citizen living in  the  UK
    since 1966. SA also married RA in the UK and she lives  with  him.  The
    appellant and SA have three children,  Naeem  (born  in  1975),  Nadeem
    (born in 1981) and Aneela (born in 1993).  They  are  all  UK  citizens
    living in the UK. The respondent came to the  UK  as  a  visitor  on  1
    September 2012 and then made various applications for further leave  to
    remain. The respondent no longer wishes to live  in  Pakistan  and  her
    children support her in the UK. She has maintained her marriage through
    visits and telephone contact. She has never lived with SA. There  would
    be no one to support her in Pakistan. She suffers  from  dizziness  and
    memory loss.

 4.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  respondent's  identity   and
    nationality but concluded that she did not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules  and  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    justify granting leave to remain outside the Rules.

The Appeal

 5. The respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing  at  Sheldon  Court,  Birmingham  on  23  July  2015.  She  was
    represented by Mr Blundell, Counsel. The First-tier Tribunal found that
    there were no insurmountable obstacles to return given the  absence  of
    any intolerable harassment by her new mother in law, lack of proven ill
    health and the fact that the respondent had spent the vast majority  of
    her life in Pakistan. However, the respondent had family life  with  SA
    and her adult children in the UK. Article 8 was engaged and it was  not
    proportionate to require the respondent to return to Pakistan  to  make
    an application for entry clearance.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  in
    finding that the  respondent's  relationship  with  her  children  went
    beyond normal family ties, failed to give adequate reasons in  relation
    to Article 8, failed to give adequate reasons in  relation  to  section
    117B of the 2002 Act and  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
    finding that the respondent could not return to Pakistan on her own  to
    make an application for entry clearance.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    on 2 December 2015 on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge
    erred in finding that the relationship with the adult children amounted
    to family life and it was not clear why the respondent could not return
    to Pakistan to make an application for  entry  clearance.  All  grounds
    were arguable.

 8. In a  rule  24  response  dated  26  February  2016,  the  respondent's
    representatives  submitted  that  there  was  considerable  weight   in
    counsel's submissions that the rules did not cater for  the  respondent
    to exercise the totality of her Article 8 rights. The judge  gave  full
    reasons for finding that the family life outweighed the public interest
    in removal. The public interest principles in section 117B do not cater
    for this situation where family life was enjoyed  with  adult  children
    and her grandchildren. The relationship with her  British  husband  was
    not  formed  when  her  immigration  status  was  precarious.  She  had
    financial support.  The  judge  gave  more  than  adequate  reasons  in
    relation to  the  public  interest.  There  was  an  extreme  level  of
    dependency upon UK family members. There  was  compelling  evidence  of
    family life. There was no sensible reason to insist on  even  temporary
    separation given the strength and quality of family life.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submitted that  the  judge  had  given  inadequate
    reasons for finding that family life was established  and  the  adverse
    circumstances in Pakistan. The findings at paragraph 66 of the decision
    indicate no poor health, previous use of  family  visit  visas  and  no
    legitimate expectation to remain. The  judge  weighed  up  whether  the
    respondent could return at paragraphs  69-72  but  missed  whether  the
    respondent could return to make an application. She chose to enter as a
    visitor rather than apply in the correct category. At paragraph 77  the
    judge found that the respondent could not succeed under the Immigration
    Rules and then contradicted the findings at  paragraph  66.  The  judge
    failed to consider  that  the  respondent  would  continue  to  receive
    support in Pakistan and had returned to Pakistan many times previously.
    The current application was made on 8 April  2015  by  which  time  the
    leave to remain had expired. The judge had used Article 8 as a  general
    dispensing power. There was no basis for finding family  life  and  the
    assessment outside the Rules was therefore incorrect.

11. Mr Doyle submitted that paragraphs 54 and 75-77 set out how  the  judge
    came to the findings  regarding  family  life  outweighing  the  public
    interest. The judge addressed  each  component  of  section  117B.  The
    strength and quality of family life appears  at  paragraphs  14-17  and
    financial/practical support were dealt with at paragraphs 19-21. All of
    that led to the findings at paragraph 69 that  the  respondent  had  no
    close relatives in Pakistan. The family members  are  British  citizens
    who could not go  back  to  Pakistan  to  look  after  the  respondent.
    Adequate reasoning was given. The respondent originally made an in time
    application but that was refused; therefore the current application was
    made  when  the  visit  visa  had  expired.  That  was  not  fatal   to
    consideration outside the Rules. There can be family life between adult
    siblings and the findings at paragraph 42 were  properly  open  to  the
    judge. The judge did consider the Rules first and was  fully  cognisant
    of R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD [2015] UKUT  189  (IAC),  from
    paragraphs 65 and 76-77). The length and degree of family separation is
    important. The findings at paragraph 68 were open  to  the  judge.  The
    family say that the respondent suffers from forgetfulness and  mobility
    problems. If a material error of law is found than there should be a de
    novo hearing to address new medical evidence.

12. Ms Willcocks-Briscoe submitted in response that there had been no cross-
    appeal  against  the  findings  at  paragraphs  66-68.  There   is   no
    requirement for further evidence and the decision could  be  remade  on
    the basis of submissions.

13. I note that the judge found at paragraph 66 of the  decision  that  the
    respondent had not proved that  she  suffered  from  poor  health,  any
    alleged harassment in Pakistan  was  not  sufficient  to  preclude  her
    return to Pakistan and that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    return. The respondent had always been financially supported by SA  and
    was regularly visited in Pakistan by SA and  her  sons.  There  was  no
    reason why those arrangements could not  continue.  Those  findings  of
    fact have not been challenged by the respondent and form an unpromising
    backdrop for her Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

14. At paragraph 69 of the decision, the judge found  that  over  the  last
    three years the respondent had developed a close relationship with  her
    adult children. She was supported  financially  by  her  sons.  It  was
    reasonable to  conclude  that  she  was  financially,  emotionally  and
    practically dependent upon them. The relationship disclosed  more  than
    the normal emotional ties  and  there  was  a  far  greater  degree  of
    dependency which went beyond the irreducible minimum of family life.  I
    find that those conclusions are unsupported by the evidence. The  judge
    found that the respondent was not in poor  health  and  had  previously
    been supported by SA. The mere existence of  financial,  practical  and
    emotional support is not sufficient  to  constitute  family  life  with
    adult children. Adult children routinely provide such support to  their
    parents. The  judge  did  not  identify  why  those  elements  were  so
    compelling in this case to merit a finding of family life  between  the
    respondent and her adult children. I find that the judge has failed  to
    give adequate reasons for that key  finding  of  fact  and  that  is  a
    material error of law.

15. The judge found at paragraph 77 of the decision that the respondent had
    family life in the UK and a right to remain in the UK. On  that  basis,
    the requirement to return to Pakistan to apply for entry clearance  was
    disproportionate because the might be several months of disruption  and
    the respondent could not return on her own. I find that several  months
    of "disruption" is not a compelling reason to grant leave  outside  the
    Rules. No reasons were given as to why the respondent could not  return
    on her own. In accordance with Chen, it is for the respondent to  prove
    that  temporary  separation  would  interfere  disproportionately  with
    protected rights. The judge found that there were no health issues  and
    no  other  insurmountable  obstacles  to  return.  The  respondent  had
    accommodation and financial support in Pakistan. There  was  no  proper
    factual basis for the finding that return to make  an  entry  clearance
    application would amount to disproportionate interference.  That  is  a
    further material error of law.

16. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  respondent's
    appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error of law  and  its
    decision cannot stand. I have not found it necessary  to  consider  the
    remaining grounds of appeal.

Decision

17. Mr Doyle invited me to order a rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal  if
    I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph 7.2 of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statements I consider that  an  appropriate
    course of action. I find that the errors of law infect the decision  as
    a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de novo with all issues to
    be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal. I am not persuaded that
    the findings of fact are sufficient to remake the decision on the basis
    of submissions only. I take into account  the  possibility  of  further
    medical evidence.

18. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.




Signed   [pic]                      Date  28 March 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
