
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/02303/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14th April 2016                     |    On 29th April 2016              |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                              miss sunita shah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel instructed by OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant contends that there is error in Judge  Mailer's  decision
    promulgated on 26th August  2015  in  which  he  dismissed  her  appeal
    brought on Immigration Rules' grounds in respect  of  paragraph  276ADE
    and Appendix FM, Asylum and Articles 2, 3, and 8 ECHR.

 2. The grounds contend that the  judge  has  failed  to  engage  with  the
    Appellant's asylum claim or Ground  of  Appeal  as  it  was  raised  in
    relation to Section 120 and that the judge considered that she had made
    no application for asylum to the point that he refused to deal with it.
     The grounds further contended that the judge's approach in respect  of
    Article 8 was inadequate failing to make findings in respect of  family
    life in the context of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Singh and
    Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630 and that the judge failed  to  follow
    the structured approach suggested in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

 3. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal and in a notice dated
    23rd February 2016  Judge  Simpson  having  accurately  summarised  the
    Appellant's grounds at paragraph 2 considered the same and at paragraph
    3 and 4 of that notice found:

         "3. It is clear that the Appellant's Section 120  notice  contained
         claims for humanitarian protection and asylum.  Consequently, it is
         arguable that the judge erred in failing to deal with those  claims
         save for the statement 'the Appellant had made no  application  for
         asylum'.

           4.  The grounds and decision identify an arguable material  error
         of law."

 4. The first point that I want to deal with  is  that  Mr  Collins  argued
    before me that the grounds and the grant were such that it was open  to
    him to argue the permission encompassed the Article 8 issues which  had
    been raised.

 5. I disagreed with that  position  finding  that  the  grant  is  clearly
    directed to the issue raised in respect of the asylum claim as set  out
    at paragraph 3 of those grounds and at paragraph 4 when  the  judge  is
    referring to the arguable material error of law it is quite plainly  in
    the context of a conclusion that reads back to the earlier paragraph.

 6. I turn to the issue in respect of the asylum position.

 7. In terms of the summary of the Appellant's Grounds of Appeal the  judge
    notes at paragraphs 11  and  12  the  inclusion  of  the  international
    protection grounds which, in  summary,  represent  the  full  suite  of
    grounds available.  At  paragraph  20  the  judge  sets  out  that  the
    Appellant had, in making her assertion of difficulties  in  respect  of
    return relating to private and family life which fell for consideration
    under paragraph 276, asserted matters which the Respondent advised  her
    were international protection matters, requiring further application.

 8. In the event the Appellant did not make such an  application.  That  is
    accurately recorded by the judge at paragraph 185 of the decision where
    he states:

      a)  "The Appellant has made no application for asylum."

 9.  It is clear that the judge is referring to the factual position in the
    context  of  no  application  having  been  made  historically  because
    paragraph 185 appears in the context of  a  historical  resume  of  the
    Appellant's claims and history in the United Kingdom.

10. Further, it is accurate because the Appellant had not made a claim  for
    asylum but raised asylum grounds of appeal by  way  of  a  Section  120
    notice. The judge has correctly identified elsewhere (including 11] and
    [12]) that the ground was before him.

11. The judge assesses the context of the Appellant's claim at paragraph 31
    when he sets out that she is scared and in fear of her life if returned
    to Nepal on the basis that she thinks that it would not be safe  for  a
    single woman to live alone. Indeed that is the  context  of  the  claim
    which was relied on before me by Mr Collins when  he  argued  that  the
    judge had failed to assess that subjective fear. The final part of  the
    Appellant's asylum or international protection  claims  argued  at  the
    First-tier were that as a result of earthquakes the Appellant would  be
    homeless, or as a result of her own financial position,  she  would  be
    homeless.

12. At paragraph 70 of the decision the Respondent's  contention  that  the
    Appellant's  fear  about  being  destitute  and  forced  to  become   a
    prostitute had not been made out is assessed. The contention  was  made
    in the context of the Appellant having family resources and the absence
    of country information of single women being  driven  to  prostitution.
    The decision records the Respondent's reminder to  the  judge  that  no
    specific vulnerability had been asserted by  the  Appellant,  that  the
    Appellant had been in Nepal on her own, in the  sense  of  her  parents
    having arrived in the United Kingdom between 2000 and  2007,  and  that
    the sisters had gone into a hostel  to  study,  and  of  the  Appellant
    having a work history here and in Nepal.

13. The judge refers to the matter again at paragraph 218 in the context of
    the position on return referencing the earthquake, the lack of evidence
    that it would  force  problems  in  terms  of  reintegration,  and  the
    strength of her background in terms of having lived in that country  as
    an adult and being familiar with the context of the country.  The judge
    finds that the Appellant would have the assistance of  her  parents  as
    well as other relatives in the United Kingdom until  she  was  able  to
    find her feet and obtain employment in Nepal, and  that  the  Appellant
    would be able to obtain suitable rented  accommodation  :to  the  point
    that she would not be destitute or forced into prostitution.

14. In the context of the decision as a  whole  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    assertion that the judge has  failed  to  give  separate  reasoning  in
    respect of the Appellant's fear of living alone in Nepal,  acknowledged
    as a subjective fear, falls far short of showing any material error  in
    respect of the assessment of the Appellant's  international  protection
    claim.

15. The judge issued a decision dismissing the appeal. In that  context  it
    is clear that the appeal that has been dismissed on all of the  grounds
    that had been put forward by the Appellant.  I am  satisfied  that  the
    reasoning as a whole deals adequately with the case as it was argued by
    the Appellant on the day, and, whilst specific articulation in  respect
    of dismissal with reference to  the  asylum  grounds  would  have  been
    helpful, the grounds' contention that the judge refused to deal with it
    as reflected by the assertion at 185 that the  Appellant  has  made  no
    claim or no application for asylum is not borne out when  the  decision
    is read as a whole.

16. The consideration of the Appellant's appeal and assessment of her  fear
    on return and whether or not there is sufficient to warrant  the  grant
    of international protection whether on asylum or Article 3 grounds were
    matters that stood and fell together.

17. The decision dismissing the appeal encompasses all grounds, reveals  no
    error, and it stands.

Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is dismissed.


19.  The  decision  of  the  First  -tier  Tribunal  judge  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal reveals no material error of law requiring it to  be
    set aside, and it stands.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



