
[pic]
IAC-AH-cj-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02351/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th March 2016                            |On 25 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                            mr Mohammed Abu Jahed
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, instructed by KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 22nd November 1996 and
    he challenges with permission a decision made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gibbs on 12th August 2015 whereby she dismissed his appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds against the  decision
    of the Secretary of State refusing him leave to remain  under  Appendix
    FM and paragraphs 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  The judge  recorded
    that the appellant entered the UK on 2nd March 2008 accompanied by  his
    father when he was 11 years old and did not return to Bangladesh  prior
    to the expiry of his visit visa some six months later.

 2. On 24th March 2010 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain
    in the UK and that application was refused but on 29th November 2010 he
    was granted leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  until  22nd
    November 2014.  On 25th September 2014 he applied for further leave  to
    remain in the UK.  That application was refused on 23rd  December  2014
    on the basis the appellant did not meet  the  suitability  requirements
    because he failed to declare that he was convicted of  robbery  on  7th
    September 2012 and the appellant was refused further to the suitability
    requirements that being S-LTR 1.6 and S-LTR 2.2.   The  respondent  was
    not satisfied that there were  any  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
    case.  A decision was made to remove the appellant under Section 47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The permission to appeal asserted that the judge erred at paragraph  10
    of the decision in concluding that S-LTR.2.2 is mandatory as  the  Rule
    states, whether or not to the applicant's knowledge, and submitted that
    this construction  was  erroneous  in  the  light  of  AA  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department EWCA Civ 773 were the  court
    held that intention was necessary and there had to  be  dishonesty  for
    deception to apply.  That Rule also applied to "whether or not  to  the
    applicant's knowledge" in relation to  false  representations  and  the
    judge erred in failing to recognise that the intention  was  necessary.
    Having found at paragraph 11 there was an innocent mistake on the  part
    of the appellant the judge should  have  concluded  S-LTR.2.2  did  not
    apply and gone on to consider  276ADE  specifically  Section  (iv)  and
    (vi).

 4. This was a minor child who was essentially abandoned by his father  and
    the appellant was a vulnerable young man with learning disabilities and
    autism, such it would be unjust for the appellant to be penalised under
    Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act because he was in receipt of disability
    living allowance.  The judge's  conclusions  at  paragraph  18  of  the
    determination  that  public  interest  in  removal  was  fortified  was
    arguably erroneous and perverse.  At paragraph 19 the judge gave little
    weight to the private or family life because  the  appellant  was  here
    unlawfully or with precarious leave but that leave had been established
    whilst he had discretionary leave and whilst he was a minor and it  was
    arguable that Section 117B(5) of the Act would not  apply  the  private
    life because he was under 18 and had been granted  leave.   Actions  of
    adults which had an impact upon children should not be used to penalise
    them, see Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]
    UKSC.

 5. Further the judge's findings of credibility were erroneous and she  had
    failed to give adequate reasons to make proper findings in  respect  of
    the appellant's evidence.



 6. The balancing exercise undertaken by the judge, it  was  asserted,  was
    erroneous as it did not factor in the appellant's ties in  the  UK  and
    the judge  had  not  properly  assessed  the  impact  of  removal  both
    financially and emotional on the appellant and his  UK  relatives  with
    whom the judge accepted he had family life.

 7. At the hearing Mr Karim submitted that there was an  identical  wording
    in relation to the Rule paragraph 322(1A) and S-LTR.2.2.

 8. Mr Whitwell by contrast submitted that it  was  a  different  Rule  and
    there was not the same wording.  The suggestion was that the  appellant
    should not be penalised for deception by his family  members  but  that
    was not consistent with the authority AA.

 9. Mr Karim confirmed that the appellant did sign the application form but
    he just did not check it.  At that point he was just shy of 18  and  he
    was a minor and he should not be penalised for that mistake.

10. In terms of the other grounds the judge had made a mistake in  assuming
    that his claiming DLA should penalise the appellant.  It could  not  be
    parliament's intention  to  penalise  and  discriminate  against  those
    claiming disability benefits.  The law should be sensibly read.  It was
    not that he was submitting that the law was not  legal.   The  benefits
    had been claimed through his uncle and aunt.

11. The judge also gave little weight to his  private  life  and  Mr  Karim
    outlined the appellant's immigration history.  The judge had once again
    not taken into account the fact that the appellant was a  minor  and  I
    was referred to ZH (Tanzania) paragraphs 33 and 44.  These were actions
    over which he had no control.  Mr Karim also submitted that there was a
    lack of reasoning in respect of the appellant's  evidence  and  in  the
    assessment of proportionality the judge failed to assess the impact  on
    the appellant and the impact  on  the  members  and  relatives  of  his
    family.  Those were material errors of law.

12. Mr Whitwell submitted  that  the  ultimate  question  was  whether  the
    appellant was financially independent and the answer was  no  and  this
    was clear from paragraph 18.  Even if  Section  117B(3)  had  not  been
    found  against  the  appellant,  the   remainder   of   the   statutory
    considerations fell to be construed against the appellant and therefore
    Section 117B(3) did not assist him.  Mr Whitwell  referred  me  to  the
    findings of the judge at paragraphs 21 and 23 and noted that the  judge
    could not be certain of factual findings because of the actions of  the
    family members and it was difficult to  be  certain  exactly  what  was
    happening.

13. The fact was that the appellant was now an adult and the judge did  not
    fall foul of ZH (Tanzania).  The judge had made findings on the  autism
    and the ability of the appellant and found that he now  had  a  driving
    licence and was enrolled at college to become a mechanic.  There was no
    error.  In response to Mr  Karim's  contentions  Mr  Whitwell  produced
    Deelah and others (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT  00515  (IAC)  and
    referred to the headnote at (iii).



Conclusions

14. In her findings and conclusions the judge found at  paragraph  10  that
    the appellant was convicted of robbery on 7th September 2012 for  which
    he received a fine and referral order.  This conviction became spent on
    9th October 2013 but nonetheless the application  form  states  clearly
    that  both  spent  and  unspent  convictions  must  be  provided.   The
    appellant claims that he relied on his aunt to fill out the form.

    322

         "(1A)    Where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
                documents or information have been submitted (whether or not
                material to the application,  and  whether  or  not  to  the
                applicant's knowledge), or  material  facts  have  not  been
                disclosed, in relation to the application  or  in  order  to
                obtain documents from the Secretary  of  State  or  a  third
                party required in support of the application,

         ...

         the application must be refused."




    S-LTR.2.1.    'The applicant will normally be  refused  on  grounds  of
                suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2. to 2.4. apply.

    S-LTR.2.2.    Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

                (a)    false information, representations or documents  have
                    been submitted in relation to the application (including
                    false information submitted to any person  to  obtain  a
                    document used in support of the application); or

                (b)    there has been a failure to disclose  material  facts
                    in relation to the application.

    It is correct to state that these are two different Rules and paragraph
    322  is  a  mandatory  refusal  whereby  S-LTR.2.2  is   discretionary.
    Although the judge states clearly that she was satisfied  that  it  was
    more probable than not that the appellant did not check the form before
    signing it, and therefore from his  perspective  the  omission  was  an
    innocent mistake, she does not find the same for Mrs Begum.  She  found
    that Mrs Begum was an articulate and intelligent woman and that it  was
    more probable than not that she did not disclose the conviction because
    she believed it would adversely affect the appellant's application.

15. The judge rejected the finding under S-LTR.1.6 which is  the  mandatory
    refusal and although there was no challenge to the judge's  finding  on
    the basis that there was established a conviction, I am  not  persuaded
    that there was a discretionary element here such  that  the  judge  was
    entitled without more to do so.  The fact is that the appellant  had  a
    conviction and it was the Secretary of State that made  the  assessment
    that his conduct (including convictions) made it undesirable  to  allow
    him to remain.  However that was in favour  of  the  appellant  and  no
    challenge was made to that by the Secretary of State.

16. That said, the judge was satisfied with regards to S-LTR.2.2(a) and (b)
    that:

         "False information was given (the concealment  of  the  appellant's
         criminal conviction) or alternatively that the  appellant/his  aunt
         failed to disclose a material fact (the criminal conviction)."

    On this basis the judge found that there  were  no  factors  such  that
    could lead her to "conclude that the respondent should  have  exercised
    her discretion differently, particularly because I  consider  that  the
    actions were deliberate".

17. The Rule under S-LTR.2.2 is quite clear that it is to apply whether  or
    not to the applicant's knowledge.  There was  no  question  that  false
    information and false representations had been submitted  as  the  form
    submitted in September  2014  made  no  reference  to  the  appellant's
    conviction and a specific question is asked with that regard.  The Rule
    does not import  the  necessity  for  a  mens  rea  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. Mr Karim invited the application in the circumstances of  AA
    which considered  paragraph 322(1A).  At paragraph 65 AA states:

         "The essential question is  whether  'false'  in  either  paragraph
         320(7A) or paragraph 322(1A) is used in the meaning of  'incorrect'
         or in the meaning of 'dishonest'."

    The preferable meaning given to the term "false" was "dishonest".

18. AA draws a sharp contrast between a matter of innocent mistake,  and  a
    dishonest representation.   An error short of dishonesty was not to  be
    construed as a false  representation.   However  at  paragraph  67  the
    following was said:

         "First, 'false representation' is aligned in the rule  with  'false
         document'.  It is plain that a false document is one that  tells  a
         lie about itself.  Of course it is possible for a  person  to  make
         use of a false document (for instance a counterfeit currency  note,
         but that example, used for its clarity, is rather distant from  the
         context of this discussion) in total ignorance of its  falsity  and
         in perfect honesty.  But the document itself is dishonest.   It  is
         highly likely  therefore  that  where  an  applicant  uses  in  all
         innocence a false document  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  entry
         clearance, or leave to enter or to remain, it is because some other
         party, it might be a parent, or sponsor, or agent, has  dishonestly
         promoted the use of that document.  The response of  a  requirement
         of  mandatory  refusal  is  entirely  understandable  in   such   a
         situation.  The mere fact that a dishonest document has  been  used
         for such an important application is  understandably  a  sufficient
         reason for a mandatory refusal.  That is  why  the  rule  expressly
         emphasises that it applies  'whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
         knowledge'."

19. This makes it clear that

         "it might be a parent or sponsor or agent has dishonestly  promoted
         the use of  that  document.   The  response  of  a  requirement  of
         mandatory refusal is entirely understandable in such a  situation".



    Lord Justice Rix in AA clearly canvassed the possibility that a  parent
    might submit a document which was a false document  and  that  a  child
    could be fixed with the dishonesty of the parent in such  an  instance.
    If that were not sufficient I move to  paragraph  68  of  AA  and  this
    refers to the grounds under paragraphs 320  and  322  where  the  entry
    clearance or leave to enter or leave  to  remain  should  "normally  be
    refused".  The judgment here states:

         "If on the other hand a dishonest representation has been  promoted
         by another party, as happened with the sponsor's husband in Akhtar,
         then it is entirely understandable that the  Rules  should  require
         mandatory refusal irrespective of the  personal  innocence  of  the
         applicant herself.  Therefore the reason of the thing, as  well  as
         the natural inference that 'false' in relation to 'representations'
         should  have  the  same  connotation  as  'false'  in  relation  to
         'documents', together argue for a conclusion that 'false'  requires
         dishonesty although not necessarily that of the applicant himself."

20.  As  stated  above  it  is  quite  clear  that  the  non-disclosure  of
    information is also referred to in AA at paragraph 69

    "if dishonest, the dishonesty may again happen without the knowledge of
    the applicant, or the applicant may be personally dishonest.  The facts
    of Akhtar again come to mind".

21. In this  instance  the  judge  was  clear  [13]  that  Mrs  Begum,  the
    appellant's aunt, who is  an  articulate  intelligent  woman,  did  not
    disclose a conviction and the judge was satisfied  that  the  appellant
    fell to be refused under these grounds.  The judge considered the  fact
    that these grounds were not mandatory but nonetheless did not  conclude
    that the respondent should have exercised her discretion differently.

22. Mr Karim is submitting that because  the  appellant  was  underage  the
    error  was  short  of  dishonesty,  does  not  stand  easily  with   an
    interpretation which can be derived from AA and I find that  the  judge
    directed herself appropriately between paragraphs 10 to  13  and  found
    the relevant facts and that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE because he fell foul of paragraph 276ADE(1),  that  is
    the suitability requirements.

23. The criticism  therefore  that  the  judge  should  have  proceeded  to
    consider the matter under 276ADE(4) and (6) is misconceived.

24. Indeed I note from the witness statement of the appellant that far from
    being 'abandoned' by his father and unable to make decisions as a minor
    or having no  control  over  his  future  the  appellant  was  in  fact
    'adamant to stay in the UK' and did not give in to his father's request
    to return to Bangladesh.  He appeared to prefer the schooling here.  He
    also added that he did well at school [w/s 9].

25. The next challenge  was  that  it  could  not  have  been  parliament's
    intention for the appellant  to  be  penalised  under  Section  117B(3)
    because he was in receipt of disability living allowance.

26. Section 117B(3) reads

    'It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests  of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-
    (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)are better able to integrate into society.


27. A proportionality assessment was relevant as the judge found  that  she
    needed to consider the matter under Article 8 and bearing in  mind  the
    appellant was a child when he came to the UK, and of  which  the  judge
    was clearly aware, of and  addressed this  issue.   The  case  of  Miah
    (Section 117B NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT 00131  makes  it  clear
    that Sections 117(1) to (5) makes  no  distinction  between  adult  and
    child immigrants and the factors set out apply to all regardless of age
    although other factors should be weighed in the balance.  Even  if  the
    judge was incorrect in taking into account the fact of  the  disability
    living  allowance  the  actual  fact  is  that  the  appellant  is  not
    financially independent and that is the issue that needed to be  looked
    at.  The judge was not  making  a  criticism  that  the  appellant  was
    receiving disability living allowance but merely observing through  the
    source  of  finance  that  the  appellant  received  that  he  was  not
    financially independent.  Indeed there are indeed restrictions on those
    able to claim benefits within the United Kingdom social security system
    specifically regarding residency.  It might also be relevant  to  point
    out that the appellant is enrolled on a four  year  college  course  to
    become a mechanic and attended school in the United Kingdom.  There was
    no indication that the appellant was self-supporting.

28. In respect of the ground that the  judge  gave  little  weight  to  the
    private or family life because the appellant was here  unlawfully  with
    precarious leave under Section 117B, Mr  Whitwell  cited  the  case  of
    Deelah and indeed this states at headnote (iii):

         "A private life established in the wording and in  the  context  of
         Section 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act is not to be construed  and
         confined to the initiation or  creation  of  the  private  life  in
         question and not its continuation or development."

    It is clear that the appellant came to the UK and  in  respect  of  the
    private life at least  the  judge  correctly  considered  that  he  had
    developed his private life whilst it was precarious.  The appellant has
    had discretionary leave but this does not render  his  status  anything
    other than precarious.   As stated above the Section 117 factors  apply
    equally to children and adults and  thus  the  judge  directed  herself
    appropriately at paragraph 19.  She gave little weight to  his  private
    life but in this instance in relation to his private life as opposed to
    his family life she considered that the public interest was  served  by
    the appellant's removal which was "a factor that weighs heavily against
    the appellant in my proportionality assessment".  The judge  was  clear
    at paragraph 20 that "in this assessment I have considered all  of  the
    factors put before me on the appellant's behalf which  were  emphasised
    by Mr Chowdhury in his submissions".

29. Section 117 does not necessarily affect the weight to be attributed  to
    family life but the appellant's immediate family is in  Bangladesh  and
    the judge also found that she was not persuaded that

    "any of the witnesses before me are reliable and I find that they  have
    sought to either exaggerate the situation that the appellant will  face
    on return to Bangladesh or to obfuscate the facts".

    This would include a finding in relation to the appellant himself.  She
    did take into account his evidence at paragraph 25 of the  decision  by
    stating that

    "the fact that the appellant does not want to return home  or  rely  on
    his parents is not, in my mind, a persuasive factor".

30. Overall there is no doubt that the  judge  was  fully  aware  that  the
    appellant came into the UK as a minor but rejected the notion that  the
    appellant had been abandoned by his family stating

    "I find that the appellant, his aunt and uncle have sought  to  portray
    him as a victim of abandonment in  order  to  bolster  his  immigration
    applications when the fact is that the family made the  joint  decision
    that he remain here".

    The judge found that the appellant had  "chosen  not  to  contact"  his
    family since his application was refused and was not persuaded that the
    contact had been severed in any meaningful way.

31. The judge has given a series of adequate findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's evidence and made an assessment of the  proportionality  of
    the respondent's decision.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant  had
    spent the majority of his life in Bangladesh and that  he  was  now  an
    adult.  The judge carefully considered the weight to be attached to the
    issue of his  mental  health  problems  but  noted  that  he  had  been
    discharged from the Coborn Centre [26] and that he had  stopped  taking
    medication in 2013.  The judge was aware that the appellant had been in
    the UK for seven years but found that he was ultimately  returning  "to
    his home country, to his family" and that she was satisfied  that  this
    would mitigate any negative impact on him.

32. It is clear from a reading of the determination as  a  whole  that  the
    judge was fully aware  of  when  the  appellant  entered  the  UK,  the
    circumstances in which he entered the UK and remained in the UK and was
    to return.  On an overall reading of the decision she gave  due  weight
    to his family life.  She recorded at [25] that 'he has  his  immediate,
    financially stable, family to return to, as well as other relatives'. I
    was referred to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, that children were not  to
    be blamed for the sins of the adult. I have made observations about the
    appellant's own statements regarding his abandonment or otherwise above
    and the judge found that the family  made  a  joint  decision  in  this
    regard. A careful  consideration  of  paragraph  33  of  ZH  (Tanzania)
    demonstrates that this is in relation to  an  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child as a primary consideration and that the children
    were not to be blamed for the actions of the adult.  The fact  is  that
    the appellant is now an adult and the judge was aware of this  and  she
    took into account that most of his life had been spent  in  Bangladesh.
    The appellant is now an adult and it is not the task of  the  judge  to
    consider the best interests of the appellant. In his witness  statement
    the appellant states very clearly 'Now that I am 18 years old I am very
    keen to get involved in paid employment and live  independently'.   The
    judge pointed out at [26] that the appellant had attended a  mainstream
    school, was not significantly impaired in his ability to function.

33. The challenge is merely a disagreement with the findings.   I find that
    there is no legal error in the decision and the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.



No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 21st April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


