
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02101/2015
                                                IA/02102/2015, IA/02104/2015
                                                IA/02105/2015, HU/00619/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 November 2016                       |On 9 December 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              PHINDILE [M] (1)
                              BOGODILE [M] (2)
                             BONGUMENZI [M] (3)
                                NZAMA [M] (4)
                                DAVID [M] (5)
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dixon, instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  she
    is the appellant.


 2. On 19 September 2016, I decided the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in
    law when it allowed the appeal on 15 September 2015.  For  convenience,
    my decision is annexed to this  decision  and  it  includes  directions
    regarding the ambit of the issues to be remade.


The resumed hearing


 3. In order to remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  I  resumed
    the hearing on 29 November 2016 and heard evidence from the first three
    respondents before hearing submissions.


 4. Prior to hearing  the  appeals,  I  re-read  the  original  bundles  of
    documents and read  the  additional  15-page  bundle  provided  by  the
    respondents in accordance with my directions.


 5. From a procedural point of view, it is relevant to record the following
    two matters.


 6. Although this is the Secretary of State's appeal, because I am  looking
    to remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I adopted  the  usual
    procedures of that Tribunal.  Therefore, during the hearing I  referred
    to the respondents as the appellants and the Secretary of State as  the
    respondent, and heard submissions in the order  they  would  have  been
    given in the First-tier Tribunal.   There  was  no  objection  to  this
    approach.  However, for the purpose of this written decision, I  resume
    the roles that each have.


 7. In addition, Mr Richards agreed that the respondents could  all  remain
    in the hearing room during evidence. It was obvious why  he  agreed  to
    this approach; he had no cross-examination for any of the respondents.


 8. The three respondents who answered questions all  did  so  in  English.
    They each adopted  their  witness  statements.   Mr  Dixon  asked  some
    supplementary questions of the first and second respondents to  clarify
    certain points and bring the evidence up  to  date.   The  majority  of
    questions were asked of the lead respondent, who is the mother  of  the
    others.


 9. There is no need for me  to  repeat  here  what  is  contained  in  the
    documents provided, including  the  witness  statements,  and  in  oral
    evidence because the relevant parts will be  discussed  as  I  make  my
    findings.


Relevant legal issues


10. Before making my findings, I remind myself of the what is in issue.   I
    am considering whether the respondents' personal circumstances (that is
    the private and family lives they have established and enjoy in the UK)
    outweighs the public interest considerations.  My findings are  limited
    to the fourth and fifth Razgar questions.


11. I add that in order to answer these questions, I must  have  regard  to
    s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  because  it
    puts the public interest considerations on a statutory footing.


    117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
    (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
    interest.
    (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak  English,
    because persons who can speak English-
        (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b) are better able to integrate into society.
    (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  financially  independent,
    because such persons-
        (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b) are better able to integrate into society.
    (4) Little weight should be given to-
        (a) a private life, or
        (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
        that is established by a person at a time when the person is in  the
        United Kingdom unlawfully.
    (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
    (6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-
        (a) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
        with a qualifying child, and
        (b) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
        United Kingdom.


12. I must also apply the  approach  to  proportionality  set  out  by  the
    Supreme Court at paragraph 74 of Bank Mellat v Her  Majesty's  Treasury
    (No. 2) [2013] UKSC 39 (which is cited by the Supreme Court  in  Hesham
    Ali (Iraq) v  SSHD  [2016]  UKSC  60  when  providing  guidance  as  to
    "Appellate decision-making" at paragraphs 39 to 50).


    74.  The judgment of Dickson CJ in Oakes provides the clearest and most
    influential judicial analysis of proportionality within the common  law
    tradition of legal reasoning. Its attraction as  a  heuristic  tool  is
    that, by breaking down an assessment of proportionality  into  distinct
    elements, it can clarify different aspects of such an  assessment,  and
    make value judgments more explicit. The approach adopted in  Oakes  can
    be summarised by saying that it is necessary to determine  (1)  whether
    the objective of the measure is sufficiently important to  justify  the
    limitation of a protected right, (2) whether the measure is  rationally
    connected to the objective, (3) whether a less intrusive measure  could
    have been used without unacceptably compromising the achievement of the
    objective, and (4) whether, balancing the  severity  of  the  measure's
    effects on the rights of the persons to whom  it  applies  against  the
    importance of the objective,  to  the  extent  that  the  measure  will
    contribute to its achievement, the former outweighs the latter. ...


Public interest considerations


13. I begin by considering the statutory provisions of s.117B of  the  2002
    Act.


14. The respondents concede they  do  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.  Because the immigration rules are the expression of
    effective immigration controls, this concession  means  that  there  is
    public interest in expelling the respondents in order to maintain those
    controls (s.117B(1) of the 2002 Act applied).


15. The respondents are all able to speak English and the family  group  is
    financially  independent  because  of  the  earnings  the  first  three
    respondents from lawful employment.  The issues that could  arise  from
    these factors, as expressed in ss 117B(2) and (3) do not arise here.


16. This is not to say that there  is  no  need  for  me  to  consider  the
    economic well-being of the country.  The provisions of s.117B  are  not
    exhaustive (see Forman (ss 117A-C  considerations)  [2015]  UKUT  412).
    The respondents are not a burden  on  the  taxpayer  because  they  are
    permitted to work in the UK by the statutory extension of  their  leave
    under s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  Although this means they  have
    permission to work, they do not have a right to work in the  UK.   This
    is a factor that falls within public  interest  considerations  because
    immigration control includes control of entry to the labour market.


17. It is also without question that the fourth and  fifth  respondents  if
    permitted to remain in the UK will be educated at public expense.   The
    fact that there will be no additional expense to the  public  purse  on
    the basis that a school place is already being provided does not remove
    such issues when assessing the public  interest  because  there  is  an
    actual cost and if the respondents are not entitled to remain in the UK
    on any basis, then that cost should not be incurred by the UK.


18. Section 117B(4)(a) requires me to give little weight  to  private  life
    that is established whilst a person is  in  the  UK  unlawfully.   This
    factor does not apply in these appeals  because  the  respondents  have
    been in the UK lawfully throughout the time they  have  been  here.   I
    mention, for the sake of clarity, that I am  not  considering  at  this
    juncture whether the fact the respondents have been lawfully in the  UK
    is a factor that might outweigh  the  public  interest  considerations.
    All I am finding at this juncture is that it does not add weight to the
    public interest considerations.


19. The next provision of the 2002 Act does, however,  add  weight  to  the
    public  interest  in  expelling  the  respondents.   I  recognise   the
    respondents have only ever had limited leave to be in the UK  and  that
    they have always been aware the period they can lawfully remain here is
    time-limited.  The Court of Appeal in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    803 explained when an immigration status is precarious and it is  clear
    to me that the respondents' circumstances fall within that explanation.



20. The final provision of s.117B  is  of  relevance  because  it  has  the
    potential of reducing the public interest in expelling  a  person  from
    the UK.  It was the subject of much discussion  at  the  earlier  Upper
    Tribunal hearing, as I recorded in my error of law decision.  There  is
    no need for me to repeat the arguments here.  However, it is  necessary
    for me to make a finding regarding whether it is reasonable  to  expect
    the fourth respondent to leave the UK.  To answer this question, I must
    move to consider the fifth Razgar question because,  as  identified  by
    the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)  whether  his  expulsion  is
    reasonable will depend on an assessment of all the circumstances.

Proportionality assessment

21. As I indicated above, to assess the proportionality  of  the  decisions
    against which the appeals have  been  brought,  I  use  the  structured
    approach suggested by the Supreme Court in Bank  Mellat.   I  take  the
    four questions in turn.

22. The fact Parliament has deemed it  appropriate  to  identify  that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public interest
    makes it unquestionable that the measures are sufficiently important to
    justify the limitation of a  protected  right.   The  respondents  have
    conceded they do not meet any of the usual requirements  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK and are asking to be allowed  to  remain  outside  the
    usual mechanisms of controlling immigration.

23. It follows that the measure is rationally connected to  the  objective.
    The  appellant  Secretary  of  State  seeks   to   maintain   effective
    immigration controls and argues that to allow the respondents to remain
    outside the usual system would  defeat  the  objective  of  immigration
    control.

24. Neither party has suggested there is  a  less  intrusive  measure  that
    could have been used without unacceptably compromising the  achievement
    of the objective of immigration control.  This is clearly an  either-or
    case; either the respondents can stay in the UK or they cannot.   There
    is no room for negotiation.

25. As recognised by Mr Dixon, the respondents' primary  argument  is  that
    their circumstances outweigh the legitimate objectives of the appellant
    Secretary of State because of the impact their expulsion would have  on
    the fourth respondent.  It is sensible, therefore, that  I  begin  with
    this issue.

26. The original appeal bundle contained documents  relating  to  the  best
    interests of  the  fourth  respondent  from  pages  119  to  151.   The
    respondents also rely on the witness statements and  oral  evidence  of
    the first three respondents.

27. I remind myself of the concession made by Mr Mills at the error of  law
    hearing, and which Mr Richards confirmed at the start  of  the  resumed
    hearing, that there is no proposal to separate  the  respondents  as  a
    family group.  The options are that they all go to  Swaziland  or  they
    all remain here.

28. Mr Dixon summarises this part of the respondents' case at paragraphs  8
    to 10 of his skeleton argument.

    "8.  It would be unreasonable to expect the 4th Appellant to leave  the
    UK.  He has been present here from the age of 4 years 9 months  to  now
    the age of 13 years and 11 months.  Therefore, it is submitted that  he
    has been present in  the  UK  for  the  most  important  phase  of  his
    development (crucial formative years have been spent in the UK) and has
    received complete primary education and is not well into his  secondary
    education.  To remove now, disrupting this education  and  development,
    would not be in accordance with the statutory duty under section 55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  This is a case that
    can therefore be distinguished from those where the  child  spends  the
    first 7 years in the UK, which might be  considered  to  be  of  lesser
    importance with fewer ties established.  The Tribunal stated in  Azimi-
    Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) v SSHD
    {2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC): ....the Tribunal notes that seven  years  from
    age four is likely to be more significant to a  child  than  the  first
    seven years of life."[�13(iv)].  There is  nothing  in  the  subsequent
    case law which detracts from the force of this observation.

    "9.  The 1st Appellant's  witness  statement  (page  4,  paragraph  8),
    describes how the 4th Appellant does not speak  Siswati,  the  language
    spoken in Swaziland.  It is explained that he is excelling in school in
    science and maths with the hope of gaining a  scholarship  for  grammar
    school when he reached Year 9.  It is noted that aside from his family,
    he has had no contact with the Swaziland diaspora  in  the  UK  and  is
    culturally and socially integrated into the UK.  He has  been  actively
    involved in many extra-curricular activities, as described in  the  1st
    Appellant's witness  statement  (paragraphs  9-10),  and  has  numerous
    friends with whom he places and socialises.

    "10.  The 4th Appellant also has close inter-sibling relations with the
    2nd, 3rd and 5th  Appellants.   It  is  submitted  that  these  are  of
    considerable importance and should be respected."

29. There is no disagreement with the factual matrix as  described;  it  is
    supported by the documentary and oral evidence.  I note  that  in  oral
    evidence the first  respondent  admitted  that  the  fourth  respondent
    continued to be educated at a state-funded school because, although  he
    passed the entrance examination to the fee-paying  grammar  school,  he
    did not obtain a scholarship.

30. Thereafter, Mr Dixon reminds me of the cases of ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4,  SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550  and  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and what they  say  about  the
    assessment of the best interests of a child.

31. In order to assess the best interests of the fourth respondent, I begin
    by  considering  the  factors  identified  at  paragraph   35   of   EV
    (Philippines).

    35. A decision as to what is in the best  interests  of  children  will
    depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length  of
    time that they  have  been  here;  (c)  how  long  they  have  been  in
    education; (c) what stage their education  has  reached;  (d)  to  what
    extent they have become distanced from  the  country  to  which  it  is
    proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with  it
    may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or  other
    difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to
    which the course proposed will interfere  with  their  family  life  or
    their rights (if they have any) as British citizens. (NB  the  original
    contains two (c)s)

32. The fourth respondent was born on 31  January  2003  and  is  therefore
    close to being fourteen years old.  He arrived in the UK on 2  November
    2007, which means he has been living in the UK for nine years  and  one
    month.  He has been in education throughout that period, having started
    at Booth Wood School on 7 November 2007.  He is currently in Year 9 and
    will be choosing which GCSEs he will be taking alongside the compulsory
    subjects.

33. I jump ahead to the last of the factors listed,  because  that  too  is
    straightforward to answer given the agreed facts.  As I have indicated,
    the Secretary of State has conceded that the family group will  not  be
    split.  Therefore, the immigration decisions will  not  interfere  with
    his relationships with his mother or siblings as the family group  will
    remain together, either in the UK or Swaziland.

34. I return to the remaining factors listed in EV (Philippines), which  it
    is appropriate in this case to take together.

35. Mr Dixon urged me to find that the impact  of  removal  on  the  fourth
    respondent would be monumental.  I cannot do so because of the lack  of
    cogent evidence.  There is nothing to indicate that it is  more  likely
    than not that he  would  not  be  able  to  achieve  his  potential  in
    Swaziland.

36. The evidence of the first respondent is that the fourth respondent  has
    not maintained any connections with  Swaziland  and  it  will  be  very
    difficult for him to adjust to life there.  There is support  for  this
    assertion in the letter from Dr Barfield, the fourth  respondent's  GP,
    the letter from Ms Harvey, the headteacher of Booth Wood School and the
    letter from Rev Dr and Mrs Gichaara of the Methodist Church.

37. The letter from Dr Barfield includes the following observations.

    "I believe that if Nzama had to move from the UK  it  would  cause  him
    significant emotional distress and stress.  Nzama is very settled  here
    as it is all he has known growing up.  He is doing well at  school  and
    formed a number of strong friendships.  He  can  no  longer  speak  his
    mother language and I think he would seriously struggle if  he  had  to
    return to Swaziland.   I  believe  his  emotional  wellbeing  would  be
    impacted if this were the case." (Original appeal bundle, p.119).

38. It is unclear whether Dr Barfield  made  these  observations  based  on
    examining or consulting the fourth respondent directly or whether  they
    are merely a reflections of a conversion  with  the  first  respondent.
    This lessens the weight I can give to these observations.  It  is  also
    unclear whether the authors of the other supporting letters  relied  on
    information from the first respondent and their own speculation  rather
    than professional expertise and evidence  from  the  fourth  respondent
    himself.  For example, there is no indication  that  they  checked  for
    themselves whether the fourth  respondent  could  speak  or  understand
    Siswati, what he knew about Swaziland or what he  might  experience  on
    return to that country.

39. I mention because it cannot be ignored that I have no evidence from the
    fourth respondent himself (although no doubt he has a view  as  to  his
    future which is in line with what others have reported)  and  there  is
    nothing from any medical or other professional to show that  his  views
    have been taken.  There is nothing other than the evidence of the first
    respondent as to the situation the family would return to in  Swaziland
    or as to the ability of the fourth respondent  to  adapt.   Of  course,
    given her own dependence on the outcome of the appeals, I cannot regard
    the evidence of the first respondent as being impartial.

40. I add that there is no evidence of any medical issues relating  to  the
    fourth respondent that would prevent his return to Swaziland.  There is
    no reliable evidence as to how the fourth respondent might  adapt  into
    life in  Swaziland,  including  what  difficulties  he  might  have  in
    adapting to a different educational system.

41. It is, of course, for the respondents to establish what is more  likely
    than not.   I cannot make a decision on speculation or  assumption.   I
    cannot accept the speculation of professionals who have no demonstrable
    expertise regarding Swaziland.  I cannot accept  without  question  the
    evidence of the adult respondents because they have an interest in  the
    outcome of the appeals.

42. In terms of the eight factors listed in EV (Philippines), although I am
    satisfied the evidence confirms the age of the fourth  respondent,  how
    long he has been in the UK, how long he has been in education here, the
    stage of education he has reached and the fact he will  remain  in  the
    same family group whether in the UK or Swaziland, I find  the  evidence
    does not enable me to make a finding about how distant he is from  life
    in Swaziland, whether he would be able to  renew  his  connection  with
    that country, whether he would experience the difficulties in  adapting
    to life there.

43. I bear in mind that the fourth respondent would have the assistance  of
    his mother and older siblings on  return  to  Swaziland  and  there  is
    nothing to indicate they would not be able to help him  adapt  to  life
    there, even if it is a way  of  life  he  cannot  remember.   There  is
    nothing to indicate that the fourth respondent would  not  be  able  to
    adapt to the educational system in Swaziland, even  if  the  medium  of
    teaching is not English.  He is not at a crucial point in his  academic
    development. There is nothing to indicate that he would  be  unable  to
    continue his friendships at a distance, or for his friends to visit him
    in Swaziland; or that the fourth respondent would  be  unable  to  form
    additional and new friendships in Swaziland.

44. Because of the lack of reliable evidence, I find the  respondents  have
    not shown that it is more likely than not that the impact of  expulsion
    on the fourth respondent will be as serious as claimed.

45. In conclusion, the lack of cogent evidence leads me to  find  that  the
    best interests of the fourth respondent are for him  to  remain  within
    the family group as it now exists and nothing  more.   I  do  not  find
    there  are  any   other   significant   factors   which   are   primary
    considerations rather than preferences.  It follows  that  I  find  the
    proposed expulsion of the fourth respondent is reasonable  in  all  the
    circumstances.

46. Mr Dixon developed other arguments.  He focused on the opinions of  the
    House of Lords in EB (Kosovo) v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41  regarding  the
    effect of delay on the expectations of  a  person  about  whether  they
    would be permitted to remain in the UK.  Such arguments are defeated by
    the findings of the Court of Appeal in Ruppiah because in this case the
    respondents were fully aware that they did not  have  leave  to  remain
    indefinitely and that  they  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules for further leave.

47. This finding applies to all the respondents irrespective of their ages.
     I acknowledge that the younger respondents  might  be  less  aware  of
    their immigration status but that it immaterial given their  dependence
    on their mother, the first respondent.  It is part of her parental duty
    to ensure they can deal with their circumstances and that  applies  now
    just as it did when she brought her children to the UK.

48. Mr Dixon suggested that there was public interest  in  encouraging  the
    best people to come to the UK and stay here.  He relied on  overarching
    government policies in this area. He did not provide any  case  law  or
    any policy documents to support his submission.  Although  I  am  aware
    that the UK will seek  to  encourage  migrants  who  can  benefit,  for
    example, the British economy, it only does so through  the  immigration
    rules, which from time to time.  I am aware the respondents  understand
    this process because the first respondent discovered she was unable  to
    apply for leave as a tier 2  (post-study  work)  migrant  because  that
    route was closed by changes to the immigration  rules.   It  follows  I
    must reject this line of argument.

49. There are two  other  strands  to  the  respondents'  case.   Mr  Dixon
    submitted that there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  first
    respondent's integration in Swaziland.   By  so  doing,  Mr  Dixon  was
    seeking to argue that  the  first  respondent  might  in  fact  meet  a
    provision  of  the  immigration  rules  even  though  he  had  conceded
    otherwise.  Nevertheless, I have considered the  point  because  it  is
    trite human  rights  law  that  such  a  factor  might  make  expulsion
    disproportionate.

50. However, despite presenting this argument Mr Dixon failed  to  indicate
    any evidential  basis  as  to  why  there  might  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the first respondent's integration; or for that matter  in
    relation to the other adult respondents.  I reject  this  argument  for
    want of evidence.

51. The final issue raised is the relationship  of  the  second  respondent
    with Mr Kirk.  He  attended  the  hearing  although  he  did  not  give
    evidence.  Although it is accepted that the relationship exists, it  is
    also accepted that its nature is not that akin to marriage.   This  was
    confirmed by the second respondent when asked about  what  she  thought
    about the future of the relationship.  It was clear in her answer  (and
    the comments from Mr Kirk even though  not  asked)  that  although  the
    couple hope it will develop  into  a  committed  relationship  akin  to
    marriage, it is not  there  yet.   For  example,  the  couple  are  not
    engaged, although they see that as a possibility in the future.

52. Although I acknowledge  that  the  couple  will  face  challenges  they
    currently do not experience should the respondents return to Swaziland,
    there is nothing to suggest that the  nature  of  the  relationship  is
    sufficient to outweigh  the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    controls.  The lack of evidence as to whether the additional challenges
    would hinder the development of  family  life  means  this  point  adds
    nothing to the case.

Conclusions

53. Having considered all the evidence and arguments, I find  the  personal
    circumstances of the respondents taken individually and collectively do
    not outweigh  the  importance  in  terms  of  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration controls.  For  the  reasons  I  have
    given I reverse the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and dismiss the
    appeals.



Decision

I allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
The decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge E Smith contains legal
error and is set aside.
I remake the decision so that the respondents' appeals are dismissed.



                   Signed                    Dated


                   Judge McCarthy
                   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




ANNEX 1

DECISION ON ERROR ON A POINT OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS
(ISSUED 19 SEPTEMBER 2016)

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision and
    reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge E M Smith.  Judge  Smith
    allowed the appeals against the decisions of 24 December  2014  and  28
    May 2015 refusing the respondents' human rights  claims.   The  earlier
    decision relates to the first four respondents.   The  latter  decision
    relates to the last respondent only and is similar terms.

 2. Judge Smith allowed  the  appeals.   It  was  accepted  (and  Mr  Mills
    confirmed this was still the case) that there was no proposal to  split
    the family group.  Judge Smith found that  it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect the fourth respondent to leave the UK.  He was under 18  and  by
    the date of hearing had spent more than seven years in the UK.  Because
    of this finding and the concession, Judge  Smith  allowed  all  of  the
    appeals.

Grounds and submissions

 3. The Home Office's grounds of appeal argue that Judge  Smith  failed  to
    give  adequate  reasons  for  undertaking  a  "freestanding  article  8
    assessment".  She did not identify any compelling reasons  why  it  was
    necessary or appropriate to go beyond the provisions of the immigration
    rules.  The rules required the respondent child to have lived in the UK
    for seven years continuously before the date of application, which  was
    not the situation in this case.

 4. In the alternative, the grounds argue that even if the judge's approach
    was correct, she failed to have proper regard to the principles set out
    in EV (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874  and  other  case
    law.

 5. Mr Mills adopted these grounds adding only two points.  He reminded  me
    that the Court of Appeal had given further guidance as to when  it  was
    reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK in R (MA (Pakistan) & Ors)
    v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  705.   He  also  submitted  that  it  was  the
    Secretary of State's position that it  was  reasonable  (and  therefore
    proportionate) to expect a person who  did  not  meet  the  immigration
    rules at the date of  application  but  who  subsequently  meets  those
    provisions to make a fresh application.

 6. Mr Dixon provided a copy of the respondents' rule  24  response  (which
    for some reason had not reached the appeal file) and reminded  me  that
    there was no legal definition of what might be a compelling reason  and
    that  in  essence  the  factor  deciding  whether  a  reason  might  be
    compelling was whether it might be material to the outcome but might be
    overlooked if consideration of the facts was limited to the contents of
    the immigration rules.

 7. In reply to the alternate grounds, Mr Dixon reminded me that the  judge
    had  made  strong  findings  about  the  serious  consequences  to  the
    education of the fourth respondent were he required to  leave  the  UK.
    The fact the respondents all had continuing leave  under  s.3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 was also a relevant factor in reducing the  public
    interest in expulsion.  Mr Dixon was not aware of the very recent Court
    of Appeal judgment Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803  regarding  when
    an immigration status might be regarded as  precarious.   It  is  clear
    that the  respondents'  continuing  leave  falls  to  be  described  as
    precarious.

 8. I have given careful consideration to the competing arguments and  make
    the following findings.

The first ground

 9. I am satisfied Judge Smith has given adequate reasons  for  considering
    the respondents' cases outside the immigration rules and why she needed
    to undertake a freestanding article 8 examination.  At paragraphs 27 to
    29, Judge Smith explained why none of the respondents  could  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  At  paragraphs  31  to  34  she
    explains the circumstances in which it is necessary to go  outside  the
    immigration rules to give effect to article 8.   In  paragraph  30  she
    records the respondents' submission that it was necessary to do  so  in
    this case because of the factual matrix.  It  is  implicit  that  Judge
    Smith accepted that submission.

10. Of course, whilst it is always necessary for a judge to  give  adequate
    reasons, the depth of reasoning will depend on the factual matrix.   In
    this case the only reason the fourth respondent was found to be  unable
    to benefit from the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) was  that  at
    the date of application he had not completed the  mandatory  seven-year
    residence period.  By the date of hearing he had.

11.  This  is  not  to  say  that  Judge  Smith  allowed  the   appeal   by
    retrospectively applying paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).   It  is  clear  from
    paragraphs 23 and 35 of her decision and  reasons  statement  that  she
    decided this was not an option open to her.  Neither party  has  argued
    against that finding and therefore Judge Smith's  finding  stands.   In
    addition, she expressly indicates at paragraph 35 that  she  could  not
    apply a principle  of  near-miss  (which  must  be  correct  given  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in cases such  as  SSHD  v  KD  (India)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 477).

12. Instead, Judge Smith followed the  structured  Razgar  approach.   When
    considering article 8 directly she was no longer bound to the  date  of
    application.  Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 required her to consider  evidence  material  to  the  immigration
    decision whether available at  the  date  of  decision  or  thereafter.
    Therefore, Judge Smith was required to take account of  the  fact  that
    the fourth respondent had by the date of hearing been resident here for
    more than seven years.

13. If there was any doubt about the appropriateness of this approach, then
    it should be dispelled by s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  As  explained  by
    the Court of Appeal in  MA  (Pakistan)  there  is  significant  overlap
    between the provisions in paragraphs 276ADE(1)(iv)  and  s.117B(6)  but
    that they differ in that the  former  is  restricted  to  the  date  of
    application whilst the latter is not so limited and therefore needs  to
    be considered at the date of decision-making.  In many cases there will
    be no difference since  either  a  child  does  not  have  seven-years'
    residence either at the date of application, date of decision  or  date
    of hearing; or will have such  period  of  residence  at  all  relevant
    dates.

14. The appeal I  am  considering,  however,  is  one  of  what  may  be  a
    significant number of cases where the passage of time affects  how  the
    appeal should be considered.   The  mere  fact  that  by  the  date  of
    hearing a child meets the seven-year qualifying period of residence  is
    a factor that must be considered by the Tribunal even though  there  is
    no provision  in  the  immigration  rules  to  do  so.   The  fact  the
    immigration  rules  do  not  permit  such  consideration  even   though
    statutory provisions require it to be considered when assessing  public
    interest factors indicates that it is necessary in such cases to depart
    from the strictures of the immigration rules.

15. In other words, it will always be necessary under the  current  complex
    nature of immigration law for the Tribunal to  take  into  account  the
    fact an appeal includes a child who has been resident for  seven  years
    even if the qualifying period  is  only  achieved  whilst  awaiting  an
    appeal to be heard.

The second ground

16. At this juncture I turn to the second ground of appeal.   This  centres
    on whether Judge Smith properly carried  out  the  necessary  balancing
    exercise under the last three Razgar steps.  I refer to the last  three
    steps because recent case law has indicated the great weight that  must
    be given to the public interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration
    control and therefore a decision which is found  to  be  in  accordance
    with the law will only be overturned where there are compelling reasons
    so to do.

17. I have already referred to s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  I  refer  to  it
    again because it should have been central to Judge  Smith's  assessment
    of the appeals.  She makes no explicit reference  to  it.   Of  course,
    failure to expressly refer to a particular provision is not of itself a
    legal error so long as it is clear the provisions have been applied.

18. It is clear throughout the decision and reasons  statement  that  Judge
    Smith accepted that at the date of hearing the  fourth  respondent  had
    been resident in the UK for a continuous  period  of  more  than  seven
    years.  As  such,  he  was  a  qualifying  child  for  the  purpose  of
    s.117B(6).  It is also evident  throughout  the  decision  and  reasons
    statement that Judge Smith accepted that the  first  respondent  had  a
    genuine  and  subsisting  parental   relationship   with   the   fourth
    respondent.  In fact, neither of these matters appears to have been  in
    dispute.  Two of the three conditions in s.117B(6) were satisfied.

19. The remaining question facing  Judge  Smith  was  whether  in  all  the
    circumstances it was reasonable to expect the fourth appellant to leave
    the UK.  Judge Smith dealt with this question in paragraphs 36 to 38 of
    her decision and reasons statement by  focusing  on  the  child's  best
    interests.  Having ascertained that his best interests were  to  remain
    in the UK, she found that it would not be proportionate to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK and therefore all the appeals succeeded.

20. Unfortunately, the judgment in MA (Pakistan) was not available to Judge
    Smith.   It  takes  a   broader   approach   to   the   assessment   of
    reasonableness.  Reasonableness is not simply an assessment of what  is
    in the best interests of a child but must involve a wider consideration
    of the child's circumstances.  Judge Smith did  not  undertake  such  a
    wider examination and therefore her decision is not sustainable in law.
     It is for this reason I find the Home Office's second ground  is  made
    out.

21. In light of the guidance in  MA  (Pakistan),  there  are  a  number  of
    factors on which findings need to have been  made  because  they  could
    affect the outcome of the  appeals.   The  following  occur  to  me  on
    reviewing the papers.

        a. The first respondent came to the UK to study and  therefore  did
           not intend to settle here.

        b. The next three respondents came to join her.

        c. The fifth respondent was born here.

        d. None of the respondents has a settled immigration status in  the
           UK and therefore their immigration status although not  unlawful
           is precarious (as per Ruppiah).

        e. It would be open to the respondents to make a fresh  application
           for leave under paragraph 276ADE if the  original  appeals  were
           dismissed and in so doing the fourth respondent would  meet  the
           seven-year residence requirement.

22. The absence of findings on these and  other  similar  matters  means  I
    cannot remake the decision unless there  is  a  further  hearing.   The
    above is not to be seen as  an  exhaustive  list.   I  have  not  heard
    submissions on what might and might not be argued in  relation  to  the
    fourth and fifth Razgar questions and impose no restrictions.

Directions for rehearing

23. I direct that the appeal is to be reheard in the Upper Tribunal  before
    me.

24. I preserve the findings made by Judge Smith.

        a. None of the respondents can benefit from the immigration rules.

        b. It is necessary to consider the appeals outside the  immigration
           rules.

        c. The respondents have established private and family life  rights
           in the UK within article 8(1) ECHR, having satisfied  the  first
           two Razgar steps.

        d. In this context, it would be disproportionate  to  separate  the
           members of the family group.

        e. The decisions appealed against are in accordance with the law.

25. The parties are at liberty to provide further evidence in  relation  to
    the fourth and fifth Razgar questions  as  long  as  such  evidence  is
    provided at least 14 calendar days before the next hearing.

26. As oral evidence is likely to be required, the respondents are required
    to file up to date witness statements at least 14 calendar days  before
    the next hearing.


