
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02434/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 August 2016                             |On 12 August 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                              MR SAKESH SARKER
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Biggs, SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Meah
    promulgated on 4 January of  2016.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh born on 4 October 1982.  On 11 June of 2014, he applied  for
    further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  2  General
    Student Migrant.  The  application  was  refused  by  letter  dated  31
    December of 2014, and removal directions were made giving rise to  this
    appeal.

2.   The factual determination by the Judge is not in dispute and  there  is
    a concession that the appellant failed to qualify under the Rules.  The
    reason for such failure was that his educational institution namely the
    University of Sunderland withdrew his CAS. The Judge was  of  the  view
    that the conduct of the University  of  Sunderland  was  wrongful.  The
    tenor of the decision shows considerable sympathy for the appellant and
    the situation in which he found  himself.  The  Judge  notes  that  the
    appellant has an exemplary track record, no adverse immigration history
    and that he has been diligently pursuing  his  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom since his arrival.

3.   The narrow issue argued before me on this appeal relates to the  public
    law obligation upon the Secretary of State to  determine  matters  with
    procedural fairness. A particular point that is made is that by  letter
    dated 11 July 2014 those then acting for the appellant contacted the UK
    Visa and Immigration Department in the following terms:

         Our client applied for further leave to remain on 11 June 2014 as a
         Tier 4 Migrant under PBS.  However he has received an email  on  10
         July 2014 sent by the University of Sunderland  that  his  assigned
         CAS has been withdrawn due to the invalidity  of  English  language
         qualifications.

         Indeed our client provided IELTS certificates with his application.
          Therefore his CAS should not be withdrawn for this reason at  all.
         This is totally  unfair  and  unreasonable  decision  made  by  the
         university.  In these circumstances  our  client  is  seeking  your
         permission to provide you a new CAS from new sponsor in support  of
         his pending application.  Would you please send  him  a  letter  so
         that he can provide a new CAS from a new sponsor?

4.   Although there was argument regarding this  letter  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the letter was not in fact  produced  until  some  hours
    afterwards.  The Secretary of State's  position  is  that  she  has  no
    record of receiving this letter, but Mr  Avery,  on  her  behalf,  does
    challenge that it was sent, and in the circumstances I proceed  on  the
    basis that it was received.

5.   When considering the letter,  the  Judge  quoted  extensively  from  EK
    Ivory Coast v The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
    EWCA  Civ  1517.  For  present  purposes,  I  need  only  rehearse  two
    paragraphs.
         [33] I do not consider that an approach by the Secretary  of  State
         which involves a simple check whether an applicant has in  place  a
         valid CAS letter  at  the  time  the  decision  is  made  on  their
         application, rather  than  seeking  to  inquire  further  into  the
         background if it appears that a  CAS  letter  has  been  withdrawn,
         involves any unfairness to an applicant for which the Secretary  of
         State bears responsibility. The PBS places  the  onus  of  ensuring
         that an application is supported by evidence to meet  the  relevant
         test for grant of leave to enter or remain upon the applicant,  and
         the Immigration Rules give applicants  fair  notice  of  this.  The
         essence of the CAS element within the PBS is that the Secretary  of
         State relies on a check on certification by approved colleges,  and
         does not have to investigate further. It is inherent in the  scheme
         that an applicant takes the risk of  administrative  error  on  the
         part of a college.
         [34] Standing back to make a general observation about the context,
         it can be said that an applicant deals directly with their  college
         in relation to  sorting  out  acceptance  onto  a  course  and  the
         certification of that fact, and so has an opportunity to check  the
         contract made with the college so  far  as  concerns  the  risk  of
         withdrawal of a CAS letter. If a college withdraws  a  CAS  letter,
         the applicant may have a contractual right of recourse against  the
         college. The fact that  there  is  scope  for  applicants  to  seek
         protection against administrative errors by choosing a college with
         a good reputation and  checking  the  contractual  position  before
         enrolling is of some relevance to the fair  balance  to  be  struck
         between the public interest in the due operation of the PBS  regime
         and the interest of an individual who is detrimentally affected  by
         it.
6.   The Judge also quoted Kaur [2015] EWCA Civ at paragraph  13.  Mr  Biggs
    who appears before me today also acted in the First-tier  Tribunal.  He
    made the contention before the Judge that the factual circumstances  of
    the  appellant's  case  could  be  distinguished  from  those  of   the
    individuals in both EK Ivory  Coast  and  Kaur.   That  submission  was
    rejected by the Judge who at paragraph 17 said this:

         I do not accept this line of contention.  EK Ivory Coast  makes  it
         clear that there is no duty on  the  respondent  to  follow  up  an
         application and the circumstances surrounding when a CAS is  either
         valid or has not been issued.   The  appellant's  case  involved  a
         similar circumstance whereby it was his university who withdrew his
         CAS.  It did not follow that the respondent was  therefore  somehow
         required to either grant leave or follow up why the  CAS  had  been
         withdrawn.  The appellant clearly could not meet  the  requirements
         of the Immigration Rules by not having a  valid  CAS  therefore  it
         followed that his application fell to be refused."

7.   The Judge continued:

         18.  It is of course unfortunate that the appellant has ended up in
         this difficult situation due to no fault of his own however  it  is
         clear to me that his grievance lies firmly with the  University  of
         Sunderland and not the respondent given that there is no duty  upon
         the respondent to follow up a lack of a valid CAS by the applicant.




         19.  However that said the appellant did attempt to do all he could
         to inform the respondent of the development regarding withdrawal of
         his CAS through his letter from his representatives dated  11  July
         2014.  He could not obtain another CAS by registering with  another
         educational institution owing to not being  in  possession  of  his
         relevant  identity  documents  which  were  in   the   respondent's
         possession in connection with his further leave application."

8.   The decision in EK  Ivory  Coast  enunciates  a  readily-understandable
    principle that a points-based system  is  designed  for  simplicity  of
    application  and  ease  of  disposal  of  a   substantial   number   of
    applications. I also note an observation more recently of Beatson LJ in
    SH (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 426.  Adding a few paragraphs  of  his  own  in  agreement  with  a
    substantive judgment of Elias LJ.  Beatson LJ makes the obiter  comment
    that EK Ivory Coast should be read with care.  He says at paragraph 30

         Given that a Secretary of State may  act  unfairly  notwithstanding
         her compliance with  the  Rules  and  the  terms  of  the  majority
         judgment in EK Ivory  Coast  that  case  should  not  be  taken  as
         excluding the  common  law  duty  of  fairness  in  such  cases  or
         confining it to cases  in  which  the  problem  is  caused  by  the
         Secretary of State's conduct.


9.   Mr Biggs' argument was perhaps advanced  before  me  with  more  nuance
    than before the Judge. He contends that there  was  a  failure  by  the
    Secretary of State  to  take  into  account  a  relevant  and  material
    feature.  I am of the view that, without derogating from the  principle
    of EK Ivory Coast, there is some force in  this  public  law  argument.
    The letter of 11 July of 2014 was not  well-drafted.  In  substance  it
    evinced an intention on the part of the applicant to seek to  vary  his
    application (as he was entitled to  do)  by  substituting  a  different
    institution  for  the  University  of  Sunderland.   That   replacement
    institution could then provide the qualifying CAS. This would allow the
    application to proceed, and in all likelihood it would  have  succeeded
    as all other requirements would have been met.

10.  Whilst the letter did not spell out with particularity that absent  the
    return of identity documents (which remained  in  the  custody  of  the
    Secretary of State)  any  attempts  to  provide  a  new  CAS  would  be
    fruitless, it was implicit. It is regrettable that this was  not  spelt
    out and that all the appellant asked for was "a letter so that  he  can
    provide a new ES from a new sponsor".

11.  The law is clear that the Secretary of State does not have  a  duty  of
    enquiry in relation to the withdrawal of a CAS.  Ivory Coast  is  clear
    in suggesting  that  the  complaints  of  individuals  caught  in  such
    circumstances lie with the educational institution  and  not  with  the
    Secretary of State.  However  in  this  particular  case  I  have  been
    narrowly persuaded that there was a public law error in  the  Secretary
    of State's approach in that the appellant could have obtained a new CAS
    from another institution had he had access to his identity documents.

12.  The Secretary of State's public law failure was in not  acceding  to  a
    putative request to vary the application  founded  in  the  expectation
    that a different educational institution  would  provide  a  fresh  CAS
    would be supplied.  I make no comment as to how that request  could  or
    should have been determined.  The refusal letter makes no reference  to
    it so plainly the Secretary of State did not turn her mind to the  fact
    that the appellant was  proposing  to  vary  his  application  and  was
    prevented from doing so without the cooperation  of  the  Secretary  of
    State. The Judge should have accepted the  appellant's  submission  and
    remitted the matter to the Secretary of State.

13.  Being satisfied on this narrow ground that there was an error  of  law,
    I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   With  the
    concurrence of Mr Avery and Mr Biggs, I now re-make the decision. It is
    self-evident from my error of law finding that the proper course is  to
    allow the appeal and require the Secretary of State to  reconsider  the
    matter having regard to the unlawfulness I have identified.

14.  The appellant needs to be fully aware that my decision does not  amount
    to any indication as  to  the  outcome  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    redetermination. She has a discretion which is hers  to  exercise:  she
    did not consider the contents of the letter of 11  July  2014  and,  in
    revisiting her decision, she must do so.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed, the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  set
aside and the decision is re-made as follows:

    The Secretary of State's decision not being in accordance with law, the
    matter is remitted for her to consider  afresh  having  regard  to  the
    contents of the appellant's solicitor's letter dated 11 July 2014.




Signed   Mark Hill                           Date         10 August 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
