
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02032/2014
                                                               IA/02041/2014
                                                               IA/02046/2014
                                                               IA/02051/2014
                                                               IA/02055/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th August 2014                              |On 12th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                            mNM (FIRST APPELLANT)
                            RM (SEcond Appellant)
                            AM (Third Appellant)
                            FM (Fourth appellant)
                            MM (fifth appellant)
                          (ANONYMTY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Byrne, Counsel instructed on behalf of Drummond
                    Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first two Appellants are the parents of the  remaining  Appellants.
    They appeal, with permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Doyle) who in a determination promulgated on 14th April
    2014 dismissed their appeals against the decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to grant leave to remain  under  paragraph  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM and on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise  the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify the Appellants or any members of  their  family.
    This direction applies both to the Appellants and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.  I have made such a direction as the evidence  before  the
    Tribunal refers to three Appellants all of whom who are minor children.



 3. The background to the  appeal  is  as  follows.   The  first  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom in October 2001.  His  wife  and  the  third
    Appellant, the eldest child entered the  UK  in  2005.   The  remaining
    children, namely the fourth and  fifth  Appellants  were  born  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. As to the immigration history,  following  the  arrival  of  the  first
    Appellant  in  the  UK  in  October  2001,  he  claimed  asylum.   That
    application was refused in or  about  January  2002.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed on 21st March 2003 and by the end of  June  2003,  the  first
    Appellant's  appeal  rights  were  exhausted.   The   first   Appellant
    therefore remained in the UK and did not make any  further  application
    for leave until submitting the  application  that  is  subject  of  the
    current appeals on 25th July 2013.  As to the position of his wife  and
    eldest child, they entered the United Kingdom illegally in 2005 joining
    the first Appellant.  As I have stated,  the  remaining  children  were
    born in the United Kingdom.  Since that time  all  the  family  members
    have been resident in the United Kingdom.

 5.  On 25th July 2013 applications were made on behalf of  the  Appellants
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of their private
    and  family  life  under  paragraph  276ADE  and  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In the alternative, it  was  submitted  that  leave
    outside of the Rules under Article  8  should  apply.   The  Respondent
    refused those applications in notices  of  immigration  decision  dated
    29th August 2013.  Those notices set out that as the applications  were
    made at the time when none of the Appellants  had  leave  to  enter  or
    remain, there was no right of appeal against  the  refusals.   Thus  it
    appears a pre-action protocol letter was submitted in or about November
    2013 challenging the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  those
    applications under Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE and Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.  The Secretary of State responded to this by a letter dated  16th
    December 2013 (exhibited in the Appellants' first bundle at  pages  10-
    15) and at the same time issued a notice of immigration decision  which
    allowed a right of appeal.  Thus the decisions of the  Respondent  were
    made on 29th August 2013 to be read in the light of the letter of  16th
    December 2013.

 6.   In summary, the Secretary of State refused their  applications  after
    considering Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.
    The thrust of the refusal was that  the  Appellants  were  not  British
    citizens and neither the first Appellant or second were  considered  to
    be able meet the Rules for eligibility as either a  partner  or  parent
    for the purposes of Article 8 of the ECHR.  Whilst it was accepted that
    both  the  first  and  second  Appellants  had   a   genuine   parental
    relationship with the child (the third Appellant) who had lived in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years, it  was  considered  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable for the children to leave Britain.   It  was  further  not
    considered that the  first  and  second  Appellant  had  established  a
    private life in the United Kingdom under the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE and that it had not been demonstrated that in the light of their
    previous residence in Pakistan that they had "no ties" to their country
    of origin.

 7. The Appellants exercised their right to appeal  the  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State and the appeal came before a Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal on 4th April 2014.  The judge heard evidence  from  the  first
    Appellant and had regard to two bundles of evidence produced on  behalf
    of  the  Appellants  including  letters  of  support,  school  reports,
    certificates, photographs, expert report and in bundle 2  a  series  of
    legal authorities and the Home Office Guidance.  The judge set out  his
    conclusions at paragraph [12](a)-(n).  The judge took into account that
    it had  not  been  argued  that  either  the  first,  second  or  fifth
    Appellants could fulfil the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules nor was it argued that the  Appellants  could  fulfil
    the requirements of Appendix FM.

 8.   The judge went on to state that it  was  "beyond  dispute"  that  the
    third and fourth Appellants have lived in the UK for  more  than  seven
    years and thus the focus on the case was on paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the
    Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  both  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants  were  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  had  both  lived
    continuously in the UK for more than seven years.

 9.  As the judge identified, the question for the Tribunal was whether  or
    not it would be  reasonable  to  expect  either  the  third  or  fourth
    Appellants to leave the UK.  In the conclusions reached, the judge made
    reference to the expert  evidence  at  (e)  and  (f)  but  reached  the
    conclusion at (g) that all five Appellants were Pakistani nationals and
    that the progress made by the third and fourth Appellants in the UK had
    been made against "the first and second Appellants' informed choice  to
    remain in the UK, to raise their family in the UK  and  to  enable  the
    third and fourth Appellants to benefit from education in the  UK,  when
    they knew they did not have any entitlement to  be  in  the  UK".   The
    judge made reference to the fact that it was not the children who  made
    those decisions but went on to state that that  did  "not  altered  the
    fact that the third and fourth Appellants have reaped the  benefits  of
    living beyond the borders of their country of nationality  without  the
    necessary permission to do so."  In respect of the expert  evidence  at
    (f) the judge noted the report was two years' old,  it  was  not  clear
    from the report what information was available to the expert nor was it
    clear from the report whether or not he  had  spoken  directly  to  the
    third Appellant.  The report had said that the third Appellant  was  an
    intelligent, capable and polite child who was doing well  in  education
    and had nice circle of friends.

10.  The judge went on to  consider  the  Supreme  Court  decisions  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v the SSHD UKSC.  The judge
    found that the first and second  Appellants  were  Pakistani  nationals
    whose  siblings  remained  in  Pakistan.   They  both  spoke  Urdu  and
    continued to communicate with each other in that language.   The  judge
    found that neither the first nor second Appellant had any right  to  be
    in the UK and had remained there for a decade when not entitled  to  do
    so.  He also reached the conclusion that they  had  made  a  "conscious
    decision to have children in the UK and educate them in  the  UK."   At
    (l) he reached the conclusion that there was  no  material  before  the
    Tribunal to indicate that education was not available for the  children
    nor was there any risk to the children if they  returned  to  Pakistan.
    He took into account that they were well-settled in the  UK  and  spoke
    English as a first language and participated  in  activities  that  any
    other UK child would participate in and  found  that  they  were  well-
    integrated.   The  judge  found  that  return  would  not  be   without
    disruption but in view of the progress  made  in  their  education  and
    their background they had transferable skills which  meant  they  could
    adapt to the culture and way of life in their country  of  nationality.
    At (m) the judge took into account that there was no true  obstacle  to
    the return of the third and fourth Appellants to Pakistan and that they
    were talented children who could re-establish  themselves  in  Pakistan
    and thus it was not unreasonable to expect either of the Appellants  to
    leave the UK.  Thus he  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

11.   As to Article 8 outside the Rules, the judge found at paragraph  [15]
    that it was intended that the five Appellants would be removed together
    as a family unit, there was no material to indicate that they would  be
    inadequate reception facilities available  for  the  children  and  the
    decision would maintain the integrity of the  family  unit  and  ensure
    that they would  not  be  separated  from  their  parents.   The  judge
    considered the Upper Tribunal  decision  of  Gulshan  and  reached  the
    conclusion by looking at their private life  that  the  most  important
    aspect of the children's private life was that with their  parents  and
    that their education could continue in Pakistan, they could develop new
    friendships and when weighting together the matters, it  would  not  be
    disproportionate for the Appellants to return  to  Pakistan.   Thus  he
    dismissed the appeal also on Article 8 outside of the Rules.

12. An application for permission to  appeal  the  decision  was  made  and
    permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on  1st  May
    2014 for the reasons set out in that notice.

13. At the hearing of the appeal before me, Mr Byrne, Counsel instructed on
    behalf of the Appellants relied upon the Grounds of Appeal as  drafted.
    There were three grounds that were identified by Mr  Byrne;  the  first
    relying upon the mistake of fact made by the judge when considering the
    expert evidence of Mr Gibb.  It  was  submitted  that  he  had  made  a
    mistake of fact in his determination at [12](f) and that the mistake of
    fact necessarily affected the weight that the judge ultimately gave  to
    that report  and  thus  vitiated  his  conclusions  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for the third and fourth Appellants to return  to  Pakistan.
    He relied upon the decision of  Hamden  v  SSHD  [2006]  CSIH  57.   He
    submitted that this was material and that if the mistake  of  fact  had
    been right, it would have formed the basis for criticising the  report.
    However, the judge was wrong to state that it was not  clear  from  the
    report what information was available to the expert as that was set out
    clearly at section 2 and furthermore, when the judge stated it was  not
    clear whether he had spoke directly to the third  Appellant,  that  was
    also set out at paragraph 2 of the report.  Thus, it was submitted that
    the source of the report was found by the judge to be  unconfirmed  and
    left open a question that ultimately affected the weight of the  report
    that the author had not  even  met  the  third  Appellant  and  had  no
    information from that source available to him.

14.   Furthermore it was submitted that thereafter  the  determination  did
    not engage with the report for the reasons set out at paragraph  10  of
    the grounds.

15.  As to ground 2,  he  submitted  that  the  Tribunal  asked  the  wrong
    question at paragraph [12](g) and asked the  question  whether  it  was
    reasonable for the family to return to Pakistan.  However the  question
    for the Tribunal was whether or not it was reasonable for the  children
    to go to Pakistan and therefore that should have been considered  first
    before considering the question of the parents in the  context  of  the
    whole family.  He submitted this was important because  the  Rule  gave
    the  child  rights  not  capable  of  being  diminished  by  extraneous
    considerations including the behaviour of third parties.  In this  case
    he submitted the judge collapsed the whole set of family  circumstances
    rather than considering whether or not the children met the Rule.   The
    Rule was as focused one focusing on the  individual  children  and  the
    question of reasonableness.  The approach was not consistent with  that
    set out in ZH (Tanzania).

16.  As to ground 3, he submitted that the decision of the Tribunal  failed
    to give any reasons for discounting  the  submission  as  to  what  was
    "reasonable" for  the  purposes  of  276ADE(iv).   In  particular,  the
    submissions at paragraph [13]-[17] set out the  jurisprudence  relating
    to the length of  residence  of  seven  years  being  highly  relevant.
    Furthermore under the heading "avoidance  of  injustice/prejudice",  an
    argument  was  advanced  that  as  they  had   qualified   during   the
    transitional  period  where  the  Rule  did  not  require  it   to   be
    unreasonable to return, it was also a material consideration which  the
    judge did not take into account.

17.  As to the disposal, Mr Byrne asked  for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted
    because the findings of fact in relation to the report were made  on  a
    misapprehension of the facts and could not be relied upon and it  would
    be artificial to consider the findings of fact made by the judge in the
    light of the mistaken facts and a way to avoid any artificiality  would
    be for to remit the matter to the Tribunal.

18. Ms O'Brien on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted  that  it  was
    fair to comment that the judge had failed to notice that the sources of
    information were set out at paragraph 2 of  the  report.   However  she
    submitted it was not material and that  regardless  of  the  error  the
    judge did take into account the contents of the report  (see  paragraph
    [12](e).  As to weight given to the report, the judge  was  aware  that
    the third and fourth Appellants had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    seven years and therefore the only question he needed to ask was "is it
    reasonable  for  the  children  to  leave  the  UK".   By  reading  the
    determination as a whole he did consider the relevant factors.  He  did
    not dispute that they were doing well  and  that  they  were  resilient
    children.  Whilst there was no doubt that the children were doing  well
    the question was whether or not it would be unreasonable to reintegrate
    to their country of nationality.  It would not be right, she  submitted
    to blame the children for the behaviour of their parents however it was
    a matter that could not have been left out of account.   She  submitted
    the judge looked at Zoumbas but overall the judge found that  it  would
    not be unreasonable to return to Pakistan.

19.   As to ground 2, she submitted that when the determination was read as
    a whole the  judge  was  aware  that  it  was  a  holistic  fact  based
    assessment and took factors into  account.   It  was  not  possible  to
    ignore the parasitic benefits for the children or the parents  and  for
    the parents it was the only basis upon which they could remain.

20.  As to ground 3, she submitted that the transitional arguments did  not
    apply as the application was not made until July  2013.   Even  if  the
    judge did not  take  into  account  the  submissions  in  the  skeleton
    argument at paragraphs [13]-[17] it would not have changed the  outcome
    of the appeal.

21.   She submitted that the error of the judge was not being clear in  his
    determination but that was not a  material  error.   She  submitted  if
    there was not an error it was not necessary for any further evidence.

Decision

22. I have given careful consideration to the submissions  of  the  parties
    and having done so I have reached the conclusion that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal does disclose errors of law in its approach  to
    the evidence and the issues in this case.   I  have  not  reached  this
    decision lightly but have given careful consideration  to  the  matters
    raised by the grounds and relied upon by Mr Byrne and also the reply by
    Ms O'Brien however I have reached the conclusion that on balance  I  am
    satisfied that those grounds are made out.

23. The judge was correct to identify that the crucial issue in this appeal
    was paragraph 276ADE(iv) in relation to the third and fourth Appellants
    (both minors) who are under the age of 18 years and have both lived  in
    the UK continuously for more than seven  years.   Thus  the  issue  was
    whether or not it would be reasonable to expect either of them to leave
    the United Kingdom.  In deciding  that  question,  there  was  evidence
    submitted on behalf of the Appellants including school reports, letters
    from the children and other such documentation.  Central to that  issue
    was the expert report commissioned on behalf of the Appellants from  Mr
    Gibb  an  educational  psychologist  (see  page  90;  an  inventory  of
    productions).  The judge  summarised  the  report  at  (e)  stating  as
    follows:-

         "(e) The report from Mr Gibb, reproduced at documents 90 to  97  of
             the first inventory of productions for the  Appellants,  state
             that the relocation of the third Appellant to  Pakistan  would
             have a detrimental  effect  and  would  harm  her  confidence,
             restrict her educational prospects and hamper the  social  and
             educational progress the third Appellant has made and so limit
             her potential."

24. However the judge went on to state (f):-

         "Mr Gibb's report is two years' old.   It  is  not  clear  from  Mr
         Gibb's report what information was available to  him.   It  is  not
         even clear from the report whether or not he spoke directly to  the
         third Appellant.  What I take from Mr Gibb's  report  is  that  the
         third Appellant is an intelligent, capable,  polite  child  who  is
         doing well in education and has a  nice  circle  of  friends.   The
         various  items  of  documentary  evidence  produced  indicate  that
         exactly the same  can  be  said  for  the  fourth  Appellant.   The
         question for me remains whether or not it will be  unreasonable  to
         expect either of the third or fourth Appellants to leave the UK."

25. As both advocates have stated, that is plainly wrong.  The report  sets
    out at paragraph 1 of the summary of the instructions and at  paragraph
    2 which provides the sources of information the expert  had  access  to
    when making an assessment and reaching the conclusions for his  report.
    The sources  of  information  plainly  set  out  what  information  was
    available to him and also that he spoke directly to the  Appellant  and
    the family members as indicated at paragraph 2.  Thus  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did proceed on a mistake of fact or as Mr Byrne states a
    "material misapprehension" (see decision of Hamden as  cited  at  [10]-
    [11]), that the source of the report was unconfirmed and also that  the
    author had not met the Appellant who was the subject of the report.

26.   The issue was whether that was material to  the  decision  ultimately
    reached. Ms O'Brien submits that whilst the judge  made  a  mistake  of
    fact he did not vitiate his decision.  In this respect,  I  prefer  the
    submission of Mr Byrne.  It seems to me that the  judge  by  proceeding
    from the wrong premise that this was material to  his  decision  as  he
    went on to conclude that it was reasonable for the Appellants to return
    to Pakistan and therefore can be said that the mistake went to the root
    of the decision.  Having considered the report to be deficient  as  set
    out at (e) that was a matter which plainly  affected  the  weight  that
    could be attached to the  report  and  that  thus  the  assessment  and
    conclusions reached.  So much is clear by the use of the words "what  I
    can take from Mr Gibb's report ..." and demonstrates that the weight of
    the report was diminished by what was seen by the  judge  as  important
    deficiencies.  Indeed if there were right then the weight attaching  to
    the report and the conclusions  reached  would  be  undermined  by  the
    failure to set out the sources of the information including that of the
    principal Appellant.  In the circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    factual  misconception  was  taken  into  account  by  the  judge   and
    ultimately affected the weight that he could attach to the  report  and
    thus rejecting the assessment of the expert.

27. I also consider that having reached that erroneous view of the  report,
    the judge did not make any further  assessment  of  its  contents  when
    reaching the conclusion on the question  of  reasonableness.   This  is
    exemplified by the conclusion at [12] where  it  was  stated  that  "no
    material was placed  before  me  to  indicate  that  education  is  not
    available to the third and fourth and fifth  Appellants  in  Pakistan".
    Whereas the report did make an assessment of  the  issue  at  7.3  with
    reference to the material at 6.1.  It was incumbent upon the  judge  to
    consider that in the light of the report.

28. Whilst the core of the report dealt with the educational needs  of  the
    children concerned, it went further than that and made an assessment of
    the children's assimilation into British  culture  and  life.   As  the
    report noted, "The education of an individual never stands  alone  from
    the culture and context in which it takes place" (see 7.5) and thus the
    assessment made of this issue in the report was a relevant and material
    consideration to the overall question of reasonableness.  That was also
    a material consideration left out of account by not taking into account
    the matters in the expert report in this regard.

29. I am also persuaded by Mr Byrne's submission that  the  judge  did  not
    take into account the earlier jurisprudence of the Tribunal relating to
    children who had accumulated seven years'  residence  when  reaching  a
    decision on the reasonableness of return.  The judge did properly  have
    regard to the two Supreme Court decisions of ZH (Tanzania)  (as  cited)
    and Zoumbas v SSHD (as cited) and whilst  reference  was  made  to  the
    decision of Azimi-Moayed and Others, the quote in the determination  at
    (i) did not reflect the more relevant  parts  of  the  authority  which
    states that:-

         "Length of residence in the country other than the state of  origin
         can lead to development of social, cultural  and  educational  ties
         that it would be  inappropriate  to  disrupt,  in  the  absence  of
         compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What  amounts  to  lengthy
         residence  is  not  clear  but  past  and  present  policies   have
         identified seven years as a relevant period."

30.  Such  authority  stems  from  the  jurisprudence  of  EM  and   Others
    (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98, E-A (Article 8 - best interests
    of child) [2011] Nigeria UKUT 00315 where it was stated:-

         "Absent other factors, the  reason  why  a  period  of  substantial
         residence as a child may become  a  weighty  consideration  in  the
         balance of completing considerations is that in the course of  such
         time  roots  are  put  down,  personal  identities  are  developed,
         friendships are formed  and  links  are  made  with  the  community
         outside the family unit.  The degree to  which  these  elements  of
         private life are forged and therefore the weight to be given to the
         passage of time will depend on the facts in each case."

31. In this context the ages of the children has direct distinct  relevance
    as those who have spent their childhood and teenage years in the United
    Kingdom. Such children are in  a  different  position  to  those  of  a
    younger age.  Such jurisprudence is  not  inconsistent  with  the  Home
    Office Guidance on the application  of  EX.1  and  thus  the  issue  of
    putting down roots and integration into life in the United Kingdom  and
    in the light of the children's ages was a material consideration  which
    was not taken into account in the decision.

32. As to ground 2, the questioned posed by the judge at (g) and (m) was in
    effect whether it was reasonable for the family to return to  Pakistan.
    It seemed to me that  this  asked  the  wrong  question  and  that  the
    assessment should have begun with considering whether it was reasonable
    for the children to return to Pakistan taking into account the evidence
    relating to the material considerations  as  set  out  in  the  earlier
    jurisprudence.  Such matters would  entail  the  consideration  of  the
    "best interests" principle.  The Rule does provide for  the  children's
    interests  to  be  considered  which  should  not  be   diminished   by
    consideration should as the poor immigration history of the parents and
    their behaviour.  The judge at (g) took into account  when  considering
    reasonableness of return the parents' immigration history and  that  it
    was their "informed choice" to remain in the  UK  and  to  raise  their
    family in the UK when they had no entitlement.  Whilst  the  judge  did
    properly state that it was their parents' decision and not that of  the
    children, such a consideration at  the  outset  of  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness is I find, inconsistent with the test to be applied.   I
    consider that Ms O'Brien is correct to say that in reaching an  overall
    decision as to reasonableness all findings are  required  to  be  taken
    into account which would include what she described as  the  "parasitic
    benefits for the parents" but the point made by Mr  Byrne  adds  weight
    when he submitted that it must be circular if  a  parent's  immigration
    status could affect  the  Appellant's  ability  to  meet  the  Rule  in
    circumstances when the application is  made  because  the  parents  are
    unlawfully present in the UK.

33. As to ground 3, and the argument advanced on the basis of  whether  the
    Appellant qualified during a transitional period, it is  not  necessary
    to reach a conclusion on  this  ground  in  the  light  of  the  errors
    identified earlier.

34. In those circumstances I  have  reached  the  conclusion  the  decision
    cannot stand and should be set aside.  Having reached that  conclusion,
    the errors of law identified demonstrate  that  material  evidence  and
    considerations were not taken account of and thus affected the  overall
    assessment of the question of reasonableness thus none of the  findings
    of fact  can  stand.   In  those  circumstances,  I  have  reached  the
    conclusion that the submission made by Mr Byrne should be followed that
    it is in the interests of justice for the appeal to be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to  consider  all  the  evidence  and  to  reach  a
    conclusion on the issues raised in this appeal.  Whilst  I  have  heard
    some submissions from the parties it seems to me that it  is  important
    for the Tribunal to consider any new evidence that the Appellant  seeks
    to place before the Tribunal as this is an in country appeal  and  from
    what I have heard the circumstances of the third Appellant have or  are
    about to change.  The expert evidence is now not current and will also,
    I anticipate, require updating.  The question of the Tribunal  concerns
    the best interests of minor children and therefore I consider  that  it
    is in the interests of justice that the  right  disposal  is  for  this
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the  fact  finding
    and assessment of the evidence to be made in the light of the evidence.
     Thus I have reached the decision that that course should  be  adopted,
    having given particular regard to the  overriding  objective  and  that
    there are issues of fact that are central to the  appeal  that  require
    determination.

35.   Therefore the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and
    the case is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Glasgow for  a
    hearing in accordance with Section 12(2)(b) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act and the Practice Statement of  10th  February  2010
    (as amended)

36. The following directions should apply:

      i) The case should be heard afresh with all issues to  be  decided  at
         the hearing none of the findings shall stand.

     ii) A paginated and indexed bundle of all documents be relied on at the
         hearing must be provided  no  later  than  seven  days  before  the
         hearing date.

    iii) Any updated expert evidence is to be  filed  and  served  upon  the
         parties and the Tribunal  no  later  than  seven  days  before  the
         hearing.

     iv)   The case to be listed before the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
         Glasgow with a time estimate to be  confirmed  by  the  Appellants'
         representatives and confirmation as to whether  an  interpreter  is
         required and if so what language.


Direction regarding anonymity - rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

A.   The  appellant  is  granted  anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings,
    unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise, and be referred to  as
    FK. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify him or any member of their family. This direction applies both
    to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to a contempt of court.

Signed            Date 9/9/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


