
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02235/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd and 23rd September, 2013               |On 24th October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                    A S M

                         (aNNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Boyle Assistant Solicitor with Halliday Reed
Solicitors
     (on 2.9. 2013 and 23.9.2013)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer (on
2.9.2013)
     Mr C Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer (23.9.2013)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  1st  January,  1982.   He
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent, taken on 6th January, 2012, to make him the  subject  of  a
    deportation order.

Immigration History

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  9th  April,  2003  and
    applied for asylum on arrival.   His  application  was  considered  and
    refused on  29th  July,  2004.   The  appellant  did  not  appeal  that
    decision.

3.   Unfortunately, the  Secretary  of  State  did  nothing  to  remove  the
    appellant.

4.   The appellant's personal history and the circumstances  leading  up  to
    the making of an appeal are complicated and set out at some  length  in
    the determination of a panel (First-tier Tribunal Judge Sacks,  sitting
    with Dr T Okitikpi) of the First Tier  Tribunal.  For  completeness,  a
    copy of their determination ("the First-tier panel's determination") is
    set out in Appendix A.

5.   On behalf of the appellant it was accepted that the panel of the First-
    tier Tribunal accurately set out in clause 1 of its determination,  the
    appellant's convictions and the sentences imposed on him.

6.   The appellant challenged the panel's decision and Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 22nd May,
    2012.  In granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  also  gave
    directions to the respondent.

7.   Unfortunately, the Secretary of  State  failed  to  comply  with  those
    directions.  As a result, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  set  aside  the
    decision of the panel of the First-tier Tribunal, having found that  it
    contained an error of law.  Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins'  reasons,  in
    which he quotes from his permission to appeal dated 22nd May, 2012,  is
    set out at Appendix B of this determination.

8.   It was also accepted on behalf of the Appellant  by  Mr  Boyle  and  on
    behalf of the respondent by Mr Dewison that the findings of  the  panel
    of the First-tier Tribunal set out at paragraph 47 were  unaffected  by
    the error found by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins and should stand.  They
    agreed that the only issue before me  was  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim.

The Hearing on 2nd September 2012

9.   At the hearing on 2nd September, 2012, I started hearing oral  evidence
    form the appellant.  During the course of his oral evidence he accepted
    that  his  immigration  history  and  his  record  of  convictions  and
    sentences set out by the panel of the First-tier Tribunal  at  pages  2
    and 3 of his determination were correct.

10.  It transpired that the appellant was due to appear  at  a  Magistrates'
    Court on 20th September, 2013.  As a result  I  adjourned  the  hearing
    until 23rd September.  At the hearing  before  me  on  23rd  September,
    2013, it was again  confirmed  that  I  was  only  concerned  with  the
    appellant's Article 8 family and  private  life  rights  and  that  the
    findings of fact arrived at by the panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    were to stand and were affected by the  errors  of  law  identified  by
    Upper Tier Judge Perkins.  None  of  the  findings  of  fact  had  been
    challenged by or on behalf of the appellant.

Oral Evidence of the Appellant

11.  The appellant was called and confirmed his full names,  date  of  birth
    and address.  He and the interpreter  confirmed  that  they  understood
    each other.

Evidence-in-Chief

12.  The appellant was  shown  a  statement  dated  12th  March,  2012.   He
    identified his signature at the  end  of  it.   He  was  then  shown  a
    statement dated 5th June, 2012 and again identified  his  signature  at
    the end of it.

13.  The appellant confirmed  that  both  these  statements  were  true  and
    accurate in all respects, that they had both been read to  him  in  his
    own language and that he did not wish to alter or correct  anything  in
    them.  He repeated that the statements were correct.

14.  I warned the  appellant  that  he  was  about  to  be  invited  by  his
    solicitor to adopt, as part of his evidence before me, the contents  of
    the two witness statements.  I explained that he was free to adopt,  as
    part of his evidence, anything he wished to  but  that  before  he  did
    adopt the statements he should satisfy himself that they were true  and
    accurate in  all  respects  and  did  not  require  any  alteration  or
    correction.  I explained to him that the reason for this was  that  if,
    when later being cross-examined on his evidence, the appellant were  to
    contradict anything contained within the statements,  then  that  might
    cause me to believe that he was not telling the truth.  If  I  believed
    that he was not telling the truth then there was a danger that  he  may
    damage his appeal.

15.  The appellant confirmed that he understood  the  warning  and  told  me
    that he wished to adopt the statements.

Cross-examination

16.  The appellant confirmed that he lived at his current address  with  his
    girlfriend's, R W, father, Mr W and brother.  She lives at XXX  Street,
    North Shields with her two children, R and K.  K was born on 23rd June,
    2013.  R moved to the address at XXX Street, North Shields in 2013  and
    before that she lived at YYY Gardens for almost six months.   Prior  to
    that she had lived in Teignmouth at TTT Avenue with  her  mother.   She
    left her mother because her child had grown up and she wanted  to  live
    independently.

17.  The appellant told me that he had lived  at  his  current  address  for
    between five and seven years.  He had been in  a  relationship  with  R
    since 28 April 2007.  When she had been living with her mother  in  TTT
    Avenue the appellant also lived there.  He lived there for some six  or
    seven months.

18.  R moved to XXX Street, North Shields in 2013.  The  appellant  did  not
    move there because he is currently on bail and his bail address is  the
    address where he currently lives.  His girlfriend's father has a  three
    bedroom house and because her brother also lives with her father  there
    is no room for R and the two children.

19.  The appellant said that his relationship had never  broken  down  since
    2007.

20.  When he lived with R and her mother, the police had never  been  called
    to her house.

21.  Neither R nor her mother had ever made any allegations  to  the  police
    about the appellant.

22.  The appellant confirmed that he had been to a police station  and  that
    false allegations had been made against him.  This was in Newcastle  on
    20th September.  He stayed in the police station for one night but then
    in court he was found not guilty.

23.  The appellant was again asked whether he had  ever  been  to  a  police
    station to complain that false allegations had been made  against  him.
    He told me that he had not.

24.  The appellant explained that he had been arrested on  suspicion  of  an
    offence but was subsequently found not guilty.   The  offence  involved
    chasing someone in a park but at the time the offence was  supposed  to
    have happened he was in his house.  He was found not guilty.

25.  The  appellant  told  me  that  he  was  not  aware  of  anyone  making
    statements against him.

26.  The appellant agreed with Mr Dewison that he was a good role model  for
    his son R.

27.  It was then pointed out to the appellant that according  to  the  panel
    of the First-tier Tribunal (paragraph 47(c) of the determination),  the
    appellant had deceived both his girlfriend, R and her father, Mr W.

28.  The appellant told me he did not.  He said, "I don't know  what  you're
    talking about.  It's kind of complicated."

29.  The appellant was asked if he recalled an incident when he was  driving
    a Mercedes van and was stopped by the police and he gave them  a  false
    name.  He said that he remembered being stopped by the police but  told
    me that he gave them  his  home  office  ID  card.   He  denied  having
    provided false identification to a police officer.

30.  The appellant was then asked about the Home  Office  "legacy  process".
    He replied that he had been told by people  including  his  immigration
    solicitor that his case was being considered under the legacy process.

31.  Mr Dewison pointed out to the appellant  that  since  he  had  criminal
    convictions he did not  qualify  for  consideration  under  the  legacy
    process.  The appellant said that he had not been  told  he  could  not
    qualify.  He had been in the United Kingdom for nearly ten years.

32.  The appellant said that although he had been driving  whilst  uninsured
    and disqualified he had never given anyone any wrong information.

33.  The appellant was then asked if he had ever been to  a  police  station
    and complained about having been dragged out of a car  at  gunpoint  by
    police officers.  The appellant replied that he had  never  been  to  a
    police station.

34.  The question was put to him again and he replied that at 8 o'clock  one
    evening he left his house to buy some food to eat on Westgate Road.  He
    was in a friend's car at the time.  The car parked and then two  police
    range rover vehicles turned up and police  officers,  who  were  armed,
    made him get out of a vehicle.  The  police  told  the  appellant  that
    someone had reported that he or  the  driver  of  the  vehicle  was  in
    possession of a firearm.  The police searched  the  appellant  and  the
    vehicle and then apologised.

35.  This took place earlier in 2013.  The appellant was not  taken  to  the
    police station.

36.  The appellant explained that he had complained to the police.   He  and
    his father-in-law went to the police  station  and  they  saw  a  high-
    ranking officer.  This officer told them to go home and explained  that
    their complaint would be investigated but he  has  not  heard  anything
    further.

37.  The appellant complained that the police should have told him what  had
    happened but had not done so.

38.  The appellant was then asked by Mr Dewison whether he had gone  to  the
    police station and complained about false allegations having been  made
    about him.  At this stage  the  appellant  told  me  that  he  did  not
    understand the interpreter.  He said that he and  the  interpreter  did
    not understand each other.  He told me that it was his  right  to  have
    the hearing adjourned.

39.  I explained to the appellant that I  was  satisfied  that  he  and  the
    interpreter did clearly understand each other and that I would ask that
    the question be put to him again.  It  was  suggested  that  he  should
    listen carefully to the question before he  answered  it.   Mr  Dewison
    again asked the appellant if he had ever been to a police  station  and
    made a complaint that someone had made false allegations  against  him.
    The appellant told me that he wished to use the lavatory.  I  told  him
    that he could not do so at that point.  He said that he  had  explained
    previously that he and Mr W had gone to the police station  and  met  a
    high-ranking police officer who they had talked to about  armed  police
    stopping him.  He said that he had still not heard anything  back  from
    the police.  The appellant said he did not have a problem with anybody.

40.  The appellant said that he  was  given  �15  a  week  by  a  church  in
    Newcastle and got by wearing second hand clothes.  He said  that  Mr  W
    also helps him with money.

41.  I adjourned the e
hearing for a five minute break.

42.  On resuming the hearing the appellant confirmed that Mr W  had  offered
    to help the appellant start up his own business  once  he  is  able  to
    work.  He said that Mr W knows that the appellant is  a  good  mechanic
    because he has fixed Mr W's car once or twice.  Mr W is a taxi driver.

43.  The appellant was asked how he spent his time and  what  proportion  of
    his time he spent with his children.   He  explained  that  R  went  to
    nursery three times a week.  It was his responsibility to prepare R  in
    the morning with his  mother  and  to  take  him  to  the  nursery  and
    sometimes in the afternoon he collected R.  The appellant told me  that
    he also took R to the park, to  the  Metro  Centre  and  to  a  Kurdish
    restaurant.

44.  During his time with R he has never  been  aware  of  entering  into  a
    different relationship with another man.  The appellant does not own  a
    car of his own.  He did have a car some two or three years ago when one
    of his friends bought a car for him.

45.  There was no re-examination.

46.  In order to clarify the appellant's evidence I asked the appellant  two
    questions in response to which the appellant said that when he moved to
    the United Kingdom he was not aware of the law.  He did not drive a car
    at that time and now he  no  longer  has  use  for  a  car.   He  lived
    permanently with his girlfriend at her mother's  home  when  she  lived
    there but his clothes were still at TTT Avenue.

Oral Evidence of R

47.  I then heard oral evidence from R.  She confirmed her address, date  of
    birth and nationality.  She was shown her statement dated  12th  March,
    2012.  She confirmed that she had read it before she signed it and that
    it was true and accurate.  I repeated the warning to  her  that  I  had
    earlier given to the appellant.  She told me that  she  understood  the
    warning and wished to adopt her statement.



Cross-examination

48.  The witness explained that she lives with her children, R and K,  in  a
    house which is rented privately.  She cannot live with the appellant at
    her father's home because it only has three bedrooms  and  her  brother
    and father lives there with the appellant.  K was born  on  23rd  June,
    2013 and the appellant is his father.

49.  The witness produced the birth certificate  for  K,  a  copy  of  which
    appears at Appendix   of this determination.

50.  The witness explained that she  had  registered  the  birth  last  week
    because she had to take the appellant with her.  She had first gone  to
    register the birth some five or six weeks earlier but in registering it
    she  had  left  out  the  appellant's  name.   She  had  left  out  the
    appellant's name because the appellant was not with her  at  the  time.
    She denied that she had not been prepared to explain who the father was
    when she first went to register the birth.

51.  Mr Dewison asked the appellant if the  police  had  ever  come  to  the
    home.  The witness explained that last year her  mother  had  rung  the
    police because the appellant wanted to take R out and at the same  time
    she and her mother wanted to take R out.  An argument  ensued  and  her
    mother rang the police.  The police told them to sort  the  matter  out
    themselves.  The witness said that it only happened once.

52.  The appellant had lived at her mother's house  for  two  years  at  TTT
    Avenue.

53.  Somebody accused the appellant  of  chasing  and  attacking  him.   The
    witness explained that she had known this person from school.  He is  a
    racist.  She has never had a relationship with this person  and  he  is
    not the father of K.

54.  The witness's mother comes to the home and helps out the  witness  with
    the children and also takes R out.  Her father also helps her  out  but
    not as much as her mother.

55.  The witness told me that she gives the  appellant  money  as  does  her
    father and he also  receives  money  from  the  Refugee  Service.   The
    witness explained that the appellant had told her that the  police  had
    accused him of driving whilst disqualified.

56.  The witness explained that she was not  prepared  to  go  and  live  in
    Iraq.

57.  She was asked by Mr Dewison whether  she  and  the  appellant  had  any
    plans to marry.  She explained that there was no  reason  for  them  to
    marry.  They had no plans about getting married.  She said that she may
    get married at some time in the future but there was no reason  to  now
    and she and the appellant had no plans.  She told me that she did  wish
    to stay with the appellant and live with him permanently.



Re-examination

59.  The witness explained that she was not aware  of  any  offences  having
    been committed by the appellant since his last conviction.  She  agreed
    with her solicitor that she had various tattoos on  her  arms,  one  of
    which was the appellant's name and the other was in Arabic.

59.  The appellant told me that she and the appellant  could  live  together
    at her father's house before her brother moved  back  with  her  father
    about a month ago but she prefers to have her own place.  She pays half
    the rent and receives housing benefit.

60.  In answer to a question put to her  by  her  solicitor,  the  appellant
    confirmed that her father lives some two or  three  streets  away  from
    her.



Oral evidence of Mr W

Evidence in chief

61.  I then heard oral evidence from Mr W  who  confirmed  his  full  names,
    date of birth and nationality.  He was also  shown  a  statement  dated
    12th March, 2012 and he identified his signature on it.   He  confirmed
    that it was true and accurate in all respects and  that  he  wished  to
    adopt it.

Cross examination

62.  In answer to questions put to him by Mr Dewison, Mr  W  confirmed  that
    he withdrew a recognisance  he  had  given  for  the  appellant's  bail
    because his wife wanted items for her home.  He spent several  thousand
    pounds on various items for her.  That was the only reason he  withdrew
    recognisance.

63.  In 2008 the appellant came to live with him  at  his  home.   He  lived
    there with his son.  The appellant has never  been  violent.   R  lived
    with her mother in a one-bedroom flat at TTT Avenue.

64.  The appellant has been living with Mr W for some five years  and  Mr  W
    gives him money occasionally.

65.  When asked how he felt about her daughter striking  up  a  relationship
    with the appellant, he explained that he did not like the idea  of  the
    appellant being with his daughter but  no  one  would  have  been  good
    enough for his daughter.

66.  The witness was asked  whether  he  remembered  an  occasion  when  the
    appellant was stopped from driving a van.   Mr  W  said  there  was  an
    incident when some Turkish people pulled out a knife on  the  appellant
    at a Turkish restaurant.  Mr W received a telephone call and he went to
    the restaurant followed by the police.  He had to  stop  these  Turkish
    people from stabbing the appellant.  The police were  called  but  they
    did nothing about it.  This was a few months ago.

67.  The witness was again asked whether he recalled an  incident  when  the
    appellant was stopped from driving a van.  Mr W said that he could  not
    remember this incident.

68.  Mr W agreed that he had gone to a police  station  with  the  appellant
    and met with an inspector.  The witness complained about people  making
    allegations.  The inspector told them that he would personally note any
    calls made to the police about the appellant.   Things  had  been  said
    about the appellant which were not true.

69.  There was an occasion when the police came to Mr W's  home  and  kicked
    in the front door.  They told Mr W to mind his own  business  and  they
    had got the appellant and handcuffed him and took  him  away.   He  was
    released the following day.  He was supposed to have  attacked  someone
    but it was all lies.

70.  Mr W said that he went on another occasion to complain  to  the  police
    about having stopped him when  they  received  a  complaint  about  him
    having a firearm.

71.  Mr W told me that his former wife, together with R  and  "another  lad"
    made false statements about the appellant, according to information  he
    had been given by the police.

72.  Mr W explained that his former wife  had  made  up  several  complaints
    about the appellant to the police.  One related to a  kidnapping.   The
    appellant had been told by the police that his daughter, R,  also  made
    up a statement complaining about the appellant.

73.  Mr W explained that he would support  his  daughter  if  the  appellant
    were deported but of course he would rather him being allowed  to  stay
    and work.  Mr W said that he would help the appellant if he  wanted  to
    open a garage.

74.  In answer to questions put by me, in order  to  clarify  the  witness's
    evidence, the witness told me that the appellant  did  not  drive.   He
    does not live with R  because  she  wants  her  own  property  and  the
    appellant is bailed to live with him.

Submissions

75.  Mr Dewison relied  on  the  refusal  notice.   He  explained  that  the
    appellant had no leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He  has
    repeatedly attempted to deceive people.  Mr W clearly believes that the
    appellant is a reformed character but it is necessary to  consider  the
    evidence.  The appellant and R still did not live together and Mr W  no
    longer acts as the appellant's surety.  K's birth was registered  by  R
    but with the name of his father left blank.  It has now been registered
    but, submitted Mr Dewison the reason it has been  registered  with  the
    appellant as the father is in order to assist the appeal.

76.  Even Mr W has confirmed that his daughter made statements  against  the
    appellant to the police about an incident in the park.

77.  The respondent of  course  accepts  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children must be given careful consideration and ordinarily they should
    of course remain with their parents.  At  the  moment  they  live  with
    their mother.  That is her  choice.   Mr  Dewison  suggested  that  the
    appeal really comes down to one question, is it proportionate to  allow
    a recidivist to remain in the United Kingdom where he has a  propensity
    for driving whilst uninsured.  The appellant clearly has a capacity for
    not telling the truth.

78.  This is an appeal against an order made under Section 3(1) of the  1971
    Act.  Mr Dewison  submitted  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    entirely proportionate given the duty of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    protect the public.

79.  The appellant's solicitor told me that the appellant has a  "worryingly
    high number of convictions".  However the evidence clearly demonstrated
    that there was family life between the appellant and R and between  him
    and his children.  He referred me to the decision of the European Court
    in Onur v United Kingdom 27319/07 and in particular  at  paragraph  57.
    Mr Boyle pointed out that the appellant's  offending  did  not  involve
    violence or drugs and was not  concerned  with  sexual  offences.   The
    appellant has now been out of trouble for some time.  He  now  has  two
    children and in the ordinary course of events it  is  right  that  they
    should be brought up by two parents.  The parents do not live  together
    at the moment but the  reasons  for  that  have  been  explained.   The
    appellant lives with R's father in his house and she lives on  her  own
    in accommodation for which she receives  housing  benefit.   She  is  a
    young woman who wants to have a home of her own in which she can  bring
    up her children.  She does not want to go and share  a  home  with  her
    father.  The parties live close to each other; Mr W's home is only  two
    or three streets away from R's home.  The appellant  spends  time  with
    her and the children and gave evidence that he assists with R.

80.  Mr  Boyle  suggested  that  the  appellant  does  now  have  a  belated
    understanding of what is required of him if he is to  be  permitted  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  He invites me to allow the appeal.

81.  The decision of the respondent  which  the  appellant  appealed  was  a
    decision to make a deportation order dated 6th January, 2012.   In  the
    notice the respondent said:-

         "On 11th October, 2011, at Newcastle-upon-Tyne Crown Court you were
         convicted of driving whilst disqualified, resting or obstructing  a
         constable and failing to surrender to custody.  In  view  of  these
         convictions, the Secretary of  State  deems  it  conducive  to  the
         public good to make a deportation order against you.  The Secretary
         of State has therefore decided  to  make  an  order  by  virtue  of
         Section 3 (5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971  (as  amended  by  the
         Immigration and Asylum Act 1999) requiring you to leave the  United
         Kingdom and prohibiting you from re-entering while the order is  in
         force."


82.   It  appears  that  in  the  accompanying  letter  giving  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant should be deported the Secretary of State
    referred to the appellant having made an application for  asylum.   The
    letter then explained why the appellant's application  for  asylum  was
    refused.  In the appellant's grounds of appeal, the  appellant  claimed
    that his removal would be contrary to his rights under Article  8.   It
    was also asserted that his rights under  Articles  2  and  3  would  be
    breached by his removal.

83.   The  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  rather  confused   but
    unchallenged findings at paragraph 46 of their determination,  did  not
    accept the appellant's claim since the appellant's Article 8 claim  was
    based on the same factual matrix as his  asylum  claim  that  was  also
    dismissed.  It was not  argued  before  me  that  the  appellant  could
    succeed under the Immigration Rules.

84.  Article 8 of the  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides for  respect  for  a  person's
    private and family life, their home and correspondence.  The  appellant
    has to show that the subject matter of the Article 8 subsists and  that
    the decision of the respondent will interfere with it.  If he does  so,
    it is for the respondent to show that the  decision  is  in  accordance
    with the law, that it is one of the  legitimate  purposes  set  out  in
    Article 8(2) in this case for the economic well-being of  the  country,
    for the prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others, and that it is necessary in a democratic
    society, which means that it must be proportionate.

85.  At paragraph 17 of Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2004] UKHL 27, Lord Bingham of Cornhill said this:
         "17.  In considering whether  a  challenge  to  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision to remove a person  must  clearly  fail,  the
             reviewing court must, as it  seems  to  me,  consider  how  an
             appeal would be likely to fare before an adjudicator,  as  the
             tribunal responsible for deciding the appeal if there were  an
             appeal. This means that the reviewing court  must  ask  itself
             essentially the questions which would have to be  answered  by
             an adjudicator.  In  a  case  where  removal  is  resisted  in
             reliance on article 8, these questions are likely to be:
             (1)      Will the proposed removal be  an  interference  by  a
                  public authority with the  exercise  of  the  applicant's
                  right to respect for his private or (as the case may  be)
                  family life?
             (2)      If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                  such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation  of
                  article 8?
             (3)      If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
                  law?
             (4)      If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                  society in the interests  of  national  security,  public
                  safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the
                  prevention of disorder or crime, for  the  protection  of
                  health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
                  freedoms of others?
             (5)      If so, is such interference proportionate to the
                  legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"
86.  I am satisfied that the appellant does enjoy a  family  life  with  the
    sponsor and the respondent's decision does amount  to  an  interference
    with it.  I believe that such interference does  have  consequences  of
    such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article  8;  the
    threshold for which is not especially high (see  paragraph  28  of  the
    judgement of Sedley LJ in AG (Eritrea) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 801).
87.  In the leading case of Huang  [2007]  UKHL  11,  [2007]  2AC  167  Lord
    Bingham said at paragraph 20:
           "In an article 8 case where this question [i.e. the question  of
           proportionality] is  reached,  the  ultimate  question  for  the
           appellate immigration authority is whether the refusal of  leave
           to enter or remain, in  circumstances  where  the  life  of  the
           family cannot reasonably be expected to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,
           taking full account of all considerations weighing in favour  of
           the refusal, prejudices to the family life of the applicant in a
           manner sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
           fundamental right protected by article 8. If the answer to  this
           question  is  affirmative,  the  refusal  is  unlawful  and  the
           authority must so decide."
88.  The interference is in accordance with the law and is  necessary  in  a
    democratic society for the economic well-being of the country  for  the
    prevention of disorder or crime and for the protection  of  the  rights
    and freedoms of others; the question is whether or not interference  is
    proportionate.  I have to bear in mind in considering  the  appellant's
    Article 8 appeal the fact that there is only one family life  and  that
    it is necessary to look at the family as a whole  and  to  regard  each
    affected family member as a fiction (see  Beoku-Betts  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39). I must also have  regard
    to the best interests of the appellant's children in the  way  required
    by paragraph 29 of the judgements  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4.
    There are no considerations inherently more significant that  the  best
    interests of the children who are both British citizens.

89.  Before considering the appellant's  Article  8  appeal  further  it  is
    necessary for me to make findings of fact.

90.   I am grateful to the representatives for confirming that the  findings
    at paragraph 47 of the determination of the  panel  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stand.

91.  The panel were clearly not impressed by the appellant  and  found  that
    he lacked all  credibility,  was  a  persistent  offender  and  on  the
    evidence before them they were not satisfied that he  had  in  any  way
    rehabilitated himself or attempted to reform his ways.

92.  In some important respects I am inclined to agree with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant is not a man whose word  can  be  trusted.   I
    believe that he will say almost anything if he believes that  it  suits
    his purpose.  I have several reasons for reaching this conclusion:-

    (a)  The appellant claimed that he lived at the address in TTT  Avenue,
         with the appellant, for some six or seven months when R lived  with
         her mother.  Earlier he had explained that R moved to  her  current
         address in 2013 and before that had lived  for  six  months  at  an
         address in YYY Gardens.  Before that she  lived  with  her  mother.
         According to R, the appellant lived at his  mother's  house  for  a
         couple of years.  When I pointed out to the appellant that  he  had
         claimed to live with R's father for between five  and  seven  years
         and had also lived with R's mother for  six  or  seven  months  the
         appellant replied that he had lived "permanently at my girlfriend's
         mum's house but my clothes were in" Mr W's home.  This is just  one
         example of the appellant's inability  to  be  honest  in  answering
         questions.  I am  perfectly  satisfied  that  this  had  absolutely
         nothing to do with him not understanding  the  interpreter  or  the
         interpreter not understanding him.


    (b)  The appellant was asked very simply whether, at the time he  lived
         with R and she was living with her mother, the police  were  called
         to the home.  He denied it.  He was then asked  whether  R  or  her
         mother had ever made any  allegations  against  him  and  again  he
         denied this.  The appellant was then asked if he had ever been to a
         police station and alleged that false  allegations  had  been  made
         against him.  The appellant's initial response was to explain  that
         false allegations  had  been  made  which  resulted  in  him  being
         acquitted of charges, but when the question was again put he  said,
         "no I have never been to a police station and complained that false
         allegations had been made against me".  The appellant was asked why
         he had recently attended court and he explained that  he  had  been
         arrested on suspicion of an offence but had been found not  guilty.
         It was for chasing somebody in a park but at the  time  he  was  at
         home.  Mr Dewison then again asked whether the appellant  had  been
         aware of someone making false allegations about him and he  replied
         that he was not.


         However the appellant changed his evidence  when  later  questions
         were put to him  concerning  his  conviction  for  driving  without
         insurance and obstructing a police officer in  the  course  of  his
         duty.  The appellant continued to deny giving false  details  to  a
         police officer and it was only when  it  was  pointed  out  that  a
         police report with attached statement from the police  officer  had
         earlier been submitted to the Tribunal and been considered  by  the
         panel of the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant indicated  that
         he wanted an adjournment to go to the lavatory and complained  that
         he did not understand the  interpreter.   He  then  told  me  about
         having been to the police station with Mr W  and  meeting  a  high-
         ranking police officer.  I am perfectly  well  satisfied  that  the
         appellant's responses had absolutely nothing at all to do with  him
         failing to understand the interpreter or the interpreter failing to
         understand the appellant.  I believe  that  the  appellant's  claim
         that he could not understand the interpreter was an attempt to have
         the proceedings adjourned, because the appellant realised  that  he
         had been caught out giving incorrect answers to questions which had
         been put to him.


89.  I believe that the appellant and R are in a long-term relationship  and
    that as a result of that relationship they have two sons, R and  K.   I
    am prepared to accept R's evidence that she registered K some  five  or
    six weeks prior to the hearing at a time when she was unaccompanied  by
    the appellant and for that reason had left K's father's details blank.

90.  I have some difficulty in understanding quite why the appellant  and  R
    do not live together.  I was told by the appellant and R  that  because
    the appellant had been bailed to R's father's address he had been  told
    it would be sensible not to make any changes to that.  I  am  afraid  I
    find that explanation incomprehensible.  Mr W  had  originally  been  a
    surety for the appellant but, with the agreement of the Tribunal  Mr  W
    had been released from  his  recognisance.   There  was  no  reason  to
    believe that if an application had been made for the bail conditions to
    be amended so that he lived with R that this application would  not  be
    acceded to.  The respondent would have no objection  to  the  appellant
    living with his long-term  partner  and  children.   I  also  found  it
    curious that R should insist on living on her own at an address, albeit
    only two or three streets away from where the appellant was living with
    her father.  It would have been perfectly possible for R to go and live
    with the appellant at her father's accommodation prior to  her  brother
    returning to live with the appellant and her father, and yet she  chose
    not to do so.  I accept of course that any young woman  would  want  to
    have her own home but it did strike me  as  particularly  curious  that
    they had done nothing more about seeking to live together as a  family.
    I am satisfied, however, that family life does exist between  them  and
    of course it clearly does exist  between  the  appellant  and  his  two
    children.  I did not find R to be  an  entirely  credible  witness.   I
    believe that she was  deliberately  hiding  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's recent court appearance from me.

91.  I found Mr W to be an entirely credible  witness.   Understandably,  he
    only wants the best for his daughter.  Over the five years during which
    the appellant has been living with Mr W in his home, Mr W has  had  the
    unique opportunity to observe the appellant and make an  assessment  of
    his character.  He believes that the appellant has seen  the  error  of
    his ways and he is prepared to go  to  the  lengths  of  assisting  the
    appellant is setting up a business  if  the  appellant  is  allowed  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  I believe that Mr W  and  the  appellant
    did go to the police and make complaints that  false  allegations  were
    being made about the appellant and I believe that they were told  by  a
    police inspector that if any further allegations were logged  he  would
    examine them.  I am prepared to accept that Mr W was told by the police
    that his former wife and his daughter had made allegations against  the
    appellant.  Whether indeed they had made allegations I do not know, but
    I am prepared to accept that Mr W was told by the police that they had.
     Clearly R's mother is less than sanguine about the relationship.


92.  I am satisfied that the appellant clearly does enjoy a  both  a  family
    and private life in the United Kingdom most of which is centred  around
    his girlfriend, R and his children.

93.      I am aware of course that the best interests and welfare of  R  and
    K are a primary consideration when making my decision.

94.  I accept that it is of course in the best interests  of  any  child  to
    live and be with their parents.  At the moment the children  live  with
    their mother and not with their parents jointly.  I am aware of  course
    that K is only a baby, R is still under 3.   Undoubtedly  R  will  have
    formed a close attachment to his father.  I am prepared to accept  that
    the appellant does play a key role in R's life and takes  him  to,  and
    collects him from nursery and takes him out to the park and shopping.

95.   In  considering  the  question  of  proportionality  of   course   one
    recognises that the Secretary of  State  has  a  duty  to  protect  the
    public.  The appellant has some seven convictions  for  driving  whilst
    disqualified and driving whilst uninsured.

96.  These are very serious  offences  reflected  in  the  prison  sentences
    which the appellant has served.  The consequences for innocent  members
    of the public being hit by a driver of a vehicle who has no third party
    motor insurance is clear.  Driving a motor vehicle whilst disqualified,
    and with insurance, shows a total disregard for the  law.   I  bear  in
    mind the findings made by the panel of the First-tier Tribunal.  Before
    me the appellant continued to deny that when stopped by the  police  he
    had given a false identity and he was clearly disturbed to realise that
    a copy of the officer's statement had been  served  on  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (by the appellant's own solicitor).

97.  I bear in mind that the appellant has no right  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Against this, of course, I accept that the appellant has been
    in the United Kingdom for almost ten years and during this time he  has
    been unemployed and reliant on the generosity of charities and friends.
     The appellant spent his formative years in Iraq and I have no evidence
    at all to suggest that the appellant has been using  his  time  in  the
    United Kingdom constructively.  He claims to have made enquiries  about
    undertaking an English course and  having  been  told  that  until  his
    status is clarified he is not eligible to attend the course.  I am told
    that he has not worked.

98.  It is to the appellant's credit that since November  2011  he  has  not
    been convicted of any further offences.

99.  Whilst noting that the offences of which the  appellant  was  convicted
    (which include committing acts with intent to  pervert  the  course  of
    justice, failing to provide a specimen  for  analysis,  using  a  false
    instrument and being drunk and disorderly), are all  serious,  they  do
    not involve  violence  or  drugs.   When  looked  at  cumulatively  the
    appellant's convictions are appalling, but it is clear that during  the
    period of the last two years the appellant has, to his credit, kept out
    of trouble.  Mr W believes that the appellant has  learnt  his  lesson.
    Mr W believes that the appellant should be given one last chance.

100. I bear in mind that the appellant's children are entirely  innocent  of
    any blame.  I also bear in mind that the appellant's relationship  with
    R is of some 7 years duration.   I  also  bear  in  mind  that  if  the
    appellant were to be deported from the United Kingdom it is likely that
    he would be excluded for a minimum period of ten  years,  and  possibly
    longer; I believe that effectively his family life with  his  wife  and
    children will end.  It might be possible that  at  some  stage  in  the
    future when they are adults his children may  seek  to  re-establish  a
    family life with their father, but that would be  no  compensation  for
    the years they have spent without  him.   I  have  concluded  that  the
    appellant's removal from the United Kingdom would,  in  the  particular
    circumstances  of  this  appeal,  be  disproportionate.   I  allow  the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                  Anonymity

I made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
appellant or his family members.  Failure to comply with  this  order  could
lead to a contempt of court.


                        Appendix A above referred to

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-AL-V1

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02235/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Kings Court North Shields              |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st March 2012                              |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                   JUDGE of the first-tier tribunal SACKS
                                Dr t oKITIKPI

                                   Between

                                    A S M
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Selway
For the Respondent:    Miss Bishop


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Appellant's name is Mr A S M, he is a citizen of Iraq, and his date  of
    birth is 1st January 1982.

    The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  9th  April  2003  and
    applied for asylum upon arrival.  His application  was  considered  and
    refused on 29th July 2004.  The Appellant did not appeal  against  this
    decision.

    It  is  important  to  have  regard  to  the  Appellant's  history  and
    criminality since that date which is as follows:

|Date   |Conviction                       |Sentence                     |
|04.04.0|Driving whilst disqualified      |Community punishment order of|
|5      |Using a vehicle whilst uninsured |80 hours                     |
|       |                                 |Disqualified from driving    |
|07.07.0|Breaching above community order  |Fined �80                    |
|5      |                                 |                             |
|22.09.0|Driving whilst disqualified      |2 months imprisonment        |
|5      |Using a vehicle whilst uninsured |Disqualified from driving for|
|       |Using a vehicle with obscured    |2 years                      |
|       |window                           |                             |
|05.06.0|Drunk and disorderly             |Fined �50                    |
|6      |                                 |Forced to pay costs of $43   |
|03.11.0|Driving whilst disqualified      |8 months imprisonment        |
|6      |Failing to provide analysis of   |Disqualified from driving for|
|       |breath                           |an additional 2 years        |
|       |Using a vehicle whilst uninsured |                             |
|29.08.0|                                 |Failed to report to UK BA    |
|7      |                                 |                             |
|11.06.0|Failing to provide specimen for  |24 weeks imprisonment        |
|8      |analysis                         |Disqualified from driving for|
|       |Using a vehicle whilst uninsured |4 years                      |
|       |Driving whilst disqualified      |Court recommended for        |
|       |                                 |deportation, rescinded on    |
|       |                                 |appeal                       |
|15.09.0|Using a false instrument         |Community order for 12 months|
|8      |Possessing a false registration  |                             |
|       |card                             |Unpaid work requirement of   |
|       |2 counts of attempting to obtain |200 hours                    |
|       |a pecuniary advantage by         |                             |
|       |deception                        |                             |
|       |Driving a vehicle with excess    |                             |
|       |alcohol                          |                             |
|       |Using a vehicle whilst uninsured |                             |
|       |Driving whilst disqualified      |                             |
|       |Resisting/obstructing a constable|                             |
|02.04.0|Committing acts with the intent  |9 months imprisonment        |
|9      |to pervert the course of justice |Community order revoked      |
|       |                                 |                             |
|       |Driving whilst disqualified      |                             |
|       |Using a vehicle whilst uninsured |                             |
|17.05.1|Using a vehicle whilst uninsured |Sentenced at a later date as |
|0      |Driving whilst disqualified      |he failed to surrender       |
|       |Failing to surrender to custody  |                             |
|11.10.1|Sentenced for offences committed |17 weeks imprisonment in     |
|1      |on 17.05.10                      |total                        |
|11.10.1|Driving whilst disqualified      |4 months imprisonment        |
|1      |Resisting or obstructing a       |                             |
|       |constable                        |                             |
|       |Using a vehicle whilst uninsured |                             |



    As to the conviction of 11th June 2008  it  is  noted  that  the  court
    recommendation deportation was rescinded on appeal.

    On 12th June 2009 we note  the  Appellant  applied  for  a  facilitated
    return scheme which was rejected on 21st July 2009.

    On 16th June  2009  the  Appellant  met  the  criteria  for  conductive
    deportation as he  was  a  non-EEA  national  and  had  been  given  an
    aggregate sentence of more than one year over the previous five  years.




    On 30th June 2009 the UKBA writes to the Appellant care of the Governor
    of HM Prison Durham asking him to advise the Appellant of his liability
    to deportation and asking him to give reasons  why  he  should  not  be
    removed to Iraq.  These documents are at H3 to H6 of  the  Respondent's
    bundle and the confirmation of conveyance is at H6  and  this  will  be
    referred to in greater  detail  later  in  this  determination  as  the
    Appellant in his oral evidence seeks to challenge that the signature on
    H6 is his.

    The Appellant argues that he  has  been  in  a  relationship  with  his
    British citizen partner R since 28th April 2007 and there is a child  R
    born on 24th November 2010.

 2. By way of further submissions the Appellant argues:

      a)  Protection  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  by  virtue  of   his
         relationship with R and his parentage of R.

         In support of this the Appellant has referred to the  case  law  of
         Chikwamba (FC) (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department.  AB  (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department and Beoku-Betts  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2008] UKHL 39.

         The Appellant has submitted statements from  himself,  his  partner
         and her father regarding their relationship.

         The Appellant  has  submitted  that  he  and  his  partner  do  not
         currently live together for supporting reasons.

      b) The Appellant has submitted six  photographs  of  himself  and  his
         partner.

         The Appellant  has  submitted  a  copy  of  his  partner's  British
         passport.

         The Appellant has also submitted in his  further  submissions  form
         that he has received a letter from an extremist  group  threatening
         to kill him as a matter of honour over his relationship with a girl
         in Kirkuk.  Members of the  girl's  family  are  in  the  extremist
         group.  The letter was sent in 2009 but the Appellant's family  did
         not know how to send it to him in the UK and accordingly  a  friend
         of the Appellant's went to Iraq for a visit and brought the  letter
         back to the UK with him.  The Appellant  states  that  he  did  not
         bring it to the Home Office's attention in 2009 as he  was  unaware
         how to have it translated.  The Appellant states that  it  will  be
         impossible for him to return to Kirkuk because the  extremists  are
         determined to kill him.  The Appellant has now submitted the letter
         with English translated dated 13th December 2009 from Akhwan  Ansar
         Al-Sunna.

 3. By a decision dated 6th January 2012 the Secretary of State refused the
    Appellant's claim for  asylum  under  paragraph  336C  of  HC  395  (as
    amended) and on 6th  January  2012  a  decision  was  made  to  make  a
    deportation order by virtue of Section  5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

 4. The Appellant appeals against the decision on the grounds that he is  a
    refugee  under  the  Refugee  or  Persons  in  Need  of   International
    Protection (Qualification) Regulations  2006  (the  2006  Regulations).
    The  Appellant  further  claims  humanitarian  protection  pursuant  to
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules and finally  having  regard  to
    his relationship with R and his child R claims that to remove him  from
    the UK would be a breach of his Article 8 rights in respect of both his
    private and family life.

 5. The Appellant's right of appeal  arises  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  Appellant  has
    available the grounds mentioned in Section 84  of  the  2002  Act,  and
    raised Section 84(1)(a): that the decision is not  in  accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules, and  Section  84(1)(g)  that  removal  would  be
    unlawful under the 2006 Regulations, and Section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act 1998 if he is returned to Iraq.

 6. In determining this appeal, we have had regard to Section 85(1) of  the
    2002 Act, and in so doing have considered all avenues of appeal open to
    the Appellant.

 7. The burden is on the Appellant to show as  regards  his  asylum  appeal
    that returning him will expose  him  to  a  real  risk  of  an  act  of
    persecution  for  a  reason  set  out  in  Regulation  6  of  the  2006
    Regulations: as regards his humanitarian protection appeal, that he has
    shown substantial grounds for believing he would face a  real  risk  of
    serious harm as defined by paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules,  or
    a real risk of a breach of his protected human rights.

 8. We heard oral evidence from the Appellant  and  oral  submissions  from
    both representatives all  of  which  are  set  out  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and all of which will be dealt with in greater detail later
    in this determination.

 9. On the file was the original  Home  Office  bundle,  the  documentation
    comprises the decision of the Secretary of State  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter dated 6th  January  2012  and  all  matters  before  the
    Secretary of State upon which the  decision  was  made.   These  are  a
    matter of record on the file and we will not set them out further here.

10. For the hearing the Appellant put in a bundle containing:

      1. Schedule of Essential Reading;

      2. Chronology of Events;

      3. Skeleton Argument;

      4. Appellant's Statement (in Relation to his Deportation Matter);

      5. Witness Statement of Appellant's Partner R;

      6. Witness Statement of Mr W, Father of Appellant's Partner;

      7. Witness Statements in Support;

      8. Appellant's Son's Full Birth Certificate (UK);

      9. Appellant's Educational/Training Certificates (From HMP Durham);

     10. Notice of Intention to Issue a Deportation Order ;

     11. The Refusal of the Appellant's Initial Claim for Asylum (2004);

     12. Pre-Action Letter to UKBA of 12.08.2011 and Enclosures;

     13. Representations to the UKBA of 25.09.2007;

     14. Evidence Submitted with Further Representations of 20.07.2007;

     15. Appellant's Representations to the UKBA of 17.08.2009;

     16. Appellant's Further Representations to the UKBA of 20.07.2010;

     17. UKBA Update to the Appellant's MP;

     18. Letter from UKBA Confirming the Appellant's  Case  Being  with  the
         Legacy Department;

     19. Halliday Reeves' Enquiry with the Most Recent Criminal  Solicitors,
         13.03.2012;

     20. Response from Appellant's Former Solicitors (Re: Criminal Matter);

     21. Halliday Reeves'  Enquiry  with  First  Known  Criminal  Solicitors
         (08.03.2012);

     22. US Department of  State,  2010  Country  Reports  on  Human  Rights
         Practices: Iraq, 08/04/2011;

     23. Amnesty International, Annual Report 2011: Iraq, 13/05/2011;

     24. Human Rights Watch, World Report 2012: Iraq, 22/01/2012;

     25. MK (deportation - foreign criminal - public interest) Gambia [2010]
         UKUT 281 (IAC);

     26. Onur v The United Kingdom 27319/07;

     27. Beoku-Betts (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department (Respondent) [2008] UKHL 39;

     28. Chikwamba (FC) (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department (Respondent) [2008] UKHL 40;

     29. ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4;

     30. Northumbria Police Charge Sheet - appended Police Report.

11. For the hearing the Respondent put in a supplementary bundle including:

      a) Appellant's certificate of convictions dated 7th July 2009;

      b) judge's sentencing remarks dated 2nd April 2009;

      c) decision in R and Patricia Kluxen [2010] EWCA Crim 1081;

      d) decision in  Rocky  Gurung  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2012] EWCA Civ 62;

      e) decision Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  and  Shabaz
         Masih Pakistan [2012] UKUT 00046;

      f) decision in Ad Lee v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2011] EWCA Civ 348;

      g) decision in Sanade and Others (British children Zambrano -  Dereci)
         [2012] UKUT 00048.

12. We will note that we have read and considered all the papers before me.
     Where we have  been  guided  to  certain  passages  in  the  objective
    material by a representative we have read these passages with  especial
    care.  However we read them in the context of the entire document.  The
    whole of the documentation  set  out  before  us  has  assisted  us  in
    arriving at our conclusions.

The Appellant's Evidence

13. There is no dispute to the fact that the Appellant was  refused  asylum
    on 29th July 2004 for reasons that are  set  out  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter of the same date.  We further note  that  the  Appellant
    did not appeal that decision and within the reasons for refusal  letter
    the issue of credibility  was  dealt  as  was  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation.  We are aware of the  guidance  set  out  in  the  case  of
    Devaseelan and that the findings within that letter of refusal are  the
    starting point in respect of the asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    Article 2 and 3 issues that are before us  albeit  that  Mr  Selway  on
    behalf of the Appellant advises us that they are not  being  vigorously
    pursued.  The only new evidence that has arisen since that decision  in
    relation to  these  issues  is  the  letter  at  I40  and  I41  of  the
    Respondent's bundle that the Appellant claims he received and which  is
    a threat against his safety should he return to  Iraq.   We  will  deal
    with  our  findings  with  regard  to  this  letter   later   in   this
    determination.

14. Mr Selway does however confirm that the main thrust  of  the  arguments
    before us today relate to the Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights  in
    respect of his private and family life and in particular having  regard
    to the Appellant's relationship with R and their child R.

15. The Appellant gives evidence and adopts two statements which are  dated
    20th July 2010 and 12th March 2012.

16. The Appellant confirms his date of birth  and  states  that  his  first
    language is Kurdish Sorani and he also  speaks  English.   This  matter
    proceeds without an interpreter and both Mr  Selway,  Miss  Bishop  and
    ourselves are satisfied that the  Appellant  is  perfectly  capable  of
    giving his evidence in English.  The Appellant states that he has  been
    in the UK since the spring of 2003.  He confirms an asylum  application
    was rejected and confirms that he then makes an application  for  leave
    to remain, he is placed in the legacy department of the Home Office and
    his application was refused which  he  claims  caused  him  significant
    frustration.

17. The Appellant states that he has been in a relationship  with  R  since
    28th April 2007 and confirms that they have a  child  R  born  on  24th
    November 2010.  The Appellant states that he is currently bailed to the
    address of Mr W who  is  R's  father  the  address  being  TTT  Avenue.
    Despite the fact  that  he  and  R  live  at  different  addresses  the
    Appellant states that they spend most of their time together.

18. The Appellant does not challenge his history of criminality and  states
    that he has apologised to his partner R and her father for his  actions
    and for the trauma that he has put them  through.   He  now  wishes  to
    establish life with R and his son R, he states that he is  settled  now
    in the UK and sees his future with R and R.  He states that  he  and  R
    are looking for a home of their own and  the  Appellant  professes  his
    desire to be a good partner to R and a father to R, he sees his  future
    with them.

19. The Appellant accepts that he is not permitted to work but states  that
    he would like to use his talents from having  in  Iraq  worked  in  his
    father's car repair garage to do similar work in the UK.

20. The Appellant states that he is seeking to integrate into UK  life  and
    has enquired with  Newcastle  College  for  a  course  to  improve  his
    English.  Whilst in custody the Appellant states that he  was  involved
    in food hygiene, first  aid,  health  and  safety,  English  and  maths
    courses.  He has not received any official certificates for  completing
    these courses.

21. The Appellant refers to a wide network of friends in the  UK  and  asks
    that we have regard to the handwritten  letters  that  are  within  the
    bundles.

22. The Appellant argues that if he is removed to Iraq he will be separated
    from his partner and his son and is aware that he will be restricted in
    returning to the UK for a period of ten years.  He  does  not  see  any
    possibility of his partner and son visiting him in Iraq or  them  being
    able to meet in a third safe country.  The Appellant maintains that  he
    is at risk in Iraq because of the reasons  that  caused  him  to  claim
    asylum.  The Appellant also refers to the continuing conflict in  Iraq.



    The Appellant accepts that he applied for a facilitated  return  scheme
    on 12th June 2009 which was rejected on 21st June 2009.

23. The earliest statement of 20th July 2010 is somewhat historical in that
    matters have moved on since that statement but that statement does deal
    with how he meets R through mutual friends and how  their  relationship
    developed.  He refers to the mutual interests that they  have  and  the
    fact that he has been accepted by R's  family  and  spends  significant
    time with them.  He refers to staying with R and her family  from  17th
    August 2008 as he was homeless at the time and  at  the  date  of  that
    statement R is pregnant but as stated matters have moved on.

24. We now turn to deal with the evidence that is presented at the hearing.
     The Appellant is then referred by Mr Selway to the letter at  I40  and
    I41 of the Respondent's bundle.  Asked how he obtained this letter  the
    Appellant states that he received it from a friend some  two  to  three
    years ago who had been to Kurdistan for a holiday and had obtained this
    letter from the Appellant's uncle.  The Appellant does not  know  where
    his uncle got the letter from but believes it may have  been  from  the
    police station in Kirkuk.  The Appellant  maintains  that  this  letter
    confirms the risk that he is at if he is returned to Iraq.

    The Appellant states that he has had no contact with any members of his
    family since he came to the UK, namely in 2003.  He does not  know  why
    despite the problems identified in that letter occurring  in  2003  the
    letter would not be sent until nearly seven years later,  it  is  dated
    13th December 2009.

    As to why he cannot live in the Kurdish region of  Iraq  the  Appellant
    refers to his previous problems in Iraq and the fact  that  his  father
    and the family had been working for the regime of  Saddam  Hussein  and
    his father had been killed by the Kurdish people.   He  maintains  that
    Iraq is still in a state of conflict even  though  Saddam  Hussein  has
    been deposed.

25. As to his life in the UK the Appellant accepts that he has  done  wrong
    but argues that he has now changed and has a partner  and  a  son  that
    provide stability.  Asked if he knew how many crimes he  had  committed
    the Appellant replies "a couple".

    As to whether he has a driving licence the  Appellant  states  that  he
    passed the theory test in 2008.

    As to his relationship with R he states that this started on 28th April
    2007.  She knows about his offences post 2008.  He accepts that he  did
    not advise her of his immigration status  until  six  to  seven  months
    after their relationship developed.  In June 2008 he was living at  TTT
    Avenue.  As to where he obtained the vehicles in which he committed the
    various offences the Appellant states that it was a  friend's  car,  he
    states that R did not know he was driving the  car  and  he  had  never
    driven R in a car.  In September 2008 he was living at a  NASS  address
    in, Gateshead.  As to the offence on 15th September 2008 R did not know
    it involved driving excess alcohol and driving while disqualified.   As
    to why he continued driving despite being  disqualified  the  Appellant
    states that one never got banned from driving in  Iraq  notwithstanding
    what offences were committed and he thought that this applied to the UK
    and it was equally safe for him to drive in  the  UK.   Asked  when  he
    realised what a ban meant the Appellant states that he found  this  out
    in 2008.  It is  then  put  to  the  Appellant  that  he  despite  this
    continues to drive and the Appellant states that  he  was  driving  for
    money helping a friend taking a car  to  be  repaired  in  Byker.   The
    Appellant  states  that  whilst  he  does  not  read  English  he  does
    understand road signs and refers to his passing the theory part of  the
    driving test.

26. With regard to driving with excess alcohol the Appellant confirmed that
    he knew this was wrong and as to  the  conviction  for  perverting  the
    course of justice the Appellant states that he pleaded guilty.   As  to
    his arrest on 10th October 2011 the Appellant when asked with regard to
    the false name that he gives the police argues that he gave the name of
    Lukman Ali who was the owner of the vehicle.  The  Appellant  does  not
    accept that he gave his wrong name and date of birth.

27.  The  Appellant  is  then  referred  to  documents  H3  to  H6  in  the
    Respondent's bundle.  In particular the Appellant is referred to H5 and
    H6 and the signature on  H6  as  to  the  confirmation  of  receipt  of
    ICD0350.  The Appellant states that he  never  received  this  document
    which advised him of his liability to deportation and then states  that
    the signature on the document is not his.  It is pointed out that  this
    document has been in the hands of his solicitors as is evidenced by the
    fax header to the document which refers to Halliday Reeves  Solicitors,
    gives their  telephone  number  and  is  dated  16th  July  2009.   The
    Appellant maintains that he never received  this  document  and  states
    that he only became aware  of  his  liability  to  deportation  on  6th
    January 2012 four days before his  release  from  prison.   As  to  his
    failure to report when on bail the Appellant  challenges  that  he  has
    ever been on bail and then states that on the occasion that he did  not
    report he was in hospital in the Newcastle RVI in respect of  a  throat
    problem.

28. The Appellant is then asked why he commits offences when subject  to  a
    deportation order and  again  challenges  that  he  ever  received  the
    deportation documents of 9th July 2009.  As to why he is not  currently
    living with R the Appellant states that he lives with  R's  father  and
    she lives with  her  mother,  they  are  divorced.   His  condition  of
    residence is at R's father's address.  They are currently applying  for
    a council  house.   Further  R  is  unemployed  and  has  no  means  of
    supporting him.  The Appellant receives support from  R's  father.   He
    accepts that he has a history of criminality but argues that this is in
    the past and everything will change.

29. In answer to re-examination by Mr Selway it is  put  to  the  Appellant
    that whilst he is arguing that he has changed he has committed offences
    since R was born.  The Appellant states that he  is  now  living  in  a
    different place and has to change his life for the sake of R.  He moved
    back to his current address because of the effect that him living  with
    R and her mother was having on their housing benefit.  He however  does
    confirm that he still sees R every day, her date of birth is  6th  July
    1991, they met on 28th April 2007, she was fifteen  years  old  at  the
    time.

30. R is then called to give evidence on behalf of the  Appellant  and  she
    adopts two  statements  dated  13th  July  2010  and  12th  March  2012
    respectively.  She confirms her date of birth and the fact that she  is
    a British citizen and that she met the Appellant  on  28th  April  2007
    through mutual friends.  They began their relationship from  that  date
    and she confirms that the Appellant moved into  her  parents'  home  on
    17th August 2008 because he was homeless.  He lived  with  her  parents
    for one year, it was suggested that the Appellant who had just come out
    of prison at that point move to the witness's address until he found  a
    place of his own.  She states that they have mutual interests and spend
    most of their time together.  He is the father of R.

    The witness states that her parents are divorced and she lives with her
    mother at TTT Avenue, and the Appellant lives at  his  current  address
    with her father.  She states that they are currently looking for a home
    together.

    She refers to the  effect  the  deportation  order  has  had  upon  the
    Appellant and the relationship she enjoys with him.  Whilst he  was  in
    prison they would visit every week along with her  father  Mr  W.   She
    refers to them having been together for nearly five years and as to the
    love and affection that they have for each other and their wish to have
    more family.  She refers to both  their  wishes  to  have  a  job,  she
    accepts that the Appellant has committed offences but believes that  he
    wishes to draw a line under his past and to live a normal life with her
    and R.

    She states that the effect of deportation will be  devastating  on  her
    and it will mean permanent separation.  She is aware that the Appellant
    will not be able to return to the UK for ten years and states that  she
    would not be able to go to Iraq because of the cultural differences and
    the danger that exists on a day-to-day basis within Iraq.  She does not
    believe it would be safe for R or in his best interests to relocate  in
    Iraq.  She states that R if the Appellant  is  deported  will  grow  up
    without a father figure.  By way of supplemental questions the  witness
    states that she did not know about the Appellant's criminal  background
    when they met and when she is told about his  background  she  is  only
    told about matters from 2007/2008 onwards.  She is not told  about  his
    earlier criminality and only finds this out when she is at  court  with
    him on bail application.

31. As to why they are living apart the witness states that her mother  and
    her are on benefits and these would be affected if the Appellant is  in
    the household.  In any event the  Appellant's  bail  conditions  as  to
    residence are at her father's home.  There is a spare room there.   She
    was aged 18 when she became pregnant.  She states that  she  wishes  to
    permanently live with the Appellant in their own home and  is  applying
    for a council house.  She is sure that she is not  being  used  by  the
    Appellant merely to establish his immigration status.

32. In answer to cross-examination the witness states that she first  finds
    out that the Appellant has no legal status in the UK in 2008/2009.   He
    said he was waiting a decision on his asylum claim.   When  she  became
    aware that it had been refused she was still prepared to  support  him.
    She becomes aware of his driving offences in 2007/2008, she  was  aware
    that he was not allowed to drive and has no explanation as  to  why  he
    continues driving.  She states that her father spoke  to  him  in  2008
    with regard to his continuing to drive, she accepts that he ignored his
    advice.  She accepts that she has been in a car with him on a couple of
    occasions.  She did visit him in prison and in 2009 she states that  he
    telephoned her after he was served with a notice of  deportation.   She
    is at this point shown document  H6  in  the  Respondent's  bundle  and
    states that the signature "looks like his signature".

    She has no knowledge why he continues to  offend,  she  does  not  know
    where he obtained the cars from or why he was  driving.   She  did  not
    know that in October 2011 he gave false identity details to the  police
    when stopped.

    As to his contact with his family she states  that  he  speaks  to  his
    mother in Iraq on occasions, she does not know the last time  he  spoke
    but either his mother rings him or he rings his mother.  She  does  not
    believe that he is using her as a means  to  remain  in  the  UK.   She
    states that they have a stable relationship,  they  have  had  a  child
    together and been together for five years.  As to why she does not live
    with him at TTT Avenue she states that conditions are squashed  as  her
    father and brother aged 19 live there although it is a three  bedroomed
    house.  She states that she will be devastated  if  the  Appellant  was
    returned to Iraq.

33. In answer to re-examination by Mr Selway she states that the  Appellant
    is a good father, R refers to him as "daddy" and the  Appellant  baths,
    feeds, changes nappies and plays with R.  She states that she sleeps at
    his home maybe for 50% of any week.  If he  is  returned  to  Iraq  she
    states that she will miss him significantly and it will be hard on both
    herself and R.  She has had no other relationships since  she  met  the
    Appellant.

34. Mr W is then called to give evidence on behalf of the Appellant and  he
    formally adopts his statement of 12th March 2012.  He confirms that  he
    is a British citizen and is employed as  a  taxi  driver.   He  is  the
    surety in respect of the Appellant's bail and the address the Appellant
    is bailed to is his address.  He is the father of R and has  known  the
    Appellant since 2007.  He states that they enjoy a strong relationship.
     In 2008 the Appellant comes to live at their address.  He is aware  of
    the problems that the Appellant had had following his  criminality,  he
    states that he talked to the Appellant who indicated that he wished  to
    put his past behind him.   Since  his  last  release  from  prison  the
    Appellant has lived with him and he  refers  to  seeing  the  Appellant
    every day and refers to him as a caring and trustworthy  person  and  a
    good father to R and is heavily involved in his upbringing.  He  states
    that he has spent significant time  with  the  Appellant  since  he  is
    released from prison and  refers  to  him  as  a  changed  person.   He
    considers that the effect of deportation will be devastating upon R and
    R and will deprive R of  a  father.   He  also  is  concerned  for  the
    Appellant's safety because of the situation within Iraq.  He  would  be
    reluctant to allow his daughter and R to visit the  Appellant  in  Iraq
    because of the state of conflict.

35. By way of supplemental questions the witness states that he  found  out
    about the Appellant's criminality over time and in about 2008.  He  has
    been to court with him on a number of occasions.  He is a  taxi  driver
    and prior to that was employed for fourteen years as a  court  bailiff.
    He has a  good  relationship  with  R  but  is  not  happy  as  to  the
    Appellant's previous  criminality.   He  has  tried  to  speak  to  the
    Appellant and advised him of what he is doing and tried to  change  his
    ways.  He was aware that the Appellant was banned from driving in  2009
    and at that time told him that he should not  and  that  he  could  not
    drive vehicles.  He however argues  that  he  could  not  be  with  the
    Appellant all the time.  He believes the Appellant has now  learnt  his
    lesson.

36. In answer to cross-examination from Miss Bishop the witness states that
    he first knew the Appellant's immigration status in 2007  and  was  not
    happy about the situation.  He  is  aware  that  the  Appellant  is  in
    contact with his mother, they each phone each other.  As to whether the
    Appellant is using his daughter R to gain status in the UK the  witness
    states that no one wishes their daughter to be used in such a  way  but
    he believes now that because of the long standing relationship they are
    a unit and becoming stronger.

37. In 2009 he was aware of the service on the Appellant of the  notice  of
    deportation.  The fact that the Appellant  despite  this  continued  to
    commit offences did upset him and told him on more than once to  desist
    from his ways.  He does not know where the Appellant got vehicles  from
    but is aware that he has a friend who has a repair yard.

    He is asked whether he is aware that in October 2011 the Appellant gave
    a false identity when stopped by the police.  The witness  responds  by
    saying that this is not the case and the  Appellant  merely  identifies
    the owner of the van and then says

         "Do you believe the police all the time?".

    Asked why R is not living with  him  the  witness  states  that  he  is
    divorced, R lives with her mother and the son lives with  the  witness.
    He states that R is quite welcome to come and live  with  him  and  the
    door is open to her all of the time.

38. In answer to re-examination from Mr Selway the witness states  that  he
    lives in a three bedroomed house and  could  juggle  things  around  to
    accommodate R.  He is aware that she wants her own home.  She is living
    with her mother with R but believes he eventually wishes to  live  with
    the Appellant.  He refers to the Appellant as a quite good  father  and
    refers to R sleeping on "odd nights" up to two nights a week.  He would
    not mind R and the Appellant sharing a  bed.   As  to  the  Appellant's
    involvement with R the Appellant takes him out in the pram, feeds  him,
    plays with him and changes his nappies.

Respondent's Submissions

39. Miss Bishop relies upon the reasons for refusal  letter  and  considers
    that it is appropriate to deport the Appellant and that the deportation
    has been initiated by the Secretary of State under Section 35A  of  the
    Immigration Act.  She refers to the case of Kluxen  and  in  particular
    paragraph 34 thereof.

    With regard to the 2004 refusal there is nothing new today  that  would
    identify the Appellant being at risk on return.  We are referred to the
    case of SM which deals with internal  relocation.   As  to  the  letter
    which the Appellant claims to have received via a friend from his uncle
    the case of Tanveer Ahmed must be applied.

40. It is accepted that the Appellant because of the time he has  spent  in
    the UK and the relationship that he has  with  R  and  his  son  R  has
    developed  both  a  private   and   a   family   life.    However   the
    proportionality exercise must  be  carried  out  and  the  case  of  AR
    Pakistan applies and we are referred to this case where again there was
    the interests of a child to be taken into account.  In  this  case  the
    Appellant is a persistent offender where there is  no  indication  that
    over the past he has attempted to  change  his  pattern  of  behaviour.
    Indeed there is evidence at this hearing that the  Appellant  has  been
    deceitful to the Tribunal and evidence that his deceit to R  and  Mr  W
    and indeed to the police has continued.  The Appellant  has  denied  in
    2009 being aware of his liability to deportation despite  the  evidence
    from both R, Mr W and indeed from his own  solicitors  that  they  were
    aware of it.  The Appellant it is argued has been convicted of  serious
    offences including the offence of perverting  the  course  of  justice.
    Clearly neither R or Mr W have had any  influence  on  him  as  he  has
    committed these offences during the period that he  lives  with  R  and
    continues his association with her and lives in the same home as Mr  W.
    Clearly Mr W's employment as a taxi driver would make him aware of  the
    seriousness of the driving offences.  R is not in a position to support
    the Appellant who is it is argued a prolific offender and has continued
    his history of deceit and deception up to the  very  evidence  that  he
    gives before this Tribunal.  There  are  no  exceptional  circumstances
    identified in this appeal.

Appellant's Submissions

41. Mr Selway relies upon the skeleton  argument  and  asks  that  we  have
    regard to the fact that the Appellant has developed a family life  with
    R and R and that the best interests of the child fall to be considered.
     The majority of the Appellant's offending relates to traffic  offences
    and it has always been impossible for him to obtain a  driving  licence
    and insurance which has been hard for the  Appellant  bearing  in  mind
    that he has brought up in an environment that involves vehicles and  he
    has wished to maintain this lifestyle in the UK.

42. As to the issue of proportionality R will  be  left  fatherless  for  a
    period of ten years and R will be without the support of  her  partner.
    The conviction for deception relates  to  the  Appellant  giving  false
    names to the police.  The offences he has committed are it is argued to
    the lower end of the scale.  If the Appellant is allowed to stay in the
    UK Mr Selway argues that he would be then clear to apply for a  driving
    licence and the demon that he has on his back would disappear  and  any
    driving would not involve the commission of offences.

43. With regard to the case of AR this was a Court of Appeal decision which
    has been superseded by the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011]  UKSC  4
    and Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act.

44. It is accepted by Mr Selway that the Appellant has  lied  both  to  his
    partner R, her father Mr W and the court today.  However this  must  be
    viewed against the fact that the child will be  significantly  affected
    if the Appellant is returned to Iraq.  The Appellant has presented as a
    good father who has a hands-on role in R's welfare.  If he  is  removed
    from the UK he will be prevented from returning for  a  period  of  ten
    years and there is little prospect of the  Appellant  and  his  partner
    being able to meet in a safe country.  Hopefully the Appellant will  be
    able to sort himself out, get a valid driving licence  and  work  in  a
    garage where he will be able to re-establish himself and earn money  to
    support both himself, R and R and we are asked to allow this appeal.

Findings as to Credibility and Fact

45. We only make a finding on credibility after taking great  care,  having
    considered all the  evidence  and  having  carefully  studied  all  the
    documents and considered all the authorities  and  all  other  material
    provided to us.

46. Dealing firstly with the additional evidence  that  the  Appellant  has
    produced relating to the  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights appeals we are aware of the principles in  Devaseelan  and  that
    the starting point in respect of  our  consideration  of  any  evidence
    relating to these  issues  must  the  original  refusal  of  asylum  as
    previously referred to which was not the subject of an appeal.   We  do
    not find the Appellant's explanation as to how he acquires this  letter
    or indeed how he becomes aware of  its  existence  as  being  credible.
    Further we do not find it credible that six  years  after  the  claimed
    problems, all of a sudden the Appellant would receive this letter which
    is dated 13th December 2009.  It is not a letter from any government or
    police authority  within  Iraq,  it  is  merely  a  letter  asking  the
    Appellant  to  join  Ansar  Al-Sunna.   We  do  not  find  either   the
    Appellant's explanation for how he comes to be in  possession  of  this
    letter or the actual content of the letter to be in  any  way  credible
    and we therefore do not find that this letter of itself would justify a
    reconsideration of the original  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights decisions or us departing or altering the decisions  which
    we find  must  stand  there  being  no  fresh  evidence  of  compelling
    circumstances that would justify it being reconsidered.

47. Dealing now with the Appellant's character  we  have  earlier  in  this
    determination set out a schedule of the Appellant's criminality.  There
    is a clear history of the Appellant being a  persistent  offender.   He
    has between 2005 and October 2011 had a complete  and  utter  disregard
    for the laws of  the  UK  and  has  persistently  driven  in  the  full
    knowledge that he has no valid licence or insurance  or  any  right  to
    drive.  He has then persistently driven  while  disqualified  and  when
    apprehended  in  October  2011  clearly  attempted   to   deceive   the
    authorities by giving a false name and address.  We do  not  accept  as
    did the courts that the Appellant was not  at  fault  as  he  gave  the
    address of the registered owner of the vehicle.  We  are  satisfied  as
    were the courts that this was another attempt by the Appellant to evade
    responsibility for his actions.   The  Appellant  has  flagrantly  used
    vehicles when he was aware of the fact that he  was  disqualified  from
    driving and  we  find  unacceptable  the  Appellant's  excuse  that  he
    continues driving on the basis that in Iraq one never  is  banned  from
    driving regardless of  what  offences  one  commits  and  therefore  he
    considered that the same applied to the UK.

    The Appellant was fully  aware  of  the  significance  of  a  ban  from
    driving.  R and Mr W had both told him in no uncertain terms what a ban
    from driving meant and clearly they had little influence  over  him  in
    that despite these warnings he ignored them and continued to drive.

    The Appellant has not only had a disregard for the driving laws of this
    country but has also over an  extended  period  of  time  attempted  to
    deceive this Tribunal, the police and in particular  those  who  placed
    their trust in him namely R and Mr W.  These deceptions involve:

      a) Withholding from R and Mr W the full history of his offending prior
         to his becoming involved with R.

      b) The Appellant's evidence  with  regard  to  the  deportation  order
         served upon him on 9th July  2009.   In  his  evidence  before  the
         Tribunal the Appellant claims to know nothing of this document  yet
         according to R it bears his signature and there is  clear  evidence
         of it having been served upon him by  P  Bates  an  officer  of  HM
         Prison in Durham.  Further both  R  and  Mr  W  are  aware  of  the
         existence of this document and the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
         liable to deportation as a  result  of  that  document  and  indeed
         Halliday Reeves Solicitors were aware of it as the  document  forms
         part  of  documents  that  they  faxed  on  16th  July  2009.   The
         Appellant's persistence in his argument that he  knows  nothing  of
         this document is clearly a deceit that the Appellant seeks to  make
         no only to this court but also to R and Mr W.   Their  surprise  at
         not knowing about the Appellant's claim not to have known about the
         existence of this deportation order at the hearing was noted by the
         Tribunal.

      c) The Appellant has further attempted to deceive both R and Mr W with
         regard to the offence he committed on 10th November 2011.   He  has
         attempted to convince them that he did nothing wrong when  he  gave
         the  name  of  the  registered  owner  of  the   vehicle   on   his
         apprehension.  There is clear evidence within the summary of police
         charge sheet and police report that when the Appellant was  stopped
         he gives his own name as Lukman Ali and his own date  of  birth  as
         7th January 1983.  We prefer the evidence of the police officers to
         that of the Appellant and indeed Mr W and are satisfied that  there
         has been a clear attempt  by  the  Appellant  to  deceive  on  this
         occasion.

      d) Despite the claims that the Appellant is a changed person  this  is
         not supported by the persistent lies and deceits that he has  shown
         both  to  this  Tribunal,  those  that  assist  him  and  to   most
         importantly R and his surety Mr W.  The claims that  the  Appellant
         is a changed person and is rehabilitating himself is not consistent
         with his actions and the argument that the Appellant now he  has  a
         child has changed because of the responsibility he owes  his  child
         is again not borne out by the fact that he commits  offences  after
         the birth of this child.  He has failed to heed warnings from Mr  W
         and R and the fact that he is  a  changed  person  and  intends  to
         rehabilitate himself and the future is not one that  is  persuasive
         to us.  This Appellant has a history  of  reoffending,  deceit  and
         deception and we can find no basis to come to a conclusion that the
         Appellant that appears before  us  is  a  changed  person  and  his
         history of reoffending is  in  the  past.   He  has  a  history  of
         flaunting the law and having a total disregard for  it  and  indeed
         this is a comment that is recorded  in  the  court  documents  from
         Newcastle Magistrates' Court who on  committing  the  Appellant  to
         prison for four months on 11th October 2011 commented:

             "Offence so serious  because  the  defendant  has  a  flagrant
             disregard for court orders because danger  to  public  because
             offence was aggravated by the defendant's record  of  previous
             offending".

      e) We therefore find as a fact on the evidence that has been presented
         to us that this Appellant lacks all credibility,  is  a  persistent
         offender and we find on the evidence as a fact  that  there  is  no
         evidence that he has in any way rehabilitated himself or  attempted
         to reform his ways.

48. We now turn to deal with the consideration of  whether  deportation  is
    the appropriate course of action in the Appellant's case.

    We have had regard to the liability  to  deportation  and  the  reasons
    presented both  within  the  documentation  and  within  the  arguments
    presented to us at the hearing in  support  of  the  arguments  by  the
    Appellant that deportation is not appropriate.

    We have had regard to the persistent reoffending that the Appellant has
    committed over the period covered by the schedule which appears earlier
    within this determination.  In  making  our  decision  with  regard  to
    deportation the type and frequency of the  offending  is  an  important
    consideration together  with  the  need  to  protect  the  public.   In
    addition  we  accept  that  we  must  view  the  Appellant's   personal
    circumstances including the relationship he has with R and R his  child
    and so far as the child is concerned we recognise the duty to safeguard
    the welfare of  children  enshrined  in  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 referred to  in  the  case  of  ZH
    Tanzania  where  the  interests  of  the  child  must  be   a   primary
    consideration in making the decision.  We however equally are  entitled
    in accordance with that duty to take into account other factors as well
    which may justify deportation.

49. We are aware of the test that we must follow as set out in the case  of
    Razgar namely the five stage test and we remind ourselves of that  five
    stage test which is:

      a) whether the Appellant has established a family or private  life  in
         the UK;

      b) whether the decision to remove the Appellant  would  result  in  an
         interference with the Appellant's right to family and private  life
         and if so whether that interference is;

         in accordance with the law;

         in pursuit of one of the principle aims listed in Article 8(2); and



         proportionate in pursuit of the permissible aims.

50. We note the Appellant is 29 years of age, has  been  in  the  UK  since
    2003, is in a relationship with R and there is a child, R, born in  the
    UK.  It is noted as previously stated the Appellant  has  a  series  of
    convictions since his arrival in the  UK.   We  have  no  knowledge  of
    whether he has ever been employed.

51. We accept that the Appellant because of the very fact that he has  been
    in the UK since 2003 has established a private life despite the  period
    spent in prison and the absence  of  any  evidence  that  he  has  been
    engaged in any employment or education during this period.   A  private
    life must have developed by virtue of the very time spent in the UK.

52. In view of  the  fact  that  we  now  accept  that  the  Appellant  has
    established both a family and private life in the UK we must  recognise
    that  any  decision  to  deport  the  Appellant  would  result  in   an
    interference with his right to family and private life under Article  8
    of the ECHR.  Therefore it follows that we must  consider  whether  the
    level of interference with the Appellant's right to family and  private
    life is in accordance with the  law  and  in  pursuit  of  one  of  the
    legitimate aims under Article 8(2) of the ECHR and remain proportionate
    within the terms of Article 8(2).

53. In assessing whether the interference with private and family  life  is
    proportionate we have given  consideration  to  all  the  evidence  and
    factors identified to us.  We have considered and had regard to Section
    55 of the UK Borders and Citizenship  Act  2009  and  the  case  of  ZH
    Tanzania which as previously stated means that the best  interests  and
    welfare of the child Rare a  primary  consideration  when  making  this
    decision and we accept that it would be in the best  interests  of  the
    child for both parents to remain in the UK.  However we must view  this
    as regards the fact that the best interests of  the  child  are  not  a
    "trump card" which outweighs all other factors which  clearly  must  be
    taken into consideration.

54. We accept that the best interest of  any  child  is  to  be  with  both
    parents.  However given the fact that the Appellant has  a  history  of
    persistent and ongoing offending and having regard to  the  deceit  and
    deception that he has perpetrated on this court, his solicitors and  in
    particular R and Mr W we are satisfied on the evidence  that  the  best
    interests of this child is outweighed in this case.   The  case  of  ZH
    Tanzania  did  not  involve  criminal  matters  and  therefore  can  be
    distinguished from this case bearing in mind  the  Appellant  has  been
    engaged persistently in criminality for almost the entire  duration  of
    the time he has been present in the UK and has clearly ignored all  the
    warnings and advice that have been given to him by those who  claim  to
    care for him namely R and Mr W.

55. We are aware of the case of Ad Lee v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA Civ 348.   Paragraph  17  of  that  decision  is
    relevant where it states:

         "He contends that it  prioritises  the  case  for  deportation  and
         considers only whether the impact on the family is so great  as  to
         outweigh it when it ought  to  be  approaching  the  issue  in  the
         opposite order prioritising R's interests and asking  whether  they
         are outweighed by the case for deportation.   It  seems  to  us  at
         least in the present this  is  a  matter  of  form  not  substance.
         Provided both the child's interests and the  case  for  deportation
         have been properly appraised the question whether one outweighs the
         other can be approached from either direction."

    We confirm that we  have  properly  considered  what  is  in  the  best
    interests of the child  when  assessing  the  proportionality  in  this
    matter.  We cannot ignore the fact  that  the  Appellant  has  spent  a
    significant period in prison since the birth of Rand therefore the time
    that he has spent with him has clearly not been all of his life.  R was
    born on 24th November 2010.  The Appellant spent  a  period  in  prison
    post 11th October 2011 and therefore was away from R for a  significant
    period of his development.  The Appellant does not  live  in  the  same
    household as R despite the fact that Mr W in  his  evidence  before  us
    stated:

         "My daughter is quite welcome to come and live with me the door  is
         open all the time".

    Despite this open door R has continued to live with her mother and  has
    not set up home with the Appellant.   We  further  cannot  ignore  that
    despite all the evidence that has been presented  to  us  none  of  the
    witnesses have ever mentioned  the  word  "engagement"  or  "marriage".
    There is no suggestion that R and the  Appellant  are  engaged  nor  is
    there any mention of plans to marry in the future.  Further we find  it
    significant that R's mother has neither attended the court or  given  a
    statement in support of the Appellant and her daughter's  relationship.
    We consider that these factors are significant  in  our  assessment  of
    whether there is the strength of private and family  life  between  the
    Appellant and R as claimed.

56. We further confirm that since we have accepted that the  Appellant  has
    established a degree of family life in the UK we must consider the case
    of Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] and the impact deportation would  have  on
    the family life.  The parties are not living as a unit, there has  been
    no talk of engagement or marriage and the prospect of  living  together
    is not immediate, it is in the future.  There is  no  evidence  of  any
    application for a council house.  Whilst we accept that there will be a
    level of interference we must  bear  in  mind  that  the  parties  have
    continued their relationship in the light of the Appellant's precarious
    immigration position.

57. We have also had regard to the decision  in  Omotunde  (best  interests
    Zambrano applied - Razgar) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00247 and in  particular
    paragraph 35 of that decision where the court held:

         "We recognise that there can be a public interest in deporting both
         those who are personally dangerous or a persistent threat to public
         order and others whose offending may be a single instance, but  its
         nature and seriousness make deportation appropriate as  a  mark  of
         public disapproval and  the  protection  of  public  order  by  the
         deterrent effect on others."

    Having considered all the evidence that has been presented  to  us  and
    having  regard  to  the  Appellant's  persistent   and   long   lasting
    criminality and the deceit and deception that he has perpetrated  which
    is referred to in detail within this  determination  we  are  satisfied
    that the Appellant's actions bring him within the  case  law  contained
    within the decision of Omotunde and renders his deportation in all  the
    circumstances proportionate.

58. The Appellant  spent  his  formative  years  in  Iraq  and  it  is  not
    unreasonable we find for him to be able to  readapt  to  life  in  Iraq
    after deportation.

59. With regard to the length of time the Appellant has been in the  UK  he
    has during the whole of this time embarked upon acts of criminality and
    has always since the refusal of his  asylum  claim  had  no  basis  for
    remaining in the UK.  We therefore do not accept having regard to these
    factors that the length of residence  presents  a  compelling  argument
    against deportation.

60. Whilst we accept that the deportation will result  in  an  interference
    with both the Appellant's private and family life we cannot ignore that
    modern means of communication will allow contact to continue even at  a
    distance.  It is established in the evidence that  the  Appellant  does
    have family in Iraq.  Despite his evidence to the contrary that he  has
    had no contact with his family in Iraq there  is  clear  evidence  from
    both R and Mr W that the Appellant has been in contact with his  mother
    by telephone, both she telephoning him and he telephoning her.  This is
    yet another deceit and deception that the Appellant  has  attempted  to
    perpetrate on this Tribunal.  We have no hesitation  having  regard  to
    the evidence  that  has  been  presented  to  us  in  arriving  at  the
    conclusion that this Appellant is  not  credible  and  arrive  at  that
    conclusion having regard  to  his  persistent  offending,  his  deceit,
    deception of this court, those that represent him and those  that  have
    put faith in him namely R and Mr W.

    We have given full and careful consideration to all the  facts  of  the
    Appellant's case in accordance with paragraph 364  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (as amended).   The  presumption  is  that  the  public  interest
    favours deportation.  We are satisfied that deportation is for all  the
    reasons set out within this determination proportionate and  would  not
    be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

Asylum

    Law and Conclusions

61. The 2006 Regulations refer  to  the  definition  of  a  refugee  within
    Article 1A of the Geneva Convention as someone who  owing  to  a  well-
    founded fear  of  being  persecuted  for  reasons  of  race,  religion,
    nationality, membership of  a  particular  social  group  or  political
    opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and  is  unable,  or
    owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection  of
    that country or who not having a  nationality  and  being  outside  the
    country of his former habitual residence as a result of such events, is
    unable or owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.

62. Given the conclusions that we have arrived at within our findings as to
    credibility and fact, we are  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  not
    discharged the burden of proof to establish that he is a  refugee.   We
    come to the conclusion that the Appellant's removal would not cause the
    United Kingdom to be in  breach  of  its  obligations  under  the  2006
    Regulations.

Humanitarian Protection

    Decision on the Claim for Humanitarian Protection

63. Given the factual conclusions above, we find that the Appellant has not
    shown substantial grounds for believing that he will face a  real  risk
    of serious harm in Iraq.  Therefore, we come to the conclusion that the
    Appellant's removal would not be a breach  of  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Human Rights

64. The Appellant within the papers has submitted  that  his  human  rights
    under the Geneva Convention are engaged.

65. Under Article 3 we have to decide whether there  is  a  breach  of  the
    prohibition on torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
     We have subsumed into our conclusions of this Article  our  assessment
    under Article 2 on the right of life.  Both rights are absolute.

66. We  have  examined  the  arguments  put  forward  in  support  of  this
    submission, but in the light of the facts as established, we  find  the
    Appellant has not established that there is a real risk that  he  would
    suffer inhuman or degrading treatment in breach  of  Article  3  if  he
    returned to Iraq.

67. For the reasons set out within this determination we are satisfied that
    it would not be disproportionate in all the circumstances to remove the
    Appellant to Iraq and therefore we are satisfied that any  interference
    in his family and private life is proportionate and in pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aims of maintaining an  effective  immigration  control  and
    therefore there is no breach of Article  8  found  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's private and family life.

68. In light of the above conclusions, we find that the  decision  appealed
    against would not cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of  the  law
    or its obligations under the 1950 Convention.

Decision

We dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

We dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

We dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

We dismiss the appeal in  respect  of  the  revocation  of  the  deportation
order.

No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date 9/4/2012


Judge Sacks

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
                        Appendix B above referred to
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/02235/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided Without a Hearing at Field House      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 May 2013                                 |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    A S M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

   REASON FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW SO THAT THE DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER
                            TRIBUNAL IS SET ASIDE

                                     AND

                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 January 1982 and so
    now 31 years old.  He appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the respondent on 6 January 2012 to make him the subject  of
    a deportation order.  It is his case that he is a refugee  or  otherwise
    entitled to international protection and that removing  him  contravenes
    the United Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.

 2. I gave permission to appeal on 22 May 2012 when I said:

         "I give permission to appeal on each ground but my main concern  is
         that it  is  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Sacks and Dr T Okitikpi) did not have proper  regard
         to the rights of the appellant's son  (D  of  B  24/11/2010).   /In
         particular it is arguable that the Tribunal made no  clear  finding
         about the  degree  of  contact  that  the  appellant  and  his  son
         previously enjoyed and how their relationship might  reasonably  be
         expected  to  develop  if  the  appellant  remains  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

 3. I also gave directions where I said:

         "In addition to its obligations  under  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 the respondent must, no later
         than one month after  receiving  these  Directions,  serve  on  the
         appellant in the Upper Tribunal a Note confirming that  she  agrees
         that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its  approach  to   the
         appellant's case under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
         Human Rights and indicating in outline how the error  can  be  made
         good  or  explaining  how  the  determination  is  sound.   If  the
         respondent does not comply with this direction the  Upper  Tribunal
         is likely to find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and  to
         set aside its directions to dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
         grounds."

 4. The respondent has not complied with this Direction.

 5. In the circumstances I am satisfied the appeal ought to be set aside for
    that reason and it is set aside and I give further  directions  for  the
    proper progress of this appeal in the Upper Tribunal:

Directions

 1. This appeal shall be heard again in the  Upper  Tribunal  and  shall  be
    concerned solely with the compatibility of the decision with the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

 2. Without regard to material that the parties might think  is  before  the
    Tribunal no later than fourteen days after receipt of  these  directions
    the appellant shall serve on the respondent and the Tribunal a paginated
    bundle containing all material on which he seeks to rely in pursuance of
    his claim that  removal  would  be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
    including witness statements drawn to stand as evidence-in-chief without
    the need for further questions dealing with the present circumstances of
    the appellant and his son.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 May 2013                    |

