


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/02244/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28th November, 2014, 3rd June, 2015 and|  On 26th April 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |
|1st April, 2016                           |                                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                            Ms Junior Chikurukuta
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     28th November, 2014: Ms C Soltani, Solicitor, Iris
                    Law Firm (Gateshead)
     3rd June, 2015: Ms S Akinbola of Counsel, instructed by Iris Law Firm
                    (Gateshead)
     1st April, 2016: Ms S Akinbola of Counsel, instructed by Iris Law Firm
                    (Gateshead)
For the Respondent:    28th November, 2014: Ms L Kenny, Home Office
Presenting Officer
     3rd June, 2015: Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
     1st April, 2016: Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is female, a citizen of Zimbabwe and  was  born  on  10th
    January, 1971.  She appeals against a decision of the respondent, taken
    on 12th December, 2013 to refuse  to  grant  her  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of long  residence.   At  the
    hearing on 28th November, 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley found that
    both the Secretary of State and the Immigration Judge had erred in  law
    following the decision in Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402  by  failing  to
    apply the pre-July,  2012  Immigration  Rules.   He  was  persuaded  to
    adjourn the hearing  to  enable  the  respondent  to  produce  original
    documents which, the appellant maintained, demonstrated  that  she  had
    been in the United Kingdom for twenty years.  The matter was  adjourned
    at the hearing on 3rd June  because  the  Home  Office  had  failed  to
    produce the appellant's passport in  order  that  the  appellant  could
    retake the English language test.  The Presenting Officer said that she
    would seek permission to release the passport.

2.   When the matter appeared before me  today  we  were  advised  that  the
    Presenting Officer and Counsel had agreed between themselves  that  the
    appropriate course would  be  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal to the extent that the original decision was not  in
    accordance with the law so that the matter would then be referred  back
    to the Secretary of State in order that she could remake her decision.

3.   We expressed considerable concern at the delay in this matter  and  the
    lack of caseworkers within the Home Office to  take  a  pragmatic  view
    given that this appellant has been in the United Kingdom now  for  some
    21 years and a considerable amount of public money has been expended on
    maintaining a decision which, it now appears, the  Secretary  of  State
    accepts was not in accordance with the law.

4.   Following the appellant's decision to appeal her appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler at Taylor House on 28th  August,  2014.
    Ms Akinbola appeared on behalf of the appellant during  the  course  of
    that hearing and made submissions to  the  judge,  including  that  the
    decision was wrong and in accordance with the decision in Edgehill  the
    appellant should have  benefited  from  transitional  provisions.   The
    judge found that the appellant had not established that she had been in
    the United Kingdom continuously between 1995 and 1999.

5.   The reason we were persuaded to adjourn the hearing was because it  was
    said that the Home Office  had  retained  documents  belonging  to  the
    appellant which the appellant had submitted with her application  which
    demonstrated that she had been in the United Kingdom since 1995.

6.   We concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.

7.   It has now been accepted on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  the
    original decision of the Secretary of State of 12th December, 2013  was
    not in accordance with the law.  To that extent this appeal is allowed.

8.   We trust that the Secretary of State  will  now  be  able  to  reach  a
    decision without any further undue delay.

9.   Although this determination has been prepared by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley it is the decision of us both.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed to the extent only that is remains for the  Secretary
of State  for  the  Home  Department  to  make  a  lawful  decision  on  the
appellant's application on 25th August 2009.
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
