
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02357/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Sent              |
|On 4 July 2013                                  |On 31 July 2013            |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr tanveer ahmad
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                           DECISION AND DIRECTION

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, we shall use the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mr Ahmad  as
    "the appellant".

 2. No anonymity order has been made  hitherto  in  these  proceedings  and
    there is no material before us to suggest that one is required.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the respondent for leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the points-based
    system and for a biometric residence card.

 4. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Khawar allowed the appellant's appeal.
     The respondent decided that the appellant should be awarded  0  points
    for his previous earnings and as a consequence 0 points for his  United
    Kingdom experience.

 5. Having considered the totality of  the  evidence  the  judge  found  at
    paragraphs 16 to  18  of  his  determination  that  the  appellant  had
    provided the respondent with his application all corroborative evidence
    (and in particular a dividend voucher) showing that the  appellant  did
    in fact have the required funds.

 6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal assert that the judge erred in
    law in having regard to evidence excluded from proper contemplation and
    in failing to properly consider  the  issue  surrounding  the  possible
    application of any relevant evidential flexibility policy.

 7. We drew Mr Deller's attention to paragraphs 16 to  18  of  the  judge's
    determination and on closer consideration he accepted  that  the  judge
    had made a finding that was open to him to be made that  the  appellant
    had supported his application with all necessary corroborative material
    to show that he should have been awarded  the  appropriate  points  for
    both previous earnings and United Kingdom experience.  That  being  the
    position Mr Deller accepted that the issue of evidential flexibility no
    longer had any bearing on this appeal.

 8. We share Mr Deller's revised assessment of this determination.  On  our
    analysis of the judge's determination there is no material error of law
    whatsoever.

 9. As there is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  determination
    we accordingly order that it shall stand.





Signed                              Dated:  9 July 2013


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
