
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02807/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Dealt with on the papers at Field    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 14th August 2015                  |On 18th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN


                                   Between

                             MRS NUSRAT YEASMIN
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant with regard to a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E
    M M Smith) promulgated on 24th March 2015 by  which  it  dismissed  her
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to vary  her
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and/or on Article
    8 grounds.

 2. The appeal was dealt with on the papers  at  the  Appellant's  request.
    She had paid the fee appropriate for a paper hearing.

 3. The Judge indicated that no further evidence had been received from the
    Appellant.  However the file contains a bundle of documents provided to
    the Tribunal by the Appellant which was marked as having been  received
    by the Tribunal on 19th March; before the appeal was determined.

 4. It seems that the documents, although received by the Tribunal, had not
    reached the file due to administrative error.  That being the case  the
    administrative error amounts to a legal error as the Appellant did  not
    have a fair consideration of her appeal.

 5. With the consent of the parties I set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided  on
    the papers by any Judge other than E M M Smith.

 6. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed as set out above.


Signed   Date 14th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



Direction regarding anonymity

There is no application for nor necessity for an anonymity direction  and  I
do not make one.


Signed   Date 14th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
