

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/o2579/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 14th August & 4th October 2013           |On : 21st October 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                            manish & seema suthar

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Zane Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis & Mr Pratap Nath of the Specialist
Appeals Team


                                DETERMINATION

This determination deals with the appeals of Mr and Mrs Suthar  against  the
decisions of 4th January 2013  to  remove  them  from  the  United  Kingdom.
Initially their appeals were linked to those of their two children, but  the
children's appeals have been determined separately.  The  reasons  for  this
are set out in the 'Decision & Directions' issued after an  'error  of  law'
hearing on 14th August, at  which  the  respondent  was  represented  by  Mr
Jarvis.   The  'Decision  &  Directions'  are  now  set   out   below,   and
incorporated into this determination.  The  proceedings  were  adjourned  in
order for the decision on Mr and Mrs Suthar's appeals to be re-made  by  the
Upper Tribunal, the hearing being listed for 4th October.   The  outcome  of
that 'second stage' forms the second part of this determination.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   These four linked appeals raise an interesting  legal  conundrum  which
    has not been the subject of any 'reported' determination of  the  Upper
    Tribunal or, it would seem, of any judgment  of  the  superior  courts.
    Not for the first time, Mr Malik has ploughed a course for his clients,
    through hitherto unexplored territory.

2.   The appellants are a family of four, comprising  the  parents  and  two
    children.  All are nationals of India, and have been  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom since 15th April 2005, when the head of  the  household,
    Manish Suthar, was given leave to enter for five years as a work permit
    holder, with the other three being admitted for the same period as  his
    dependants.  The children were born in India in December 1999 and April
    2003, and are now 13 and 10 years old respectively.

3.   In March 2010 Mr Suthar applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain,  but
    this  was  refused  (presumably  because  he  did  not  meet  all   the
    requirements of paragraph 134 of HC 395) and  an  appeal  against  that
    decision was unsuccessful.  By March 2011 the appellants were, in  Home
    Office jargon, 'appeal rights exhausted', and their leave to enter also
    having expired, they were notified in October 2011 of  their  liability
    to removal as overstayers.  On 19th April 2012,  four  days  after  the
    seventh anniversary of their arrival in the United Kingdom, the  family
    applied again for indefinite leave to remain, relying on the children's
    continuous residence in the United Kingdom  for  over  seven  years  as
    giving the family a strong Article 8 claim  to  remain  here.   It  was
    acknowledged that the former 'seven-year concession' had been withdrawn
    on 9th December 2008, but LD (Zimbabwe) [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) was cited
    for  the  continuing  relevance  of  seven  years'  residence  to   the
    assessment of the best interests  of  the  children,  as  part  of  the
    Article 8 balancing exercise.

4.   On 2nd  November  2012  the  applications  were  refused,  first  under
    paragraph 322(1) of HC 395 because leave to remain was being sought for
    a purpose not covered  by  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  then  (rather
    confusingly) under  paragraph  276ADE  and  Appendix  FM,  because  the
    purpose was covered by those Rules, but the  applicants  did  not  meet
    their requirements.  A separate notice of decision (i.e. removal  under
    section 10(1) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999)  was  issued  for
    each member of the family, but it seems  that  only  one  'Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter' was  prepared,  and  that  was  for  the  head  of  the
    household.  Mr Suthar was told that, not  satisfying  the  requirements
    for leave to remain as a partner or as  a  parent,  he  was  considered
    under section EX.1 of Appendix FM, but could not satisfy  that  section
    either.  While the children fulfilled the condition  at  EX.1(a)(i)(cc)
    of having "lived in the UK  continuously  for  at  least  the  7  years
    immediately preceding the date of application", they did not  meet  the
    condition at EX.1(a)(ii) that "it would not be reasonable to expect the
    child to leave the  UK."   It  was  acknowledged  that  the  children's
    "material quality of life in India may not be to the same  standard  as
    it would be in the UK", but family life between  parents  and  children
    could reasonably be expected to continue in India.

5.   The refusal letter of 2nd November 2012 also made the  point  that  the
    children, being nationals of India, "do not have any basis of  stay  in
    this country in their own right."  Mr Malik, as  we  shall  see  below,
    disputes this assertion.  The letter goes on  to  consider  whether  Mr
    Suthar, not meeting the family life requirements of  Appendix  FM,  can
    meet the private life requirements of rule 276ADE.   It  is  considered
    that he cannot.

6.   Appeals against the decisions to remove the  family  were  lodged  with
    the First-tier Tribunal, but at a Case  Management  Review  Hearing  on
    20th December 2012 the respondent withdrew her decisions, in  order  to
    make fresh decisions in the light of the amendments to the  Immigration
    Rules introduced by HC 760 with effect from 13th December 2012.   Fresh
    removal decisions were issued for each member  of  the  family  on  4th
    January 2013, but again only  one  'Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter'  was
    prepared, in respect of the head of the household.   It  was  virtually
    identical to the previous refusal letter, save that  consideration  was
    now given to whether Mrs Suthar and the children could benefit from the
    private life provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE.   It  was  said  to  be
    reasonable to expect  the  children  to  return  to  India  with  their
    parents.

7.   Why fresh decisions were taken can be surmised from  the  reason  given
    for rejecting the children's application.  When  paragraph  276ADE  was
    first introduced into the Immigration Rules by HC  194  from  9th  July
    2012, subparagraph (iv) laid down as one of the ways of  getting  leave
    to remain on the grounds of private life that the applicant  "is  under
    the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK for at least 7
    years (discounting any period of imprisonment)."  Mr Suthar's  children
    certainly met that requirement.  But from 13th December  2012,  HC  760
    added the requirement that "it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the UK."  Hence the reliance on that new requirement
    in the refusal letter of 4th January 2013.

8.    Appeals  against  the  fresh  decisions  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 8th April 2013, and were dismissed on 7th May.   Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was then granted by  Judge  Brunnen  on
    the application of Malik Law Chambers, and thus  the  matter  has  come
    before me.  I shall begin by summarising the First-tier determination.

9.   Judge Cooper considered the appeals first under the Immigration  Rules,
    holding that the only one which could avail the appellants  was  276ADE
    and its provision that the children should not be expected to leave the
    United Kingdom after seven years' continuous residence, unless  it  was
    reasonable to do so.  The judge  considered  various  factors  for  and
    against this proposition, and concluded that it would be reasonable  to
    expect the children to return to India.

10.  Judge Cooper went on to consider whether the appellants  could  succeed
    under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules,  and  soon  reached  the
    question  whether  removal  to  India  would  be   a   disproportionate
    interference with their private lives (their family life  together  not
    being interfered with by the return of  all  of  them  to  India).   He
    decided that the appellants had no legitimate expectation of being able
    to stay beyond the five years initially granted to them, and were "only
    still here because of  their  persistent  litigation".   It  would,  he
    thought,  send  the  wrong  message  to  other  temporary  migrants  if
    permanent residence could be achieved by "persistent  applications  and
    appeals", in the manner of these appellants.   He  therefore  concluded
    that  the  decisions  under  appeal   were   not   a   disproportionate
    interference with the appellants' private lives.

11.  Finally, the judge turned "for completeness" to section 55 of the  2009
    Act.  Acknowledging that the best interests of the children had  to  be
    "a primary consideration" in his determination, Judge  Cooper  observed
    that it would nearly always be in a child's best interests to  be  with
    his parents, and in the instant case this  would  be  achieved  by  the
    children accompanying their parents to  India.   They  were  young  and
    adaptable enough to be able to return to Indian culture  and  education
    without their welfare being compromised.

12.  One might have  thought  that  the  judge  had  left  himself  open  to
    challenge for having considered the best interests of the children only
    after concluding that their removal would not be disproportionate.  But
    this was not one of the grounds on which leave was sought to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Instead, attention was drawn to Azimi-Moayed & ors
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT  197  (IAC),
    in which a Presidential panel lists five principles which  will  be  of
    assistance in determining appeals where children are  affected  by  the
    decisions under appeal.  The grounds highlight paragraph  (1)(iii)  and
    (iv) of the head note, in which "lengthy residence" in another  country
    is said to lead  to  the  establishment  of  ties  which  it  might  be
    inappropriate to disrupt, residence of seven years having  featured  in
    past and present policies and rules as a relevant period.   In  respect
    of that seven-year period, the panel observe that seven years from  the
    age of 4 are likely to be more significant to a child  that  the  first
    seven years of life.  The grounds note that in the  present  case,  the
    elder child has resided in the United Kingdom since the age of  5,  and
    that both children have resided here for over seven years.

13.  The grounds do  not  ~  as  Mr  Jarvis  pointed  out  today  ~  mention
    paragraph (1)(i) of the head note, which takes as a starting point that
    it is in the best interests of the  children  to  be  with  both  their
    parents, and that if the parents are to be removed, then  the  children
    should be too, unless there are reasons to the  contrary.   Mr  Malik's
    retort was that the panel in Azimi-Moayed were not thinking of children
    who had their own freestanding right to remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Mr Jarvis then handed up MK (best  interests  of  child)  India
    [2011] UKUT 475  (IAC),  in  which  guidance  was  given  on  the  best
    interests of the child as part of the overall assessment of an  Article
    8 appeal.  The outcome was negative for  the  particular  family  whose
    appeal it was, but the elder child of that  family  had  not  yet  been
    living in the United Kingdom for  seven  years  when  the  appeal  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and as Mr Malik observed, the case  was
    reported before HC 194 introduced new rules which were intended to make
    HC 395 compliant with Article 8.

14.  In my view, it is certainly arguable that Judge  Cooper  was  wrong  to
    put all the blame on the children's parents for letting them accumulate
    seven years' residence in the United Kingdom.  The family were  'appeal
    rights exhausted' by March 2011, but  the  Secretary  of  State  waited
    nearly eight  months  before  notifying  them  of  their  liability  to
    removal, and even then she took no steps to remove  them,  but  granted
    them temporary admission instead.  The family then waited  a  few  more
    months, until the seventh anniversary  of  their  arrival  had  passed,
    whereupon Malik Law Chambers immediately put in fresh  applications  on
    their behalf.  So the Secretary of State must share some of  the  blame
    for letting this family clock up the necessary period of residence  for
    a strong claim to be established.

15.  On the other hand, Judge Cooper was no doubt right to be  sceptical  of
    their father's assertion that the  children  were  ignorant  of  Indian
    culture and their parents'  native  language,  and  was  right  too  to
    suppose  that  children  of  that  age  can  readily   adapt   to   new
    surroundings.  It was also a relevant point to take, that Mr Suthar did
    not qualify for indefinite leave after his five years as a work  permit
    holder, and could have had no legitimate expectation of being  able  to
    settle in the United Kingdom if that was the case.   Judge  Cooper  did
    allude specifically to  the  fact  that  the  children  were  now  well
    integrated into British society, particularly through their  education,
    and as I remarked at today's hearing, it is hard to  overset  a  first-
    instance assessment of Article  8  if  it  has  taken  account  of  the
    relevant factors, and is not irrational or perverse.  With one proviso,
    Judge Cooper did take into account the relevant factors for and against
    the appellants  in  the  instant  case,  and  that  he  considered  the
    proportionality scales to come down on one side rather than  the  other
    could not ~ absent that proviso ~ be said to be erroneous in law.

16.  I shall come to that proviso in due course.  Without it, the  challenge
    to the First-tier decision on Article 8 outside the Rules would not, in
    my judgment, succeed.  But that was not the main focus  of  Mr  Malik's
    submissions.   He  contends  that  the  appeals   succeed   under   the
    Immigration Rules, which was the other ground of appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  He draws attention to the transitional provisions of HC 760,
    which added the words "and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    applicant to leave the United Kingdom" to paragraph  276ADE(iv).   This
    amendment was not one of the ones which  applied  to  all  applications
    decided on or after 13th December 2012.  Instead, it falls within  this
    passage from the 'Implementation' preamble to the Statement of  Changes
    :

             "In respect of the other changes set out in this Statement, if
         an applicant has made an application for entry clearance  or  leave
         to remain before 13 December 2012 and the application has not  been
         decided before that date, it will be decided in accordance with the
         Rules in force on 12 December 2012."

17.   The  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  of  4th  January  2013  gives  the
    impression that the amended version of rule 276ADE(iv) is  being  used,
    although the rule itself is not set out, and Judge Cooper  too  appears
    to be using the amended version of the rule, although he does  not  set
    it out either, when he concludes that the appeals cannot succeed  under
    the Rules because it would be reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  To apply the wrong rule would prima facie be
    an error of law, but Mr Jarvis argues that it is not a material  error,
    since rule 276ADE(iv) must be looked at in tandem with EX.1 of Appendix
    FM.  This section of the 'family life' part of the Rules  would  enable
    the two older appellants to succeed on the  basis  of  "a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a child  who  ...  is  a  British
    citizen or has lived in the UK continuously for at least  the  7  years
    immediately preceding the date of application;  and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK."   If  the  two  older
    appellants can only  succeed  under  the  Rules  if  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the two younger appellants to leave the UK, and it
    would  be  reasonable  to  expect  them  to  leave  the  UK,  then  the
    expectation must be, says Mr Jarvis, that parents  and  children  would
    leave the United Kingdom together.

18.  Mr Jarvis acknowledged that if children who had lived  here  for  seven
    years were being looked after by people, whether related  or  not,  who
    were not facing  removal,  then  rule  276ADE(iv)  would  give  them  a
    freestanding right to remain in the United Kingdom.  But I do  not  see
    how such a freestanding right not to be removed can be conditional upon
    whether the adults looking after the children are themselves not liable
    to removal.  Mr Malik insists, and I agree,  that  the  words  of  rule
    276ADE(iv), as it stood on 12th December  2012,  must  be  given  their
    plain and ordinary meaning, which is that children under the age of  18
    who have lived in the United Kingdom  for  at  least  seven  years  are
    entitled to "leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK",
    as set out at rule 276BE.  There is a condition to be met, as specified
    at rule 276ADE(i), namely that "the applicant does not fall for refusal
    under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR  2.3  and  S-LTR
    3.1 in Appendix FM."  These  grounds  of  unsuitability  for  leave  to
    remain are all to do with criminality and  other  forms  of  turpitude.
    None of them apply to the children in the instant case.

19.  That rule 276ADE(iv) was intended to give effect to  the  Secretary  of
    State's duty to consult the best interests of children  in  the  United
    Kingdom can be seen, says Mr Malik, at paragraph 7.6 of the Explanatory
    Memorandum to HC 194.  The unqualified wording of rule 276ADE under  HC
    194 was greeted with some surprise when the new rules were published on
    13th June 2012, and it was thought by some that it was an oversight  on
    the  part  of  the  drafters  that  no  reference  was  made   to   the
    reasonableness of the child leaving the United Kingdom.   But  no  such
    reference can be read into rule 276ADE(iv) in its unamended form.  That
    it does, in this form, have the wide ambit contended for  by  Mr  Malik
    can, it seems to me, be seen from the Explanatory Memorandum to HC 760,
    paragraph 7.45 of which says this :

             "An amendment to  the  private  life  rules  will  narrow  the
         circumstances in which a child under the age of 18  can  apply  for
         leave  to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  private  life   to   those
         circumstances in which it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK."

20.  This carries the clear implication that, before the amendment, a  child
    under 18 did not have to show that it would be unreasonable  to  expect
    him to leave the United Kingdom.  It was enough that he  was  under  18
    and had been living here for seven years.  The First-tier Tribunal  was
    therefore wrong to suppose that the two younger  appellants  could  not
    succeed under the Rules.  They do succeed.

21.  Can the two older appellants also succeed under the  Rules?   Mr  Malik
    argues that, in order for the children to enjoy their right  to  remain
    under Part 7 of the Immigration  Rules,  their  parents  must  also  be
    allowed to stay.  There is nothing to that effect in paragraph  276ADE,
    so the parents must rely on EX.1 for any entitlement under  the  Rules.
    But under Appendix FM, the children must not only have lived  here  for
    at least seven years, as required by EX.1(a)(i)(cc). It must  also  not
    be reasonable to  expect  them  to  leave  the  UK,  as  laid  down  by
    EX.1(a)(ii).  My earlier ruling, in accordance with which  the  'second
    stage' of these appeals proceeded, was that the First-tier Tribunal did
    not make an error of law in finding that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the United  Kingdom  with  their  parents.
    The fact that the children do not have to  leave  the  UK,  because  of
    their entitlement to remain under Part 7 of the Rules,  does  not  ~  I
    originally thought ~ mean that the parents acquire a 'derivative' right
    to remain, analogous to the right enjoyed under regulation 15A  of  the
    EEA Regulations 2006 by the primary carer of an EEA national child  who
    has a right to reside in the UK under European law.  Under  EX.1(a),  a
    child may be a British citizen, yet  it  may  still  be  reasonable  to
    expect him to leave the  United  Kingdom  if  his  parents  are  to  be
    removed.

22.  Further consideration since the 'second stage'  hearing  has,  however,
    changed my mind about that,  for  the  following  reason.   EX.1(a)  of
    Appendix FM contemplates it being reasonable to expect a child who is a
    British citizen to leave the United Kingdom.  But regulation 15A(4A) of
    the EEA Regulations 2006 grants a derivative right of residence to  the
    primary carer of a British citizen who would be unable to reside in the
    UK or another EEA state if the primary carer were  required  to  leave.
    (Regulation 15A(7) contemplates the primary care  of  a  British  child
    being shared by both parents, neither of whom has otherwise  any  right
    to reside in the UK, and both of whom therefore acquire a  'derivative'
    right.)  There is an obvious inconsistency between the two  provisions,
    the earlier of which was inserted into the Immigration Rules  from  9th
    July 2012, and the later of which was inserted into the EEA Regulations
    from 8th November 2012.  The later one was intended to give  effect  to
    the Zambrano judgment, and must, as a  matter  of  European  law,  take
    precedence over the earlier one, which is the product of  our  domestic
    law.  The effect of regulation 15A(4A) is actually to  cancel  out  the
    requirement at EX.1(a)  that  the  parents  of  a  British  child  (who
    themselves have no entitlement to stay) must show that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect their child to leave the United Kingdom,  if  they
    are to be permitted to remain here.  It will  never  be  reasonable  to
    expect a British child to accompany his parents to  a  country  outside
    the European Union, and thus lose  the  benefit  of  being  brought  up
    within the territory of the Union.

23.  Can the same reasoning apply to children who are not British  citizens,
    but have acquired a right to remain under Part  7  of  the  Immigration
    Rules?  They do not, of course, enjoy the  same  constitutional  right,
    being  subject  to  immigration  control.   But  it  is  a  substantive
    entitlement granted by  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  in  its  original  form,
    qualified only by the 'Suitability' provisos of Appendix  FM.   Whereas
    the former 'seven-year concession' was a policy outside the Rules under
    which children would normally be granted indefinite leave,  along  with
    the their parents, after seven years' residence, the Rules  themselves,
    between 9th July and 12th  December  2012,  granted  such  children  an
    entitlement  to  remain,  free  of  the  discretionary   element   that
    "normally" imports.  The argument deployed  by  Mr  Jarvis,  that  rule
    276ADE(iv) must be construed so as to be congruent with EX.1(a) and its
    'reasonableness' requirement, can be turned on its head.  Why should it
    have to be shown, under EX.1(a), that it would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect children to leave the UK, if they have an entitlement under  the
    Immigration Rules to remain here?

24.  The upshot is that the First-tier Tribunal may  indeed  have  erred  in
    dismissing  the  appeals  of  the  two  older  appellants   under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The inconsistency between paragraph 276ADE(iv)  and
    EX.1(a) would otherwise produce the bizarre result that, in theory, the
    children could be left behind by their parents and  would  have  to  be
    cared for in the United Kingdom at public expense.  It now seems to  me
    that the adult appellants do actually succeed under the Rules.  But  in
    practical terms, there is little difference  between  succeeding  under
    EX.1 and succeeding under  Article 8 outside the  Rules.   The  'second
    stage' of these appeals proceeded on the footing that only  the  latter
    was in issue, and the rest of this determination will be concerned only
    with that.

25.  The error of law in respect of Article 8 is more or less the  same.   I
    remarked above that Judge Cooper's  decision  on  Article  8  would  be
    sustainable in the absence of one proviso.   What  casts  his  decision
    into error is that he assumed that the  children  had  no  freestanding
    right under the Immigration Rules to remain in the United Kingdom.   If
    he  had  not  proceeded  under  that  misapprehension,  the  Article  8
    balancing exercise could have produced  a  different  result.   So  the
    First-tier determination must be set aside, and the decision  on  these
    two appeals must be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.


                               FURTHER HEARING

26.  At the hearing on 4th October, the Secretary of State  was  represented
    by Mr Nath.  Mr and Mrs Suthar each gave oral evidence, adopting  their
    Witness Statements and being cross-examined.   The  Appellants'  Bundle
    prepared  for  the  First-tier  hearing  is  largely  taken   up   with
    documentary evidence about the children, but it also contains documents
    about the parents' employment with Sainsbury's.  From these it  can  be
    seen that Seema Suthar began  working  for  the  supermarket  chain  in
    October 2005 as a 'customer service assistant' at the  checkouts,  paid
    �5.61 per hour.  Manish Suthar began working for  Sainsbury's  in  July
    2006, apparently in  a  similar  position.   Both  appellants  received
    letters of congratulation from Sainsbury's on completion of five years'
    employment, while on 4th November 2011 they both  received  letters  of
    commendation for not having had any absences from work during the first
    half of the current financial year.

27.  How long the couple continued working  for  Sainsbury's  thereafter  is
    not recorded in the  documentary  evidence,  and  the  appellants  gave
    inconsistent evidence about this when asked about it  at  the  hearing.
    But they were both adamant that they had stopped working and, no longer
    having  an  income,  had  been  obliged  to  give   up   their   rented
    accommodation and move in with relatives.  There was  nothing  whatever
    in the papers before the  Upper  Tribunal  concerning  Manish  Suthar's
    application for indefinite  leave  after  five  years  of  work  permit
    employment, the refusal of that application, and the dismissal  of  his
    appeal  against  that  decision.   I  surmised  that  the  reason   why
    indefinite leave was refused was that Mr Suthar had not told  the  Home
    Office about his change of employment in 2006, and  he  confirmed  that
    this was so, adding that he thought he was permitted to do this.

28.  Clearly, a work permit was not issued to Mr Suthar's original  employer
    in order for him to work at the checkout of a supermarket, or something
    similar.  Whatever job it was, he lost it in 2006 and, as his wife  was
    already working for Sainsbury's, was able to get a job with them.  Both
    appellants gave  good  service  to  the  company,  as  the  letters  of
    commendation attest, and no doubt they would be taken on again if  they
    had permission to work.  But Mr Suthar was certainly  not  entitled  to
    indefinite leave on  the  strength  of  working  for  Sainsbury's,  and
    however law-abiding the lives led by the appellants in  other  respects
    while residing here, they cannot by themselves establish an  Article  8
    claim to remain in the United Kingdom.  It is  only  because  of  their
    children that such a claim has any chance of success.

29.  In his closing submissions, Mr  Nath  cast  doubt  on  the  appellants'
    credibility because of  their  inconsistent  answers  about  when  they
    stopped working, but Mr Malik countered that  this  was  not  material.
    This appeal, he said, was all about the children's right to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom, and how they required the presence of their parents
    in order to do this.  I think Mr Malik is right.  The Immigration Rules
    conferred an unqualified right on the children  to  remain  here,  once
    they have resided for seven years.  In order to  exercise  that  right,
    they would need to be looked after  by  adult  carers,  most  obviously
    their parents.  It would plainly interfere with  the  right  to  family
    life of the appellants and their children  if  the  appellants  had  to
    entrust to other adults the care of those children.   In  circumstances
    where the parents have been working, paying taxes and in other respects
    leading useful lives here, such interference would be  disproportionate
    to the public interest in maintaining  effective  immigration  control.
    The Immigration Rules themselves have brought about the situation which
    has been the subject matter of these two linked appeals.

30.  The upshot is that the appeals succeed  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules as well as under EX.1(a) of Appendix FM.  As I  mentioned  above,
    there is very little difference in  the  limited  leave  granted  under
    either route, but  success  under  the  Rules  takes  precedence,  with
    Article 8 as a 'back-up'.  The outcome in the present case should  not,
    of course, be taken as a precedent for applications lodged  since  13th
    December 2012.



     DECISION

     The appeals are allowed under the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  of
    the ECHR.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           12th October 2013



