

                                    [pic]
 Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Numbers: IA/02471/2014

                                                               IA/03461/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 September 2014                   |On 1 October 2014         |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     LD
                                     BC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms Asanvic (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  The first appellant is  the
      mother of the second appellant.  The first appellant's husband and the
      second appellant's father ('the sponsor') is also  a  citizen  of  Sri
      Lanka.  He was granted discretionary leave ('DL') in 2011, having been
      in the UK since 2002.


   2. The first appellant was granted leave to remain in  2010  until  2013.
      The second appellant was born in 2011.  They both applied for leave to
      remain on 15 October 2013.  The respondent  refused  this  application
      and decided to remove the appellants in decisions  dated  20  December
      2013.

Procedural history

   3. This is a matter that has previously  been  considered  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Thorne in a determination promulgated on 5 August 2014,
      in which he dismissed the appellants' appeals under Article 8  of  the
      ECHR.  This was the sole ground upon  which  the  appellants  appealed
      against the respective decisions to remove them.


   4. The appellants appealed against this determination relying upon  three
      grounds of appeal: the Judge was wrong not to  grant  an  adjournment;
      the Judge erred in law in failing to properly apply  the  respondent's
      policies concerning claims for  international  protection;  the  Judge
      erred in law in his approach to Article 8. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Saffer granted permission to appeal on 22 August 2014.

       5. The matter now comes before me to determine whether  or  not  the
          decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error  of
          law.

Hearing

   6. Ms Asanvic relied upon the grounds of appeal, focussing in  particular
      on ground 3.   Mr  Kandola  submitted  that  the  determination  is  a
      detailed one and invited me to find that the Judge's findings of  fact
      and conclusions were open to him.


   7. At the end of the hearing I reserved my  determination,  which  I  now
      provide.

Discussion

Ground 1 - adjournment application

   8. Ms Asanvic submitted that  the  Judge  took  irrelevant  matters  into
      account such  as  the  failure  to  give  notice  of  the  adjournment
      application and the failure to make the sponsor's application earlier,
      in light of the relevant chronology.  The real question for the  Judge
      was whether or not he could fairly determine  the  appeal  without  an
      adjournment.  He considered that ultimate question and concluded  that
      the  appeal  could  be  justly  determined  without   an   adjournment
      [23(iii)].  The  grounds  of  appeal  submit  that  it  was  crucially
      important to await the outcome of the sponsor's recent application  to
      extend his DL.  This misunderstands the relevant legal framework as it
      now exists.  The sponsor remains in the UK with  limited  leave.   The
      appellants do not meet the immigration rules and are  not  treated  as
      his dependents.  Even if the sponsor was successful in obtaining a  DL
      extension it does not follow that  the  appellants  would  be  granted
      leave in line.  The Tribunal would still have to determine whether  or
      not the appellant should be removed notwithstanding his limited leave.
       There was no procedural unfairness in not granting an adjournment  in
      these circumstances.

Ground 2 - Claim for international protection and SSHD's policy on removal

   9.  Ground  2  submits  that  the  sponsor  made   an   application   for
      international protection when he submitted his application  to  extend
      his DL.  The SSHD's own policy on DL states that when  considering  an
      application for further leave, consideration should first be given  to
      whether the reasons for seeking an extension given  by  the  applicant
      amount to an asylum application.  It also makes it clear  that  where,
      like the present case in which the sponsor was granted  leave  because
      of his long residence and then makes an application for further  leave
      on asylum grounds, it must  be  considered  whether  this  application
      amounts to a fresh claim for asylum.


  10. It is further argued that this is relevant to the present case because
      either by reason of paragraph 329 or 353A of  the  immigration  rules,
      the appellants as the sponsor's dependents cannot be  required  to  be
      removed from the UK.  It is therefore submitted  that  in  failing  to
      take into  account  that  the  appellants  as  dependents,  cannot  be
      removed, the Judge has erred in law.

  11. I accept that it appears that the Judge has erroneously failed to take
      into account the relevant legal framework and policies referred to  in
      ground 2.  These are matters that seem to have been argued before  him
      as can be seen from paragraph 60.

  12. However Mr Kandola meets this submission head  on  because  he  claims
      that the appellants  have  not  been  treated  as  dependents  at  any
      material time.   In  a  letter  dated  23  July  2014  the  respondent
      confirmed that the appellants are not dependents.  This has  been  the
      subject of a letter before claim and is not a matter for  me  in  this
      statutory appeal.  Ms Asanvic accepted that the  appellants  have  not
      been treated as dependents.  It therefore follows that the prohibition
      on a removal decision in relation to them pursuant to rule 329  and  /
      or  353A  does  not  apply  -  such  a  prohibition  only  applies  to
      dependents.  In these circumstances the submission set out at ground 2
      is bound to fail.  The Judge has not made a material error of  law  in
      failing to take into account and apply the relevant policies,  because
      if he had, it would have made no material difference.



Ground 3 - approach to the best interests of the child and Article 8

  13. Ms Asanvic submitted that the Judge  impermissibly  assumed  that  the
      sponsor would be removed to Sri Lanka  alongside  the  family  members
      when he had DL since 2011 and an extant application for  an  extension
      of DL.  I accept that the Judge  should  have  directed  himself  more
      clearly to the fact that the sponsor had DL when  considering  Article
      8.  However the Judge did not assume that the sponsor would be removed
      but that it would be reasonable for the child to return to  Sri  Lanka
      if her parents are removed [43 and 46].


  14. Judge Thorne addressed the child's best  interests  sufficiently.   He
      noted a dearth of evidence about the child's best interests [42].   In
      the absence of any cogent evidence one way or another, the  Judge  was
      entitled to conclude that the best interests of the child are for  him
      to live with his parents [42].  The Judge considered the  evidence  he
      had and concluded that the child could adapt and be brought up in  Sri
      Lanka [54] where his mother would be able to care for him and he would
      be able to be educated [55].

  15. It was submitted in the grounds of appeal that the sponsor  could  not
      be expected to live in Sri Lanka as his  links  to  the  UK  had  been
      recognised by the grant of DL.  The Judge was well aware of  this  and
      explicitly referred to Ms Asanvic's submissions to  this  effect  [50,
      53].  The Judge could have dealt with this issue  more  carefully  and
      clearly but when the determination is read as a whole I  am  satisfied
      that the Judge was well aware that the sponsor had DL and had made  an
      application to extend it, and as such was not  removable  at  present.
      That is why he used the word 'if'  when  referring  to  the  sponsor's
      removal.


  16. Judge Thorne was  well  aware  that  the  sponsor  chose  to  make  an
      application to remain in the UK and was of the view that it  would  be
      reasonable to expect him to live  in  Sri  Lanka  with  his  wife  and
      children.  His asylum claim had been successful.  Although it is  said
      that the  sponsor  has  sought  to  reactivate  this  claim,  this  is
      difficult to follow.  In his application, the sponsor's solicitor  has
      not identified why the sponsor fits into any of the risk categories in
      GJ Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.  On the evidence available  to  the
      Judge and before me, the sponsor does  not  fit  into  any  such  risk
      category.  This is a case in which it is accepted that the  appellants
      cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  under  the
      present legal framework the  Judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
      circumstances are not compelling and as such the Article 8 submissions
      must fail.

  17. Even if I am wrong and the Judge did err in law regarding his approach
      to Article 8 in light of the sponsor's DL, I would not have set  aside
      the decision.  Had the Judge directed himself to the reasonableness of
      expecting  the  sponsor  to  leave  the   UK   with   the   appellants
      notwithstanding his DL and pending application to extend  it,  on  the
      evidence available he was bound to find that it  would  be  reasonable
      for the sponsor to leave with them.  The sponsor  was  granted  DL  in
      2011 at a time when he did not have an established and  long  standing
      family life with Sri Lankan citizens with current links to Sri  Lanka.
      It was emphasised in VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] Imm AR  436  that  what
      "must be shown is more than a mere hardship or a  mere  difficulty  or
      mere  obstacle.  There  is  a  seriousness  test  which  requires  the
      obstacles  or  difficulties  to  go  beyond  matters  of   choice   or
      inconvenience."  There was no evidence before the Judge to  show  that
      the sponsor would suffer more than mere hardship in returning  to  Sri
      Lanka.  The evidence before the  Judge  did  not  come  anywhere  near
      demonstrating that there would be anything other than mere  difficulty
      in the family returning to  Sri  Lanka  together  as  a  family  unit,
      notwithstanding the sponsor's  pending  DL  application.   As  I  have
      already explained the submissions relying upon GJ are unfounded on the
      evidence available to the Judge.

  18. I am aware that in the past certain Judges have been prepared to  find
      that it would be a breach of Article 8 to remove  the  family  members
      whilst that father's application was under consideration.  Ms  Asanvic
      submitted that the Judge should have given consideration to giving the
      appellants leave in line with the sponsor.  These decisions were  made
      at a time when the Article 8 landscape under the pre- July 2012  Rules
      was materially different.


  19. I must decide whether or not this Judge made an error of  law  in  his
      findings on Article 8.  He clearly took into account the evidence such
      as it was and made findings of  fact  open  to  him.   He  effectively
      decided it was reasonable for the family to  return  together  to  Sri
      Lanka notwithstanding the fact that the sponsor was the beneficiary of
      leave to remain.  That may be a harsh finding but it is not  one  that
      can properly be described as perverse or disclosing a  material  error
      of law.

Anonymity


  20. As this determination refers  to  sensitive  issues  relating  to  the
      second appellant child I have anonymised this determination.

Decision

  21. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an
      error of law.


  22. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 30 September 2014

