
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02396/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 September 2017                    |On 2 October 2017                   |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                Sajid Maqsood
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Mazeli (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Mr Maqsood against the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Judge on 14 December 2016 who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 22 July  2016  refusing  his  application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.  The judge noted  that  directions
    had been issued on 20 September to Mr Maqsood requiring him  to  submit
    his grounds of appeal by 27 September 2016.  The judge recorded that as
    at the  date  of  this  decision  no  grounds  had  been  lodged.   The
    Tribunal's directions were addressed to Mr Maqsood at the address given
    in the notice of appeal.  The judge concluded that  there  had  been  a
    failure to comply with the grounds, and that it was  not  inappropriate
    to determine the appeal without a hearing and the judge  therefore  did
    so and dismissed the appeal.  Unknown to the judge in fact under  cover
    of an e-mail on 27 September 2016 Mr Maqsood had  sent  in  grounds  to
    the  Tribunal,  those  grounds  dated  26  September,  and   that   was
    subsequently  acknowledged  in  an  e-mail  of   29   September.    The
    acknowledgment of course comes after the date by which the grounds  had
    to be submitted but the key date is  the  date  on  the  e-mail  on  27
    September 2016 from which it is clear that grounds  were  submitted  in
    accordance with the directions and the judge therefore (I do not attach
    any blame to her for this and the grounds clearly were not in front  of
    her) decided the appeal without seeing Mr Maqsood's grounds.  That  was
    an error of law and therefore the appeal will have to be reheard  by  a
    First-tier Judge taking into account those grounds of appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.




[pic]


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


