
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02543/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 February 2016                       |On 21 March 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                              LYDEN MARK RHODEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan, instructed by A O & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                    (Delivered orally on 8 February 2016)

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica,  born  on  6  August  1972.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 21 January 2012 with entry clearance as a
    spouse conferring leave until 5 April 2014.  The appellant's leave  was
    thereafter curtailed on 14 November 2013, although he maintains that he
    was not made aware of the decision at the time it was made.

 2. On 27 January 2014 the appellant made  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as a victim of domestic violence.  That application was
    refused in a decision of 14 February 2014 and on 27 February  2014  the
    appellant was served with a decision to remove him,  against  which  he
    lodged an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet remitted the matter to the Secretary of
    State; "for further consideration and a revised decision letter, taking
    into account section DVILR of Appendix FM and [the appellant's skeleton
    argument, witness statement and bundle of documents]."

 4. It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the  appellant's  case  was  thereafter
    reconsidered by  the  Secretary  of  State  within  the  correct  legal
    framework, and was once again refused.

 5. The appellant again appealed the Secretary of State's decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and that appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge Turquet on 13 July  2015  and  dismissed  on  all  grounds  in  a
    decision issued on 3 August 2015.

 6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge P  J  M
    Hollingworth in a decision of 10 December 2015, which reads as follows:

         "1.  An arguable error of law has arisen  in  the  context  of  the
             judge  considering  whether  the  test  was  satisfied  before
             proceeding to consider whether there  would  be  a  breach  of
             Article 8."

         2.   In paragraph 44 the judge has referred to that which  had  not
             been demonstrated in relation to Jamaica.  In paragraph 45 the
             judge found that for the reasons  given  removal  to  Pakistan
             would be proportionate.

         3.   It is unclear to what extent if at all  confusion  as  to  the
             country to which the appellant would proceed has  any  bearing
             on the question of whether there are compelling circumstances.
             It is arguable that insufficient analysis has been provided of
             the available evidence in relation to the appellant's  private
             life."

Discussion

 7. The pleaded grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  are  unstructured
    and lacking  paragraph  numbering.  They  can  be  distilled  into  the
    following seven submissions:

         I.   The FtT failed to objectively consider  all  of  the  evidence
             before  it,  in  particular  explanations  provided   by   the
             appellant;

         II.  The FtT placed excessive weight on the  appellant's  inability
             to provide evidence of domestic  violence,  such  as  a  court
             order or a police report.

         III.     The FtT failed to  consider  cultural  differences  as  an
             explanation  for  why  the  appellant  failed  to  seek   help
             immediately after he was asked to move out of the  matrimonial
             home;

         IV.      The FtT's conclusion, at paragraph  40  of  its  decision,
             that the fact that the appellant  had  been  prescribed  anti-
             depressants is not evidence per se that he has been  a  victim
             of domestic violence and that the curtailment of his leave and
             the prospect of him being required to leave the United Kingdom
             could have been the cause of his depression,  is  based  on  a
             misdirection as to the evidence.  At the  time  the  appellant
             was prescribed anti-depressants he was unaware that his  leave
             had been curtailed;

         V.   The FtT erred in considering the issue of  proportionality  by
             reference to return to Pakistan. The appellant is  a  Jamaican
             national;

         VI.  The  FtT  erred  in  its  consideration  of  the  whether  the
             appellant has a family life in the UK given  that  he  is  not
             divorced;

         VII.     The  FtT  erroneously  stated,  at  paragraph  45  of  its
             decision, that few details of the appellant's private life had
             been provided.  The  appellant  identified  associations  with
             friends, uncles and his church - none of which were considered
             by the FtT.

 8. At the hearing Mr Duncan sought to re-characterise the grounds into the
    following two overarching limbs - indicating at the same time that  the
    appellant  would  not  pursue  those  grounds  highlighted   above   in
    paragraphs 7(I) and 7(III).

 9. The first limb, encompassing those grounds set out in paragraphs  7(II)
    and 7(IV) above, is now formulated as follows:

         The FtT erred in  failing to take lawful account of the appellant's
         evidence given in relation to  the  absence  of  the  provision  of
         evidence obtained  contemporaneously  with  the  domestic  violence
         (such as police reports) and, consequently, it  attached  excessive
         weight to the failure to produce such evidence.

10. Mr Duncan  re-formulated  the  remaining  grounds  into  the  following
    submission:

         The FtT's consideration of the issue of private life  is  deficient
         given its cursory nature and  the  failure  to  take  into  account
         relevant evidence.

11. Taking the re-formulated grounds in turn. It was conceded by Mr Duncan,
    as  it  must  be,  that  the  FtT  did  not  treat   the   absence   of
    contemporaneous evidence as  being  determinative  of  the  appellant's
    appeal. Clearly, the FtT cannot be faulted for observing the absence of
    such evidence when coming to its conclusions, this fact being obviously
    relevant to issue it was required to determine. Once it is  established
    that the absence of such evidence is capable of being relevant  to  the
    issue being determined, the question for the Upper Tribunal is  whether
    the FtT attached irrationally excessive weight to such absence.

12. Reading the decision as a whole, and considering the evidence that  was
    before the FtT for myself, I do not concur with Mr Duncan's submission.
     The FtT was in the best position to determine what weight to attach to
    any particular feature of the relevant circumstances of  the  case.  As
    part of my analysis of the FtT's decision I observe that it scrutinised
    with great care the evidence produced by the appellant  in  support  of
    the assertion that he had been subjected to domestic violence and  that
    this had been the cause of the breakdown of his marriage. In the course
    of such analysis the FtT identified, in paragraphs  35  to  38  of  its
    decision, a number  of  implausibility's  and  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's recounting of the relevant events.  It was this,  in  large
    part, that led the FtT to conclude that it was unable to rely upon  the
    evidence given by the appellant as to the events which underpinned  the
    core issue in the appeal.

13. The lawfulness of this conclusion is not, I find, materially  detracted
    from by the rationale deployed in paragraph 40 of the  FtT's  decision,
    in which the following is said:

          "I do  not  find  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  been
         prescribed Fluoxetine, an anti-depressant, is evidence per se  that
         he was a victim of domestic violence.  He had his  leave  curtailed
         and was facing the  possibility  of  having  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom.  These events in themselves could cause someone to be  low
         or depressed."

14. The challenge brought in this regard, as highlighted in paragraph 7(IV)
    above, relates to the FtT's speculation that the appellant's  knowledge
    of the curtailment of his leave could have caused the depression  which
    led to him being prescribed Fluoxetine - knowledge which the  appellant
    denies having at the material time.  Irrespective of the state  of  the
    appellant's knowledge at  the  relevant  time,  it  is  plain  that  in
    paragraph 40 of its decision the FtT was doing no more than postulating
    that there could alternative sources for  the  appellant's  depression,
    other than that claimed. This was a perfectly lawful approach in  light
    of the available evidence on this issue, particularly when set  in  the
    context of its conclusions as a whole.

15. Turning to the  second  limb  of  the  re-formulated  submissions,  the
    contention that FtT erred in its conclusion that the appellant does not
    have a family life in the UK is entirely misconceived. The core of  the
    appellant's claim is that his marriage has entirely broken down. It  is
    plainly misconceived in such circumstances to seek  to  rely  upon  the
    existence of family life with his estranged wife to bolster his Article
    8 claim.  In addition, there was no evidence before the FtT  which  was
    capable of leading it to conclude that the appellant has an established
    family life with any other person in the UK.

16. Moving on, contrary to that submitted by Mr  Duncan  the  FtT  did  not
    consider the issue of Article 8 proportionality on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant being required to return to Pakistan. The  reference  thereto
    in paragraph 44  is  no  more  than  an  accidental  slip.   There  are
    references throughout the decision to the appellant  being  a  Jamaican
    national and of return to Jamaica;  indeed,  at  paragraph  44  thereof
    there are no less than three references to circumstances  that  pertain
    to the appellant's return to Jamaica.

17. Read as a whole and in the context of the evidence before me I find the
    FtT's reasoning in paragraphs 44 and 45 of its decision to be  entirely
    adequate.  Although it is correct to identify that  the  FtT  does  not
    mention the appellant's connections to the church, and it may  also  be
    that he gave oral evidence as to relationships  with  extended  members
    that is not reflected in the  documentary  evidence,  these  cannot  be
    characterised as failings capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal. The appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules and  the  statutory  requirements  (set  out  in  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002)  identify  that  little
    weight is to be attached to the appellant's private  life  in  the  UK,
    given the precarious nature of his stay here (see  AM  (s.117B)  [2015]
    UKUT 260 (IAC)).

18. Despite Mr Duncan putting forward everything  that  could  be  said  on
    behalf of this appellant I, nevertheless, dismiss this appeal  for  the
    reasons set out above. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is to  remain
    standing.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain an error of law  capable
of affecting the outcome of the appeal. The appellant's  appeal  before  the
Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

