
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02567/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th August 2014                             |On 21st August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    N L P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Grimshaw
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 30th April 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Canada born on 19th  January  1985.   Her
    immigration history is as follows.

 3. She entered the UK on 3rd May 2010 with leave as a Tier 5 Migrant until
    2nd May 2012.  She then made an application to stay  in  the  UK  as  a
    partner, but withdrew it, and made a fresh application on the basis  of
    her private life, which was refused on 23rd December 2013.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the  Appellant,  whom  she  found  to  be
    credible, and who, she accepted, had experienced mental health problems
    whilst in the UK as a result of the breakdown of her  relationship  and
    her former partner's abusive behaviour.  She noted that NP had  a  good
    immigration history, and enjoyed a stable life  in  the  UK.   She  had
    formed a new relationship, but it was of relatively short duration  and
    there were no real obstacles to  the  couple  returning  to  Canada  to
    pursue their relationship there.  The  Appellant  had  not  shown  that
    treatment for her mental health problems was not available for  her  in
    Canada.  She would be returning to a country where she  has  lived  for
    most of her life.   She  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated that there were any compelling or compassionate aspects to
    her application.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had not acted fairly in that she had taken into account evidence  which
    was not available to her until after the appeal.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Macleman  who
    said that there was on file a letter dated 25th  April  2014  from  the
    Respondent to the Tribunal, copied to the Appellant, supplying  further
    documents. There  may  have  been  a  procedural  mishap  amounting  to
    unfairness.

The Hearing

 7. The documents referred to by the judge who granted  permission  consist
    of a  personal  statement,  supportive  letters  from  the  Appellant's
    friends and a letter from her GP dated 22nd November 2012 stating  that
    she has been provided with CBT  sessions  and  ongoing  medication  for
    anxiety and depression disorder.

 8. NP told me that  she  had  also  provided  fresh  medical  evidence  in
    December 2013 confirming the previous diagnosis of  anxiety  and  panic
    attacks which had not been taken into account by the judge.

Findings and Conclusions

 9. There is  no  procedural  unfairness  in  this  case.   The  bundle  of
    documents referred to by Judge Macleman were all  documents  which  the
    Appellant herself had submitted.  So far as the more up-to-date medical
    evidence is concerned, it appears to be confirmatory  of  the  previous
    diagnosis.

10. The Appellant has no basis of stay in the UK.  She does not meet any of
    the applicable Immigration Rules, including those relating private  and
    family life.  The judge, in a thoughtful and sympathetic determination,
    was manifestly entitled to conclude that she had not  demonstrated  any
    compelling or compassionate aspects  to  her  application  such  as  to
    require a  grant  of  leave  to  stay  in  the  UK.   Her  decision  is
    unassailable.

Decision

11. The judge did not err in law and her decision stands.  The  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


