

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02901/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 February 2016                      |On 8 April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                               MR USMAN HAFEEZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel, instructed by Lincolns
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. He  brings  a  challenge  to  a
determination of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Hussain  sent  on  30  July
2015 dismissing his appeal against a decision made by the  respondent  dated
7 January 2015 refusing the appellant an extension of his leave  to  remain.
The hearing before Judge Hussain took place on 1 July  2015.The  appeal  was
dismissed both under the Immigration Rules and outside the Rules on  Article
8 grounds.

2.   The appellant's ground was that there had  been  procedural  unfairness
in that the judge had refused to adjourn the case notwithstanding that  "the
appellant had provided medical certificates from his GP that he had  a  knee
injury and in the circumstances was unable to attend the  hearing".  It  was
contended that the judge had refused the adjournment "solely on  the  reason
that the appeal had been pending since March 2015" even though the delay  in
the listing of the hearing was not his fault as  he  had  lodged  notice  of
appeal to the FtT in time and paid the appeal fee. As a result  the  adverse
findings that the judge had gone  on  to  make  concerning  the  appellant's
relationship  with  an  EEA  national  and  his  circumstances  in  Pakistan
regarding a "coercion marriage" were said to have been decided  without  the
appellant having been given a proper opportunity to give  oral  evidence  to
defend and prove his claim.

3.   The respondent's Rule 24 response opposed the appellant's appeal.  This
notice stated that the judge had correctly  considered  the  application  to
adjourn in light of the overriding objective set out in  the  2014  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014 and at [6]-9] had correctly noted  that  the  appellant
had been informed of the hearing 4  months  previously.  It  was  maintained
that  the  medical  evidence  submitted  merely  identified  a  knee  injury
precluding the appellant from work. There was a lack of evidence  of  family
life and not only did the appellant not attend the hearing but  neither  did
his partner.

4.   At the hearing before me I heard  submissions  from  both  the  parties
amplifying the arguments already identified on both sides.  At  the  end  of
the hearing I stated that I would reserve my decision.

5.   Having carefully considered the matter I am not persuaded that the  FtT
judge erred  in  law.  The  right  to  a  fair  hearing  is  of  fundamental
importance but it is not an absolute right and it is not  inconsistent  with
this right  for  a  judge  to  refuse  to  adjourn  if  satisfied  that  the
circumstances of a particular case do not justify it,  taking  into  account
the overriding objective set out in rule 2  of  the  2014  Procedure  Rules.
Under rule 4 of these Rules the Tribunal has power to  adjourn  hearing.  In
Nwaige (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal
stated in the head note:

     "If a Tribunal refuses to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
    decision could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several  respects:
    these  include  a  failure  to   take   into   account   all   material
    considerations;  permitting  immaterial  considerations   to   intrude;
    denying the party concerned  a  fair  hearing;  failing  to  apply  the
    correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most cases  the
    question will be whether the refusal deprived the affected party of his
    right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on
    fairness grounds, it is important to recognise that  the  question  for
    the Upper Tribunal is not whether the FtT  acted  reasonably.   Rather,
    the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there any  deprivation
    of the affected party's right to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

6.   In the appellant's case I do not consider it has been shown that  there
was a deprivation of the affected  party's  right  to  a  fair  hearing  for
several reasons.



7.   First, the explanation for the appellant's  absence,  as  presented  by
his Counsel under  instructions,  was  that  he  was  unfit  to  attend  the
hearing. However,  the  only  medical  evidence  submitted  was  a  doctor's
certificate stating that he was unable to attend work for one week  starting
from 30 June 2015 due to a knee injury.  That  note  did  not  identify  the
appellant as unable to attend a tribunal hearing. Nor  did  the  surrounding
circumstances identified by the appellant's counsel at  that  hearing  (that
he had had an accident falling down  stairs)  demonstrate  an  inability  to
attend the hearing. The Newham University  Hospital  NHS  emergency  medical
department  attendance  summary  records  that  on  29  June  the  appellant
"[p]resented after fall down stairs. Mild tenderness to anterior shin.  Full
ROM at knew.XR+no  obvious  fracture.  Discharged  with  analgesia".  It  is
notable that this description assessed no more than a "mild"  tenderness  to
an anterior shin and "analgesia" The "discharge outcome" was "no  follow  up
required and the entry  next  to   "procedures  or  investigations  pending"
simply noted XR Knee Right (Ordered: 29  June-2015...").  The  hearing  took
place over two days after the fall down the stairs.

8.   Second, related to this, the appellant has had many  months  since  the
hearing on 1  July  2015  to  adduce  further  evidence  to  show  that  the
immediate aftermath of his fall down stairs  was  more  serious  -  e.g.  by
producing medical evidence of further medical appointments  or  the  results
of the procedure/investigation regarding his  right  knee.  This  lacuna  is
made all the more curious by the fact that in his original  application  for
an extension of his leave  the appellant had produced  evidence  at  he  had
been involved in a traffic accident and "was advised by the  doctor  not  to
walk for six months". Despite this evidence, being produced to  explain  why
he had not been  pursuing  studies,  it  would  have  been  evident  to  the
appellant from the terms of the  respondent's  refusal  decision  that  this
medical evidence had not been considered to  demonstrate  the  inability  he
claimed.

9.   Third, the appellant had lodged  ground  of  appeal  taking  particular
issue with the decision by the respondent not to address the  fact  that  he
had entered into a relationship with an EEA national present and settled  in
the UK. Before the respondent and indeed the FtT judge there was  a  glaring
lack of evidence regarding this claimed relationship and  its  duration  and
surrounding circumstances. I would add that despite  a  rule  15(2A)  notice
being served on the appellant in advance of the hearing  before  me  warning
the appellant of the need to identify  any  further  evidence  on  which  he
sought to rely, he had not submitted anything further.

10.  It is argued that I should nevertheless find the judge's  decision  not
to adjourn procedurally unfair because the "sole reason" he  gave  was  that
the appellant's case had been listed since March, 3  or  4  months  earlier.
The grounds complain that "[t]he relevance  of  this  for  the  decision  to
adjourn based upon a recent injury to the appellant is not easy to see".

11.  However, perusal of the judge's determination does  not  bear  out  the
claim that this was the judge's only reason or that it was meant in the  way
portrayed in the grounds. What the judge stated at [8] was:

    "I considered a request for adjournment but  refused  it.  I  explained
    that my reason for refusal was that this matter has  now  been  ongoing
    since at least March 2015 when the appellant was served with  a  notice
    of hearing. In view of the history of the matter  and  considering  the
    nature of the application, I did not find it was  in  the  interest  of
    justice that this matter be deferred any further ..."

12.  Although the judge did use the word "reason" in  the  singular,  it  is
clear from the context that his reason was in fact  a  composite  one  which
related not just to the fact that the hearing had been  listed  since  March
but also had to do with the history of the matter  and  the  nature  of  the
application. Further, I do not consider that this paragraph  can  fairly  be
read to suggest that the judge was seeking to blame the  appellant  for  the
fact that the case had been listed since March.  The  judge's  only  concern
regarding this factor was that it meant that justice was being  delayed  and
the decision to adjourn had to be taken against that background.

13.  Given the demonstrable dearth of  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
claimed relationship with an EEA national - and also his claim to have  been
the subject of a coerced marriage in Pakistan -  the state of  the  evidence
relating to the Article 8 circumstances of the appellant was simply that  he
had first come to the UK in  September  2006  as  a  student  and  had  been
granted further extensions in that capacity until his  leave  was  curtailed
from 3 September until 7 November 2014 in view of his  failure  to  find  an
alternative education provider within the time given. In the  light  of  the
guidance given by the Supreme Court in Patel & Ors v Secretary of State  for
the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  7Patel,  the  appellant's   educational
circumstances were not such as  could  attract  significant  weight  in  the
conduct of any  Article  8  balancing  exercise.  As  regards  his  injuries
obtained  after  a  traffic  incident  in  September  2014,  there  was   no
satisfactory evidence to indicate that  these  had  in  fact  prevented  him
finding an alternative educational provider or that  his  injuries  remained
serious or that the appellant would not be able in any event to receive  any
further medical treatment necessary on return to Pakistan. In  short,  there
was no realistic prospect  that  the  appellant  would  have  been  able  to
succeed in his Article 8 claim either within or outside the  Rules  even  if
he had attended his hearing.  He had not identified any  particular  quality
to his length of residence in the UK whilst a student  save  in  respect  of
his reasons for not finding an educational provider after September 2014.

14.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
err in law and as a result his decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
must stand.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
