
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02181/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th December 2014                           |On 2nd January 2015        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              MRS BEVERLEY MOYO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dinh (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R G Walters, promulgated on  25th  September  2014,  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 20th August 2014.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed  the  appeal  of  Mrs  Beverley  Moyo.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, who  was  born  on  16th  April
    1974.  She appealed against a decision of  the  Respondent  dated  13th
    December 2013, refusing the Appellant's  application  for  a  residence
    card under Regulations 6 and 20(1) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
    2006, the Respondent maintaining that the Appellant's EEA family member
    had failed to provide evidence that he is a qualified person as set out
    in Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations; and that furthermore, that the
    Appellant would pose a threat to the requirements of public policy,  if
    allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she entered the UK in 2000 as  a  visitor
    and overstayed, was subsequently served with illegal entrant papers  in
    2003, and was eventually the subject of a court recommended deportation
    order in 2007.  However, by the time of the hearing before  Judge  R  G
    Walters, she was able to point to the fact that her EEA partner, Mr Abu
    Sule, was a qualified person exercising  treaty  rights,  and  that  no
    grounds were shown for her exclusion on the basis of public policy.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had before him, on the day of the  hearing,  a  supplementary
    bundle from the Appellant's  side,  which  the  judge  ruled  as  being
    inadmissible, because this bundle (referred to as "A.2"), had not  been
    filed in accordance with directions  (see  paragraph  21).   The  judge
    ruled that this was important because the Respondent should  have  been
    given the opportunity to "check its  veracity."   The  judge  explained
    that,

         "If A.2 had been served,  for  example,  five  days  prior  to  the
         hearing or even at some time after he got  his  job  (the  evidence
         shows this was on 2nd May 2014), the Respondent would have  had  an
         opportunity to check its veracity.  No explanation was advanced why
         the evidence had not been served until the date  of  hearing"  (see
         paragraph 22).

    With the evidence excluded by the judge, it was held that there was  no
    evidence to show that the Appellant's  partner,  Mr  Abu  Sule,  was  a
    qualified person, exercising treaty rights.   The  judge,  having  made
    this decision, did not then go on to  decide  whether  the  Appellant's
    exclusion would be  proper  in  the  grounds  of  public  policy  under
    Regulation 21(6), as explained in paragraph 29 of the determination.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge's consideration of  the
    evidence was flawed and this infected his overall decision.

 6. On 14th November 2014, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge's limited consideration of what the
    Appellant must demonstrate in order to show that he has been exercising
    treaty rights, and failed to take into account the other evidence which
    had been provided, including the fact that he had  been  registered  as
    unemployed, and had provided evidence of his activities with regard  to
    seeking employment, "showed an error of law."

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 17th December 2014, Mr Dinh,  appearing  on
    behalf of the  Appellant,  (as  he  did  before  the  Tribunal  below),
    submitted that there were two issues here.

 8. First, whether the EEA national in question was  a  "qualified  person"
    exercising treaty rights; and (2) whether Regulation 21(6) of  the  EEA
    Regulations applied for an exclusion on public  interest  grounds.   Mr
    Dinh submitted that he could confirm that documents were handed to both
    the Presenting Officer and the Tribunal on the morning of the  hearing.
    The Tribunal knew that the Appellant was relying  upon  the  bundle  of
    A.2.  If these documents were not to be admitted, the judge should have
    put the Appellant's solicitor, Mr Dinh, on notice, so that  submissions
    could be made on an alternative basis.  They were not  put  on  notice,
    and as a result the consideration of the evidence was flawed.

 9. Second, and in any event, the EEA national, Mr Abu  Sule,  was  a  "job
    seeker" at the time of the application, and therefore  qualified  under
    the Treaty of Rome in any event, and yet the judge did not address this
    issue.

10. Third, there was a letter from  Vicarage  Farm  (see  page  55  of  the
    Appellant's original admissible bundle) confirming the  EEA  national's
    employment, as well as a pay rise  to  be  given  to  him.   The  judge
    overlooked this completely.  The judge focused on  the  subsequent  new
    documents  but  neglected  to  refer  to  the  bundle  that  had   been
    admissible.

11. Fourth, there was the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  could  be
    excluded because she posed a  threat  to  the  requirements  of  public
    policy, but the judge did not reach a decision on  this  question  (see
    paragraph 29), and this was necessary because the judge's view was that
    the decision to refuse the residence card on these grounds "is  not  in
    accordance with the law because the Respondent has failed  to  consider
    the factors set  out  in  Regulation  21(6),"  but  avoided  having  to
    determine this question (see paragraph 29).

12. Finally, it was incumbent on the judge to consider the  proportionality
    of the decision under Regulation 21(5)(8) which  raised  the  issue  of
    proportionality within the EEA Regulations themselves (without it being
    necessary to look at Article 8 for the  purposes  of  establishing  the
    proportionality of the decision).

13. For his part, Mr Nath submitted that  the  documents  tendered  by  the
    Appellant were late, and no explanation was given for them and  it  was
    entirely right for the judge to say that the Secretary of State  needed
    time to check on the veracity of  these  documents.   If  there  was  a
    letter from Vicarage Farms confirming that a  person  in  question  had
    been employed, it was important to check whether this was a  fabricated
    letter or was genuine.  On the other hand, he would have to accept that
    the issue of deportation of the Appellant was properly  raised  in  the
    skeleton argument (see paragraph 30 of the judge's determination), even
    though the judge took a contrary view, because the  refusal  letter  of
    13th December 2013, being the latest refusal letter in this case,  does
    refer to the Appellant's deportation on conducive grounds.

14. In reply, Mr Dinh submitted that the scale of the errors here was  such
    that the only proper course of action was to make a finding of an error
    of law and to remit the matter back to  a  fresh  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This was for  two  reasons.   First,  the  EEA  national  had  been  in
    employment and was currently a "job seeker" and this was  confirmed  in
    his receipt of job  seeker's  allowance;  and  second,  a  letter  from
    Vicarage Farm confirmed that  the  EEA  national  had  previously  been
    employed.  All of this evidence was  in  the  admissible  bundle.   The
    judge focused too much  on  the  latest  bundle  and  appears  to  have
    overlooked the first bundle.  There has  been  an  absence  of  a  fair
    hearing.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set aside this  decision.   My  reasons  are
    that there was obviously evidence before the judge (see page 55 of  the
    original admissible bundle) confirming that the EEA national  had  been
    exercising his treaty rights and was therefore  a  "qualified  person."
    This evidence was overlooked because the judge's attention focused  too
    much on the latest bundle of A.2.  Second, the Appellant's  deportation
    on conducive grounds was a live issue  before  the  judge  and  it  was
    accordingly important for the judge to make  findings  on  whether  the
    Appellant posed a threat to the requirements of public policy such that
    a removal was in order.  Given the nature  of  the  omissions  in  this
    case, leading to the finding of an error of law that I have made, it is
    important that this matter is remitted back to  another  judge  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, other than Judge R G Walters, to be determined  de
    novo under Practice Statement 7.2.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remit this matter under Practice  Statement  7.2
    to a judge other than Judge R G Walters in the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be heard de novo.  This appeal is allowed to that extent.

17. No anonymity order is made.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
   Date 31 December 2014
