
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02893/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 15th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                            Sharon Edith Quansah
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Ghana, had applied for a  derivative
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 as the primary carer of her daughter who is a  British
    citizen.  The Appellant contended that  if  she  were  not  allowed  to
    remain in this country her daughter would also  be  unable  to  remain.
    The relevant Regulation is 15A(4A).  The application was refused as  it
    was not accepted that the Appellant had established that  she  was  the
    primary carer of the child or that her removal would oblige the British
    citizen child to leave the United Kingdom or the European Union.

 2. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Broe.  In a decision promulgated on  2nd  September
    2014 the appeal was dismissed.  Judge Broe accepted that the  Appellant
    was the child's primary carer and that the  child's  father  might  not
    play such an active role in her life but he did not accept that it  was
    established that the father  would  not  care  for  the  child  if  the
    Appellant were obliged to leave. He made no decision  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

 3. The Appellant, through her representatives, applied for  permission  to
    appeal that decision. It was contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not taken sufficient notice of the quality of life which  the
    child would encounter should the Appellant be required to leave, citing
    Hines v London Borough of Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660, that it had  not
    been shown that the father was a responsible parent and that the  judge
    had not considered the impact on other  members  of  the  family  under
    Article 8.  It was asserted that the Respondent was in  a  position  to
    make a removal decision and  Article  8  should  have  been  considered
    although in the absence of removal directions the judge had declined to
    do so.

 4. In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nicholson  considered
    that at that stage it was an open question as to whether Article 8  was
    potentially engaged and he granted permission on that  basis.   He  did
    not refuse permission on other grounds but said that in  light  of  the
    factual findings it was far from clear that the  case  of  Hines  could
    assist the Appellant.  A response under Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rule
    24 by the Respondent asserted that the judge's findings were clear  and
    properly reasoned and it was open to him to conclude that Article 8 was
    not engaged.

 5. When the appeal was called on  for  hearing  before  me  there  was  no
    attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant.  I was satisfied that  she
    had been served  with  notice  of  the  hearing  both  at  her  address
    registered with the Tribunal and through her representatives ASIRT.   I
    was satisfied that she had notice of the hearing.  I considered that it
    was in the interests of justice to proceed and exercised my  discretion
    under Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 38 to do so.  Mr  Richards  brought
    to my attention that on  4th  February  2015  the  Appellant  had  been
    granted leave to remain for a period of  30  months  under  the  parent
    route in the Immigration Rules.  That might  explain  her  decision  to
    fail to attend the hearing  as  she  already  had  a  grant  of  leave.
    However as Section 104 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 does not apply to appeals under the EEA Regulations the appeal did
    not fall to be treated as abandoned and required to be decided.

 6. In brief submissions Mr Richards relied upon the Rule 24 response.  The
    decision had been properly reasoned.  He said that Article  8  was  not
    engaged and in that regard he relied upon  the  recent  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Amirteymour and Others (EEA appeals; human  rights)  [2015]
    UKUT 00466 (IAC).  That decision of  a  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    chaired by the President makes it clear that in  appeals  such  as  the
    current one an Appellant cannot  bring  a  human  rights  challenge  to
    removal.

 7. The essence of the other basis of  challenge  was  as  to  the  judge's
    finding that the Appellant had not established that the child would  be
    unable to remain with the father if she were to leave.  The judge noted
    that the Appellant had not made enquiries  of  mutual  friends  to  see
    whether the father could be contacted to see whether he would care  for
    the child, whose paternity he acknowledged.  In reaching his conclusion
    the judge relied upon the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  Harrison
    (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ
    1736.  In that judgment Lord Justice Elias stated (at paragraph 63)  as
    follows:

         "I agree with Mr Beal QC, Counsel for the Secretary of State,  that
         there is really no basis for asserting that it is arguable  in  the
         light of the authorities that the  Zambrano  principle  extends  to
         cover anything short of a situation where the EU citizen is  forced
         to leave the territory of the EU.  If the EU citizen, be  it  child
         or wife, would not in practice be compelled to leave the country if
         the non-EU family member were to be refused the right of residence,
         there is in my view nothing in these authorities to suggest that EU
         law is engaged ..."

    The judge at first instance was satisfied that the  Appellant  had  not
    discharged that burden.  He gave adequate  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion.  There was no material error of law in his decision.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction.  I could see
    no reason why that would need to be continued and I make  no  anonymity
    order.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge and his decision  that  the  appeal  be  dismissed  therefore
stands.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date 04 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
