
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02473/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2018                            |On 21 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                          Mehul Ghanshyambhai Bhatt
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal of Counsel (London View Chambers)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Amad


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 27 January  1978.   He  was
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student
    on 19 March 2010.  This leave was extended  on  6  August  2012  to  25
    February 2014.  However on 29 December 2012 his leave was curtailed  to
    expire  on  27  February  2013.   The  appellant  made  a   series   of
    applications for leave as a student and his final application  made  on
    21 May 2013 was refused on 4 July 2013.

2.   The appellant appealed the decision and his appeal came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lal on 14 July 2015.  Reliance was  placed  on  the
    case of Syed  [2013]  UKUT  144  by  Counsel  then  appearing  for  the
    appellant to the effect that the notice of  curtailment  had  not  been
    properly communicated  to  the  appellant.   Judge  Lal  accepted  this
    submission.  Had the appellant received the curtailment notice he would
    have been afforded an opportunity to make an application  in  time  and
    perhaps to find a new college.  The appeal was allowed  to  the  extent
    that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law.  The matter needed to be reconsidered by the  Secretary  of  State
    and the appellant afforded such time as required  to  find  a  suitable
    sponsor.

3.   On 9 February 2016 Counsel who represents the  appellant  under  direct
    access wrote to the Home Office, pointing out that there  had  been  no
    correspondence since the decision of Judge Lal.  On  15  February  2016
    there was a reply from the Home Office confirming that the  appellant's
    case was currently being processed  and  that  unfortunately  the  Home
    Office was unable to give a time frame for completion and that  Counsel
    would be informed as soon as any further action was taken in the  case.



4.   On 6 September 2016 the appellant was sent what was said to be  a  copy
    of  a  letter  dated  16  September  2015  refusing   the   appellant's
    application for leave to remain as a student made on 21 May  2013.   It
    was said that the appellant had no right of  appeal.   His  application
    had been made on 21 May 2013 but his leave had expired on  27 February
    2013.

5.   One of the issues in this case is  whether  the  respondent's  decision
    was in fact taken in September 2015 or September  2016  and  directions
    were issued by Judge Shanahan on 4 October 2016 directing the Secretary
    of State to confirm which was the relevant date or whether  there  were
    in fact two decisions.  An appeal was lodged on 21 September 2016.  On
    5 July 2017 a notice was issued stating that the appeal should  proceed
    because it would be unjust not to extend time.  However on 18 July 2017
    a further notice was issued stating that the decision was out  of  time
    and time would not be extended.  Enclosed was a decision of Judge Kaler
    referring to the decision on 16 September 2015  and  the  appeal  being
    lodged on 21 September 2016.  Ms Amad states that the key issue in this
    case is whether the decision was in fact reached in  2015 -  in  which
    case the appeal would be out of  time -  or  whether  it  was  as  the
    appellant contends a decision in September 2016 in which case there was
    merit in the argument that the appeal was in time.

6.   There had been no response by the Secretary of State in this  case  and
    I adjourned the proceedings briefly to enable the  parties  to  confer.
    It was argued that the decision of September 2015 had  been  served  by
    post and had been deemed to have been served on the appellant.  Counsel
    took issue with the submission on various grounds.  The first point  he
    took was in relation to the claim in the notice that the appellant  had
    no right of appeal against  the  decision.   He  pointed  out  that  in
    section C of the decision it was said that the appellant had  made  his
    application on 21 May 2013 but his leave to remain had  expired  on  27
    February 2013 and he did not have leave to remain at the  time  of  his
    application and had no right of  appeal.   Counsel  submitted  that  no
    regard had been had to the decision of Judge Lal  and  that  notice  of
    curtailment had never been validly  served.   Counsel  referred  to  OS
    (Russia) v Secretary of State [2012] EWCA Civ 357.  This was a decision
    concerning an in country right of  appeal  as  opposed  to  an  out  of
    country appeal and the appeal lay to  the  Special  Immigration  Appeal
    Commission (SIAC).  The court was of the view  (paragraph  41)  that  a
    failure to comply with the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 would
    render the notice invalid and that the normal  response  of  the  court
    would be to quash the notice unless there  was  substantial  compliance
    with the requirement that he was entitled to an  in  country  right  of
    appeal.  The September 2015 decision was accordingly not lawful.

7.   The second  problem  for  the  Secretary  of  State  was  that  it  was
    difficult to reconcile the claim that the decision had been reached  in
    2015 with the letter of 15 February 2016 stating that  the  appellant's
    case was currently being processed and that the writer could not give a
    time frame for completion.

8.   Furthermore, the notice to the appellant should have been sent  to  his
    legal advisor under the Regulations.  Counsel  referred  to  Regulation
    7(1) - the Regulation provided for notice to be sent by  post  to  "an
    address provided for correspondence by the person or his representative
    ...".  It had not been sent to such an address.

9.   Counsel relied on the point that the respondent had  failed  to  comply
    with the directions of Judge Shanahan which I have referred to above.

10.  Counsel also mentioned other complaints  with  the  procedures  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  the   inconsistency   of   notices   issued.
    Permission to appeal had been granted on all grounds.  Counsel referred
    to various occasions where the respondent had put the  wrong  dates  on
    letters and submitted it was not inconceivable that a  similar  mistake
    had been made in respect of the decision.  There was  also  a  separate
    issue about Mrs Bhatt's appeal.  The appeal had  been  in  relation  to
    both appellants.  The appellant's wife did not feature in  the  current
    appeal.  Both appellants would have leave under Section 3C.   They  had
    however been treated as overstayers.

11.  Ms Amad submitted that if I accepted the  submission  made  by  Counsel
    based on OS (Russia) then the appeal should be  remitted  back  to  the
    Secretary of State.  She submitted that the notice  of  September  2015
    had been served at the appellant's last known address and  returned  to
    the Home Office and had been validly served under Regulation 7(2).  She
    appreciated that the same representative had appeared before Judge  Lal
    and before the refusal decision.  In relation to the lack of a decision
    against the appellant's wife she would notify  the  caseworker  of  the
    matter and apologised for the delay.  Counsel invited me to  find  that
    the decision of First-tier Judge Kaler was materially  flawed  in  law.
    The appeal had been lodged in time and should be remitted back  to  the
    respondent.  The jurisdiction to remit on an error  of  law  basis  was
    still available as the appeal fell under the old  regime.   Essentially
    the remittal was on the same basis as the  remittal  ordered  by  Judge
    Lal.  The respondent could address the issue of Mrs Bhatt in  addition.



12.  It was clear that the appellant's leave  under  Section  3C  continued.
    Both he and his wife were awaiting a lawful decision and they should no
    longer have to put up with the problems they faced  with  their  status
    being questioned by the respondent.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I can only  interfere
    with the decision of the First-tier Judge if it was  materially  flawed
    in law.

14.  There is a difficulty in  the  respondent's  case  as  I  have  already
    mentioned  in  contending  that  the  relevant  decision  is  dated  16
    September 2015 since as of 15 February  2016  it  was  said  that  the
    appellant's case was currently  being  processed.   Counsel  takes  the
    point that the letter is difficult to reconcile with  the  decision  of
    Judge Kaler since  reference  is  made  to  the  appellant's  leave  as
    curtailed expiring on 27 February 2013.  The notice wrongly states that
    the appellant has no right of appeal and I accept the  point  taken  by
    reference to OS (Russia).

15.  I am not satisfied  that  the  decision  was  properly  served  on  the
    appellant in September 2015 as claimed.  Service  of  the  decision  on
    that date is inconsistent with the subsequent correspondence.   In  any
    event the letter does not properly inform the appellant of his right of
    appeal.  The appellant has throughout been represented as  is  accepted
    by Ms Amad and notice was not given to the representative.

16.  I am accordingly satisfied that the notice of the  decision  was  given
    in September 2016 and not in September 2015 and  that  accordingly  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal on 6  October  2017  to  refuse  to
    extend time was unlawful.

17.  I remake the decision.  I accept the submission  of  Counsel  that  the
    decision of the respondent was unlawful in that it failed to advise the
    appellant of his right of appeal in the light of OS (Russia).

18.  I remit the appeal back  to  the  respondent  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was flawed in law.  As indicated by  Ms  Amad  the  respondent
    will no doubt wish to consider the position of  Mrs  Bhatt.   I  should
    note Counsel's  submission  that  both  the  appellant  and  Mrs  Bhatt
    continue to enjoy leave to remain under Section 3C of  the  Immigration
    Act.

Notice of Decision

19.  Appeal allowed as not being in accordance with the law.

ANONYMITY DIRECTION

I make no anonymity direction.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is allowed it would appear appropriate that any  fee  paid  by
the appellant is returned to him and I so direct.






Signed                                  Date 15 February 2018


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

