
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02390/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Determination Promulgated            |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 30 October 2015                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                LOI TUCK LIM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pipe, Counsel, instructed by Ian Henery,
Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Claim History

    1. Although the Secretary of State is the applicant before me,  I  will,
       for ease of reference, refer to the parties as they were  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal; the Secretary of State will be  referred  to  as
       the Respondent and Mr Lim will be referred to as the Appellant.

    2. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Malaysia,  applied  for  leave  to
       remain in the UK under Article 8 ECHR  relying  on  his  private  and
       family life with his partner, Ms Lam and her four  children.  At  the
       First-tier Tribunal hearing before Judge Ghaffar, Mr Pipe,  who  also
       represented the Appellant at that hearing, submitted a s  120  notice
       of additional grounds  relying  on  para  276ADE  (1)  (iii)  of  the
       Immigration Rules because by the date of hearing, the  Appellant  had
       been in the UK for a period in excess  of  20  years.  Judge  Ghaffar
       allowed the appeal under para 276ADE (1) (iii) and therefore did  not
       consider the grounds previously relied on in the  grounds  of  appeal
       (these being  that  the  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with  the
       Immigration Rules, that the decision is otherwise not  in  accordance
       with the law, that a discretion under the  Immigration  Rules  should
       have been exercised differently and that the decision resulted  in  a
       breach of the Appellant's rights under Article 8 ECHR).

    3. The Respondent sought, and obtained,  permission  to  appeal  on  the
       basis that it is arguable that the Judge erred in allowing the appeal
       under para 276ADE (1) (iii) because those provisions were  framed  so
       that length of residence was measured at the date of application  and
       the Appellant had not resided in the UK for a period of 20  years  at
       the date of application.

    4. A Rule 24 response was submitted on behalf of the Appellant in  which
       the stance was maintained that the statement  of  additional  grounds
       pursuant to the s 120 notice, which was served at the hearing, should
       be taken as the date of application, and that the Judge had therefore
       not erred in law. However, at the hearing, although Mr Pipe  did  not
       formally concede that the statement of additional grounds  could  not
       be taken as the date of application, he accepted that this point  was
       considered in Ragu [2013] EWCA Civ 754 and he would  have  difficulty
       in maintaining his position.

    5. As submitted by Mr Smart, Ragu, at paras 13  -  17,  makes  it  quite
       clear that the date on which the statement of additional  grounds  is
       served cannot be  taken  to  be  the  date  of  application.  I  find
       therefore, that there was a material error of law in the decision  of
       Judge Ghaffar; he allowed the appeal under para 276ADE (1) (iii) when
       the Appellant had not been in the UK for a continuous  period  of  20
       years at the date of application. I therefore set aside his decision.
       However, the Respondent did not dispute the Judge's findings of  fact
       and these are preserved.

    6. As to whether or not I  should  remake  the  decision  following  the
       setting aside of the decision, both representatives  stated  that  as
       the findings of fact were preserved, and all the  evidence  that  was
       before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  also  before  me,  there  was
       sufficient material before me to remake the decision.

    7. As to the documentary evidence before me, I had:

        a. The Respondent's bundle (RB), submitted for the purposes of  the
           First-tier Tribunal hearing, which comprised annexes A - R,  and
           the letter detailing the reasons for refusal of the  Appellant's
           application dated 16 December 2013 (RL), and the decision  dated
           20 December 2013; and

        b. The Appellant's bundle (AB), pp 1 -  236,  and  a  copy  of  the
           Appellant's driving licence. Mr Pipe also submitted  a  copy  of
           the skeleton argument (SA), which was provided to the First-tier
           Tribunal.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

    8. Relying on the RL, Mr Smart submitted that the Judge had  found  that
       the relationship between the Appellant and the  Sponsor  was  genuine
       and subsisting and that was not challenged.  He  submitted  that  the
       partner  route  fell  at  E-LTRPT.2  because  the  Appellant  is   an
       overstayer. His appeal would therefore have to  be  considered  under
       para EX.1.

    9. Under para EX.1 (a), there was no finding that there  was  a  genuine
       parental  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his   partner's
       children; there was written evidence but  this  was  insufficient  to
       establish that there was a genuine parental relationship or  that  it
       was unreasonable to expect the children to join the Appellant and his
       partner in Malaysia.

   10. As to the relationship between the Appellant and his  partner,  under
       EX.1  (b),  it  had  not  been  established  that  there   would   be
       insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing with  the  partner
       outside the UK. Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440,  at  para  21,  provided
       that the 'insurmountable  obstacles'  test  was  'significantly  more
       demanding than a mere test of  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
       expect a couple to continue their family life outside  the  UK'.  The
       facts of Agyarko were similar to the facts in this case; in that case
       the appellant was married to a British citizen who had lived all  his
       life in the UK  and  had  a  job  here  and  it  was  held  that  the
       difficulties  of  relocating  did   not   constitute   insurmountable
       obstacles. The  Appellant  therefore  could  not  succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules. Mr Smart submitted that SS (Congo)  EWCA  Civ  387
       provided that 'compelling circumstances' would need to be  identified
       if the Appellant's appeal was to be allowed under Article  8  outside
       the Rules.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

   11. Mr Pipe accepted that  this  was  a  paragraph  EX.1  case.   It  was
       accepted by the Respondent that the  Appellant  met  the  suitability
       requirements. As EX.1 was parasitic on  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
       EX.1 ten-year partner route was available to the Appellant because he
       was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his  partner,  as
       found by the Judge, and he had been residing with his  partner  since
       2010. He was an overstayer, which brought him within  the  provisions
       of EX.1.

   12. Under EX.1 (a), Mr Pipe asked  me  to  find,  on  the  basis  of  the
       evidence  before  me,  that  there  was  a  genuine  and   subsisting
       relationship between the Appellant and his partner's children. Two of
       the children had given statements which confirmed their  relationship
       with him and it would not be reasonable for the Respondent to  expect
       them to live in Malaysia as had been conceded in  Sanade  and  others
       (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2011] UKUT 48 (IAC). They had
       lived here all their lives. There would be  insurmountable  obstacles
       to family life continuing with the partner outside the UK because the
       partner had four British Citizen children  and  it  would  cause  her
       significant hardship. Although it was accepted that  in  Agyarko  the
       Court of Appeal had stated that the insurmountable obstacles test was
       a higher test than whether it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
       partner to leave the UK, it was also held that it must  be  construed
       in a practical and sensible way rather than a purely literal way.

   13. In the alternative, Mr Pipe submitted that the Appellant was entitled
       to succeed under Article 8 ECHR, applying the provisions of s 117B of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act. Although  there  was  no
       need for  the  Appellant  to  satisfy  the  financial  provisions  of
       Appendix FM, the Appellant's partner ran a business and supported the
       Appellant. Although this could not count in favour of the  Appellant,
       it lessened the importance of s 117B (4). There  was  a  genuine  and
       subsisting  parental  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his
       partner's  children,  who  were  qualifying  children,  and  it   was
       unreasonable to expect them to leave the  UK.  Whilst  little  weight
       could be given to a relationship built up with a  qualifying  partner
       during the period the Appellant was in the UK  unlawfully,  this  did
       not apply to the relationship between the Appellant and his partner's
       children.

   14. It had been held  that  the  factors  set  out  in  s  117B  are  not
       exhaustive. The Appellant had been in the UK for a period of 20 years
       at the date of decision, his ties with Malaysia had been extinguished
       and he had significant ties in the UK. This is a factor  that  should
       be taken into account in the proportionality assessment. He asked  me
       to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8.

Decision and reasons

   15. I rely on the following findings of fact:

        a. Judge Ghaffar found that the Appellant had been in the UK for  a
           continuous period of 20 years  at  the  date  of  hearing.  This
           finding was not challenged before me by the Respondent. However,
           for the reasons set out in para 5 above, the 20 years continuous
           residence provisions apply to residence prior to an application.
           The Appellant does not meet the provisions of  paragraph  276ADE
           (1) (iii) because he had not been in the  UK  for  a  continuous
           period of 20 years before the date of application.

        b. Judge Ghaffar found that the Appellant and his partner are in  a
           genuine and subsisting relationship and that he  lived  with  Ms
           Lam in the same household with her and her four children.

        c. I note from the decision of Judge Ghaffar at [12] that  both  of
           Mrs Lam's children (who attended the  hearing  today)  had  been
           present at the First-tier Tribunal hearing and  had  given  oral
           evidence of their relationship. There is nothing  before  me  to
           confirm that their evidence was challenged or that Judge Ghaffar
           was asked to find that their evidence could not be relied on.

        d. The unchallenged evidence before me, as at  24  September  2015,
           was that Ms Lam's children were now aged 18,  17,  16,  and  14.
           Statements were provided by the 18 and 17 year olds. It is clear
           from these statements that the Appellant  had  been  a  part  of
           their lives since 2010 (they would have been  approximately  13,
           12, 11 and 9), and that  prior  to  that  time  there  had  been
           significant  difficulties  between  their   mother   and   their
           biological father which had resulted in  emotional  difficulties
           for them.  The  18  and  17  year  old  confirmed  within  their
           statements  their  initial  natural  reluctance  to  accept  the
           Appellant because they  wanted  to  protect  their  mother  from
           experiencing again the pain and hardship she suffered  when  her
           relationship with their father broke down.  They  described  how
           life for  them  and  their  mother  became  easier  due  to  the
           Appellant and how they have all benefited from his  presence  in
           their lives. They assert that he means more to them  than  their
           biological father  and  they  describe  the  ways  in  which  he
           supports them. I accept, on the basis of the evidence before me,
           that the Appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
           with the Appellant's children.

        e. It was not disputed before  me  that  Ms  Lam  ran  a  business,
           although the income from the business  was  not  established.  I
           find that she does run a business in the UK.

   16. Under EX.1 (a) would it be reasonable to expect the children to leave
       the UK? It  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  these  British  national
       children to leave the UK by following the Appellant to  Malaysia.  In
       so deciding, I bear in mind that the eldest is now over 18.  However,
       attaining the age of 18 is not a bright blue line; all  the  children
       still live at home with the Appellant and their mother, and they have
       all experienced some emotional turmoil following the breakdown of the
       relationship between their biological father  and  their  mother  and
       have experienced the strain that their father's conduct has placed on
       their relationship with him. They have started to trust the Appellant
       and their lives are now on an even keel.  It  is  not  reasonable  to
       expect them to uproot and try to establish their  lives  in  Malaysia
       when their ties and roots are in the UK. I find that the Appellant is
       entitled to succeed under the provisions of EX.1 (a).

   17. Would there be insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant and  Ms  Lam
       continuing  their  family  life  in  Malaysia?  I  accept  that   the
       insurmountable obstacles test is more stringent  than  mere  hardship
       and inconvenience and the fact that Ms Lam has a business here  would
       not of itself establish that there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       family life continuing in Malaysia. Therefore, absent the children, I
       would be minded to find that there are no insurmountable obstacles to
       family life continuing in Malaysia. However, in the Appellant's case,
       there is the need to consider the children;  they  are  part  of  the
       family life of his partner. On the evidence before me, I  have  found
       that the children have experienced emotional turmoil in  their  lives
       and it is not in their interests to be uprooted from  all  that  they
       know so soon after they have achieved a degree of stability following
       the breakdown of their father's relationship  with  their  mother.  I
       find, therefore that the Appellant is entitled to succeed  under  the
       provisions of EX.1 (b).

   18. In the alternative, taking the facts as found, following the approach
       in Razgar [2004] UKHL 4, applying the provisions  of  Article  8,  my
       assessment is as follows: there is family life between the  Appellant
       and Ms Lam and between the Appellant and Ms Lam's children,  and  the
       decision to remove will have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as  to
       potentially engage the provisions of Article 8. If the Appellant  did
       not qualify for leave under EX.1 (a) and (b), the decision  would  be
       in accordance with the law. Then applying the provisions of s 117B of
       the 2002 Act, my proportionality assessment is as follows:

        a. The evidence of the children was that life  was  very  difficult
           for their mother when their biological father left; she had  two
           jobs to make ends meet and they did not see much of her  because
           either they were asleep when she returned from work or  she  was
           asleep or busy  when  they  were  at  home.  The  Appellant  had
           contributed to family life in such a way that it had freed their
           mother to spend more time with them; he had helped their  mother
           with chores and helped the children with emotional  difficulties
           and their homework. On the evidence that I have of the  children
           of Ms Lam, bearing in mind the particular circumstances of  this
           case, it is in their best interests to remain with the Appellant
           and  their  mother.  Whilst  their   relationship   with   their
           biological father is currently strained, this does not mean that
           they will not wish to be in touch with him at a later date.

        b. The Appellant stated during the First-tier Tribunal hearing that
           he did speak English but it is  not  clear  whether  his  spoken
           English is sufficient to assist with integration.

        c. There is some evidence that  Ms  Lam  has  a  business  and  can
           maintain the Appellant. As submitted by Mr Pipe,  although  this
           cannot be counted positively in favour  of  the  Appellant,  the
           public interest in the economic wellbeing  of  the  UK  is  less
           affected by lack of self-sufficiency.

        d. The Appellant's relationship with  his  qualifying  partner  was
           built up whilst he was in the  UK  unlawfully  and  I  can  give
           little weight to it. However, the provisions of s  117B  (4)  do
           not require me to give little  weight  to  relationships  formed
           with qualifying children during this time; they see him as being
           more important in their lives than their  biological  father.  I
           give  weight  to  those  relationships;  his  presence  in   the
           household has contributed significantly to the wellbeing  of  Ms
           Lam's children.

        e. As to S 117B (5), the Ms Lam's children  are  British  nationals
           and therefore qualifying children. I have already found, for the
           reasons set out at para 16 above, that it is not  reasonable  to
           expect them to leave the UK.

        f. I give little weight to the private life formed by the Appellant
           during the time that he has been in the UK unlawfully.  However,
           as submitted by Mr  Pipe,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the
           Appellant can now make an application for leave to remain  under
           276ADE (1) (iii) because he has been in the  UK  for  continuous
           period of over 20 years and the Rules do not require him to have
           been here lawfully; therefore  there  is  some  tension  between
           276ADE  (1)  (iii)  and  the   requirement   under   117B   (5),
           particularly as I have to consider the circumstances  before  me
           as at the date of decision.

   19. Having applied the provisions of s 117B, I find that the decision  to
       refuse to grant leave is disproportionate when balanced  against  the
       various factors that need to be considered  on  the  public  interest
       side of the proportionality exercise.

Decision

   20. The decision of Judge Ghaffar contains a material error of law as set
       out above. His decision is set aside but the  findings  of  fact  are
       preserved.

   21. I remake the decision to  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.

   22. There was no application for an anonymity order before the First-tier
       Tribunal or before me. In the circumstances of this case,  I  see  no
       reason to direct anonymity.


Signed   Date
M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In light of my decision, I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee  award
under  Rule  9(1)  (a)  (costs)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005 and section 12(4) (a) of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As  the  Appellant's  appeal  has  been
allowed, I confirm the fee award of Judge Ghaffar.


Signed   Dated

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
