
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02998/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 January 2014                            |On 27 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE P LANE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 AHSAN ULLAH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Butt of SHN Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Gillespie  who  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal against the appellant's decision of 7 January  2013
    refusing to vary leave to enter the United Kingdom.  The judge  allowed
    the appeal, on the basis of the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Khatel [2013] UKUT 44 (IAC).  The respondent had applied  on  27  March
    2012 for further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant
    and with the application submitted a letter from the London College  of
    Business dated 27 March 2012  confirming  that  he  had  submitted  his
    dissertation on 5 March 2012 and the results were still awaited.  Prior
    to the appellant's decision the respondent was awarded his  MBA  on  30
    May 2012.  The judge concluded that the application  was  a  continuing
    one until a decision upon it had been  made  and  in  light  of  Khatel
    concluded that the appeal fell to be allowed.

2.   It is relevant to note at this stage that on 13 March  2013,  prior  to
    the hearing before the judge, the respondent  and  his  representatives
    were notified that because his appeal had been lodged without a fee and
    he had not met the deadline for a fee  being  provided  that  the  Lord
    Chancellor had revoked the certificate  of  fee  satisfaction  and  the
    appeal had been struck out and  the  Tribunal  would  take  no  further
    action on his appeal.

3.   Leaving that point aside for a moment, following the  allowing  of  the
    appeal by the judge, permission was refused by a judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal but subsequently, in light of the decision of  the  Court
    of Appeal  in  Raju  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  754,  which  overruled  Khatel,
    permission was granted.

4.   At the hearing Mr Walker handed up a document which indicated that  the
    respondent had been arrested in the Republic of Ireland on  4  December
    2013 for being in that state unlawfully and was due to appear in  court
    on 22 January 2014.  Mr Butt said that he  had  had  contact  with  the
    respondent and he said  he  had  been  to  Ireland,  was  arrested  and
    released and had been there for one day.

5.   We explained that in the circumstances it seemed clear that the  appeal
    fell to be dismissed  on  the  basis  of  statutory  abandonment  under
    section 104 of the 2002 Act.  In any event it was also clear  that  the
    appeal had been struck out on  13  March  2013,  albeit  a  matter  not
    realised by the parties to  the  litigation  as  it  seems,  and  as  a
    consequence the judge had  no  jurisdiction  to  proceed  to  hear  the
    appeal.  In any event, in light of what was said in Raju by  the  Court
    of Appeal and subsequently by the Upper Tribunal in Nasim  [2013]  UKUT
    00610 (IAC), it is clear on the basis of  these  authorities  that  the
    appellant's appeal, even if we had jurisdiction to hear  it,  would  be
    bound to succeed, but on the basis of the abandonment point we conclude
    that there  was  no  valid  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Judge  and
    therefore he had no jurisdiction to make the decision he  did.   It  is
    also clear from the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM  (Ghana)
    [2012] EWCA Civ 827 that leaving the country for as short a period as a
    day would be enough to constitute abandonment.  For all  these  reasons
    therefore we conclude that the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction
    to adjudicate on the respondent's appeal to it but even if it had  had,
    that appeal falls to be dismissed either  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    abandoned or on the basis that it falls foul of the  findings  in  Raju
    and Nasim.

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

