
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02651/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th April 2015                             |On 5th May 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                         miss Hanousha Devi Neerputh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffer (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  her  with
    a residence card, as confirmation of a right of residence as the family
    member of an EEA national, was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Napthine ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on 28th November 2014.
     The appellant is the niece of an Italian national currently present in
    the United Kingdom, exercising treaty rights.  The judge  made  adverse
    findings regarding the appellant's claim that she  was  dependent  upon
    her sponsor while living in Mauritius and while her sponsor was  living
    abroad.  He also found that the evidence did  not  show  that  the  EEA
    sponsor was exercising treaty rights as a worker.

2.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred in several respects.  First, in failing to properly  assess
    evidence showing that the sponsor was present  here  exercising  treaty
    rights, supporting documentary evidence having  been  provided  to  the
    Secretary of State in a bundle of documents served on 7th  March  2014,
    long before the hearing.  Secondly, in finding that the  appellant  was
    required to show that she joined her  sponsor  in  the  United  Kingdom
    after the latter's arrival here, this being contrary to the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in Aladeselu [2013]  EWCA  Civ  144.   Thirdly,  in
    failing to properly assess the appellant's claim that she was dependent
    upon her sponsor.  The judge failed to properly apply guidance given in
    Dauhoo [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC).  By the time  of  the  application  for  a
    residence card, the appellant was  residing  with  her  sponsor.   With
    regard to earlier dependency, the judge found  that  the  evidence  was
    insufficient, concluding that it amounted to two money  transfers  from
    the sponsor to the appellant, to enable travel to  the  United  Kingdom
    for the purposes of study.  The judge's approach was  contrary  to  Lim
    [2013] UKUT 00437.

3.   Finally,  it  was  contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  holding  the
    appellant's failure to produce her  personal  bank  statements  against
    her, as undermining her credibility.   The  appellant's  personal  bank
    account was not relevant and if  the  judge  had  concerns,  directions
    might have been made requiring this evidence.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted  on  3rd  February  2015.   The  judge
    granting permission  found  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  finding
    regarding the appellant joining her sponsor amounted  to  an  error  of
    law.  It was also arguable that the judge's approach to dependency  was
    inconsistent with Lim and that the appellant's failure to  produce  her
    personal bank statements ought not  properly  to  have  given  rise  to
    adverse credibility findings.

5.   In a rule 24 response from the  Secretary  of  State,  the  appeal  was
    opposed.  The judge was entitled to  find  that  the  sponsor  was  not
    present here exercising treaty rights  and  there  appeared  to  be  no
    challenge in the  grounds  to  this  finding,  which  was  sustainable.
    Overall, the judge was entitled to conclude as he did.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Jaffer relied upon the grounds.   They  identified  errors  of  law.
    First, the judge placed no weight on documents regarding the  sponsor's
    employment.  These were ordinary documents, including  wage  slips  and
    P60s  and  if  the  Secretary  of  State  wished  to  challenge   their
    authenticity,  the  judge  might  have  made  directions   accordingly.
    Secondly, the judge erred in finding that the appellant was required to
    show that joining her EEA national sponsor required her to  be  present
    here first.  As a matter of fact, the sponsor  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom after the  appellant,  but  the  authorities  showed  that  the
    requirements of the 2006 Regulations were  still  met.   The  Court  of
    Appeal held in Aladeselu that "join" includes  "has  joined"  and  that
    there is no particular temporal dimension.  The  judge's  reasoning  at
    paragraph 23 of the decision  was  erroneous  and  infected  his  other
    findings.

7.   A challenge was made in  the  grounds  to  the  judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph 19 of the decision that dependency was not shown by the money
    transfers.  Dependency while the appellant lived in  Mauritius  was  in
    issue here.  At paragraph  21,  the  judge  found  that  there  was  no
    evidence regarding a claim that the appellant and her sponsor were part
    of the same household in Mauritius.  He found  that  the  claimant  was
    raised by her parents there.   It  appeared  that  there  was  evidence
    regarding this aspect.

8.   The  two  remittances,  made  in  2007  and  2008  were  sent  to  meet
    educational needs and the cost of the appellant's journey to the United
    Kingdom for study.  The witness statement in the appellant's bundle  at
    page 4 was evidence in support of this claim  and  there  were  Western
    Union receipts at pages 33 and 34 of that bundle.  Reliance was  placed
    upon Lim and the reasoning of the Upper Tribunal in that case.

9.   Although the receipts appear to be the  only  documentary  evidence  of
    money transfers, the correct approach was shown in Lebon  and  required
    an open interpretation of dependency.  The appellant's  need  to  study
    was sufficient for these purposes  and  if  the  money  transfers  were
    necessary to meet that particular need, the requirements  of  the  2006
    Regulations would be met in relation to dependency.  Paragraphs 42  and
    43 of the  judgment  in  Pedro  showed  that  no  particular  level  of
    financial support was needed.  The appellant came to the United Kingdom
    in 2008 to  study.   Her  sponsor  arrived  here  in  July  2013.   The
    appellant was required to show that she was  dependent  prior  to  July
    2013.

10.  The next challenge concerned paragraph  32  of  the  decision  and  the
    judge's finding regarding the appellant's own bank  statements.   Their
    absence was no basis for making an adverse  credibility  finding.   The
    judge's rejection of the sponsor's evidence regarding her employment in
    the United Kingdom perhaps lay at the  heart  of  his  reasoning.   The
    documentary evidence included a bank statement going  back  to  January
    2012 in the joint names of the appellant and her sponsor and this  bore
    on the issue of  prior  dependency.   If  the  key  was  dependency  in
    Mauritius, the judge misunderstood the evidence as the  bank  statement
    in 2012 showed the joint names.   The  appellant  was  present  in  the
    United Kingdom by that time.  Paragraph 44 of the judgment in Aladeselu
    was relevant here.  The appellant relied upon the bank  statement  from
    2012 as showing dependency, before the sponsor arrived here from  Italy
    and while the appellant was in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 30  of
    the decision, the judge referred to a joint account  dating  from  2013
    but bank statements showed balances in a  joint  account  earlier  than
    that, in 2012.  Page 45 of the appellant's bundle included  a  document
    dating from August that year.   The  appellant  and  her  sponsor  were
    living in different countries in 2012, the former here and  the  latter
    in Italy and there was good reason to maintain a  joint  account.   The
    documents at pages 35 and 35A were relevant to this aspect.

11.  Mr Walker said that the major difficulty for the appellant's case  were
    the judge's findings regarding transfers and dependency, for example at
    paragraph 19 of the  decision.   There  were  two  payments,  the  only
    transfers in the period of some twenty years or so in which the sponsor
    lived in Italy.  Those payments were to enable the appellant to  travel
    to the United Kingdom, pay for her  visa  and,  apparently,  to  study.
    They were not related to  living  expenses.   The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that  the  judge  erred  in  paragraph  23  of  the  decision,
    regarding the appellant "joining" her sponsor, but this was simply  not
    material.  At paragraph 27, the judge found that the sponsor was unable
    to name the street where the appellant lived, even though that  address
    appeared in the 2012 bank statements.  Overall,  the  judge's  findings
    were open to  him  and  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  showing  any
    dependency, so that the requirements of the 2006 Regulations  were  not
    met.

12.  Mr Jaffer had nothing to add to  his  earlier  submissions  and  relied
    upon them.

Conclusion on Error of Law

13.   I  am  grateful  to  Mr  Jaffer  and  Mr  Walker  for  their   careful
    submissions.  There is no doubt, in the light of the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Aladeselu [2013] EWCA Civ 14, that the  judge  erred
    at paragraph 23 of the decision, in  finding  that  the  appellant  had
    failed to show that she "has joined" the EEA  national  in  the  United
    Kingdom,  for  the  purposes  of  Regulation  8(2)(c)   of   the   2006
    Regulations.   The  judge  made  his  finding  in  the  light  of   the
    appellant's arrival here in 2008, followed by her sponsor in 2013.  The
    Court of Appeal held in Aladeselu that the phrase "has joined" does not
    of itself impose a temporal limitation.  It does not matter whether the
    appellant or her EEA national  sponsor  arrived  first  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The critical question, however, is whether a  material  error
    of law has been shown, notwithstanding  the  judge's  mistake  on  this
    point.

14.  Mr Jaffer made a forceful challenge to  the  judge's  finding  that  no
    weight  could  be  placed  upon  documents  regarding   the   sponsor's
    employment in London, including a  P60,  payslips  and  a  letter  from
    accountants.  At paragraph 26 of the decision, the  judge  appeared  to
    base his finding on the fact that these documents were not submitted to
    the Secretary of State for examination or analysis.  I  find  that  the
    judge erred here too.  On file was a copy  of  the  appellant's  bundle
    which was sent to the First-tier Tribunal and the  Presenting  Officers
    Unit on 7th March 2014, months before the hearing.  Pages 10 to  32  of
    that bundle consisted of payslips, a letter from HM Revenue &  Customs,
    a document from Companies House and a letter confirming  the  sponsor's
    employment, all made available to the respondent in sufficient time  to
    enable an assessment to be made.  The judge's conclusion that no weight
    could be given to this evidence was based on a false premise.

15.  In the grounds in support of the application,  it  was  contended  that
    the judge erred in finding that the absence of the appellant's personal
    bank statements undermined her credibility.  Whether or not an error of
    law has been shown, this aspect of the case is peripheral and does  not
    bear  directly  on  the  requirements  of  Regulation  8  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  On balance, I find that no error of law  has  been  shown
    and that the judge was, having heard evidence from  the  appellant  and
    from her sponsor, entitled to draw attention to the absence of personal
    bank statements but, again, the absence does not bear on  the  critical
    issue.

16.  As Mr Walker submitted, if the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  8(2)(c)  of  the
    2006 Regulations, the appeal would fall to be dismissed and  the  error
    regarding "has joined" would not be material.  As is clear from  Dauhoo
    [2012] UKUT 79, the appellant was required to show dependency upon  her
    sponsor or, alternatively, membership of her sponsor's household, prior
    to arrival in the United Kingdom, in addition to either  dependency  or
    household membership in the United Kingdom.  The key focus here  is  on
    the appellant's circumstances in Mauritius, before she travelled to the
    United Kingdom in 2008.  At paragraph 19 of  the  decision,  the  judge
    found against the appellant in relation  to  prior  dependency,  having
    taken into  account  two  money  transfers  from  the  sponsor  to  the
    appellant.  At paragraph 21, he found against her in relation to  prior
    membership of a household in Mauritius, as  there  appeared  to  be  no
    evidence supporting the claim  that  the  sponsor  lived  in  the  same
    household and indeed there appeared to be no evidence showing where the
    sponsor lived before she moved to Italy some twenty years ago.

17.  The grounds in support of the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    contain no challenge to the judge's adverse finding regarding household
    membership in Mauritius.  The author drew attention to the  absence  of
    challenge by the respondent to the claim that  the  appellant  and  her
    sponsor were members of the same household, here in the United Kingdom,
    at the time  of  application  in  October  2013  (paragraph  8  of  the
    grounds).  This is unsurprising.  The  appellant's  witness  statement,
    made on 12th March 2014, included a claim that the sponsor  was  paying
    the appellant's  "fees  and  other  living  expenses  while  I  was  in
    Mauritius" and that there was dependency at the time the appellant came
    to the United Kingdom in 2008, the sponsor sending money to pay for the
    visa application fee, a ticket "and to pay  for  my  living  expenses".
    The statement went on to include a claim that the  appellant  was  "now
    living" with her sponsor.  The sponsor's witness statement, made on 8th
    March 2014, is in substantially  the  same  terms  as  the  appellant's
    statement and contains no claim that she and the appellant were part of
    the same household in Mauritius.  She states that  the  appellant  "has
    been living with her" in the United Kingdom.  So far as  dependency  is
    concerned, the sponsor's statement includes a claim that dependency  at
    the time  the  appellant  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  "can  be
    demonstrated by the fact  that  I  sent  her  money  to  pay  her  visa
    application fee and other expenses  including  her  travel  ticket  and
    other living expenses".

18.  The judge took these witness statements  into  account,  as  he  did  a
    claim which appears to have been made in oral evidence by  the  sponsor
    that she lived in the same household as her  niece  in  Mauritius,  who
    lived with her father and mother.

19.  The judge has given sustainable  reasons  for  disbelieving  the  claim
    regarding household membership in  Mauritius,  noting  the  absence  of
    supporting evidence.  Again, the grounds contain no challenge  to  this
    finding.  So far as dependency is concerned, the judge found as a  fact
    that the financial support given to the appellant by her sponsor  while
    the  former  was  living  in  Mauritius  consisted  of  the  two  money
    transfers.  Mr Jaffer drew attention to Lim and Lebon [1987] ECR  2811.
    Dependency is a question of fact.  The Court of Appeal in Pedro  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 1358 referred to guidance from the Commission to the  European
    Parliament on dependency, in the light of Lebon and Jia [2007] OB  545.
    What must be assessed is whether a person  needs  material  support  to
    meet their essential needs in the country of origin  but  judgments  on
    the concept of dependency do not refer to  any  level  of  standard  of
    living for determining the need for  financial  support.   Taking  into
    account the purpose of the transfers, as found by the judge, I conclude
    that he was entitled to find that the extent of the support, limited as
    it was, did not show dependency for the purposes of Regulation 8(2)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  That finding was open to him.

20.  In summary, although the judge did  err,  in  relation  to  the  proper
    construction of the phrase "has joined" in Regulation 8(2) of the  2006
    Regulations, and although he may have erred in relation to evidence  of
    the sponsor's employment in the United Kingdom  following  her  arrival
    here in 2013, and even if there is some doubt regarding the  weight  he
    attached to the absence of personal bank statements in the  appellant's
    name, none of that is sufficient to show a material error of law.   The
    judge's findings  on  household  membership  and  dependency  when  the
    appellant  lived  in  Mauritius,  before  coming  here  in  2008,   are
    sufficient to justify his overall conclusion that the appeal fell to be
    dismissed.

21.  As the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no  material  error
    of law, it shall stand.

Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

