
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02305/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 25 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                Mr IMRAN ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Thamina
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. In a decision signed on 28  May
    2019, I set aside the decision of Judge Paul of the First-tier Tribunal
    (FtT) sent on 5 March 2019 dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision made by the  respondent  on  20  June  2016  refusing  his
    application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student.   The
    appellant's appeal had earlier been allowed by Judge Sweet on 15  March
    2018, but that decision was set aside for material error of  law.   The
    respondent had applied paragraph 322(1A) against the appellant  on  the
    basis of his belief that the appellant had used deception in taking  an
    ETS test on 11 July 2012. The respondent stated in the refusal decision
    that "ETS have declared your test [taken at the Seven Oaks College)  to
    be "invalid" due to the aforementioned presence of a proxy  tester  who
    sat the test  in  your  place,  and  the  scores  have  therefore  been
    cancelled by ETS".

2.   At para 7 of my decision I stated:

         "Having found a material error of law,  I  turn  to  consider  what
         procedure should be followed as regards re-making of the  decision.
         Mr Singer submitted that the case should be remitted again  to  the
         FtT as on both occasions the central issue was one  of  credibility
         and so the appellant had still not had a proper assessment made  of
         his credibility.  Ms Everett voiced a more nuanced  view.   In  the
         event, I have decided the case should  be  retained  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal.  It would not be in the interests of justice for it to be
         heard in the FtT for the third time.  Given that I   have  rejected
         the appellant's contention that the judge  was  wrong  to  consider
         that the respondent had discharged the initial  evidential  burden,
         the scope of the next hearing  can  be  limited  to  assessment  of
         whether the appellant has provided (or  can  provide)  an  innocent
         explanation for what transpired in 2012 as regards his  ETS  tests.
         It is likely that the parties' submissions will cover some  of  the
         same ground as  previously:  they  will  not  need  to  start  from
         scratch."

3.   At the outset both parties confirmed that their  presentations  of  the
    case would be confined to whether the appellant had provided  or  could
    provide an innocent explanation for the circumstances of the  TOEIC/ETS
    tests he took in May, June and July 2012. I  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant. Before summarising the appellant's evidence, it is useful to
    note certain accepted aspects of the tests the appellant took  in  May,
    June and July 2012.

4.   On 11th May 2012 the appellant had  successfully  taken  the  Listening
    and Reading test. When he took the taken  the  19  June  2012  test  on
    Speaking and Writing, the detail of his  speaking  result  gave  him  a
    score of 114 which put him in the level 6 score range.   (The  relevant
    explanatory note relating to  level  6  states  that  'typically,  test
    takers of level 6 are able to create a relevant response when asked  to
    express and opinion or respond to a complicated request.   However,  at
    least part of the time,  the  reasons  for,  or  explanations  of,  the
    opinion are unclear  to  a  listener.   This  may  be  because  of  the
    following: unclear pronunciation or inappropriate intonation or  stress
    when the speaker must create language; mistakes in grammar;  a  limited
    range of vocabulary.  Most of the time, test  takers  of  level  6  can
    answer questions and give basic information.  However, sometimes  their
    responses are difficult  to  understand  or  interpret.   When  reading
    aloud, test takers at level 6 are intelligible').

5.   On 11 July the score for the same test was 190, which put him at  level
    8.  (The relevant explanatory note for level 8 states  that  typically:
    '[t]est takers at level 8 can create connected, sustained discourse and
    appropriate to the level to the typical workplace.  When  they  express
    opinions or respond to complicated requests,  their  speech  is  highly
    intelligible.  Their use of basic and  complex  grammar  is  good,  and
    their use of vocabulary is accurate and precise.  Test takers of  level
    8 can also use spoken language  to  answer  questions  and  give  basic
    information.  Their pronunciation and intonation and stress are at  all
    times highly intelligible'.)

6.   In his oral testimony before Judge Paul, the appellant was recorded  as
    saying, inter alia, that in relation to the test  on  19  June  he  was
    reaching the climax of his MBA course and had one final exam. His  mind
    was distracted and he was under acute  pressure  at  the  time,  so  he
    considered this may have impacted upon his speaking score  on  19  June
    2012.

7.   In an 'appeal statement' dated 2 July 2019, which was very  similar  in
    contents to his earlier witness  statement  of  23  October  2017,  the
    appellant said that on  11  May  2012  he  had  undertaken  a  test  in
    Listening and Reading test in which he was successful. Then on 19  June
    2012 he had undertaken a subsequent test on Speaking  and  Writing.  He
    had been informed that he had passed the  Listening  and  Reading  test
    within about three weeks after 11 May. He learnt that he had failed the
    Speaking and Writing test two weeks after 19 June. He then booked to do
    the Speaking test on 11 July 2012.

8.    Having  affirmed  the  truth  of  his  witness  statement  and  appeal
    statement, the appellant said in cross-examination that  he  wished  to
    clarify that he had in fact taken his last exam for his  MBA  in  April
    2012. When he began preparing for his TOEIC/ETS tests he had to prepare
    for the Listening and Reading test and the  Speaking  and  Writing  and
    because of his MBA exams he had not been able to prepare fully. He  had
    been confident he would pass all four  components.  However,  after  he
    learnt he had failed the Speaking and Writing test taken on 19 June  he
    did a lot of practice online, doing sample papers  and  doing  speaking
    and reading modules. It had been quite a  shock  to  him  that  he  had
    failed the Speaking and Writing test the first time.

9.   I then heard submissions from Ms Everett and Mr Biggs. Ms Everett  said
    the appellant's explanations for his failure when he took the  Speaking
    and Writing test on 19 June 2012 had differed, he saying to Judge  Paul
    it was because he was under pressure because he was still doing his MBA
    exams, he now saying his last MBA exam was in April. That went  against
    the credibility of his explanation. Mr Biggs  submitted  first  of  all
    that the  appellant's  explanation  had  to  be  assessed  against  the
    backdrop of the refusal letter which was unclear regarding whether both
    the tests he had taken were classed as invalid or one. If it was  both,
    that was very odd as he had failed it. Secondly Mr Biggs submitted that
    it was relevant in the  appellant's  case  that  the  voice  recordings
    relating to the appellant's case had not  been  produced.  Principally,
    submitted Mr Biggs, the  appellant's  oral  testimony  at  the  hearing
    before me had to be given considerable weight. The appellant  was  very
    nervous and it was only by dint of follow up questions that he was able
    to provide a proper  explanation.  His  first  test  in  Listening  and
    Reading had come very shortly after his last  MBA  exam.  Then  he  had
    approximately 6 weeks until his first  attempt  at  the  Listening  and
    Reading test.  He had obviously bene overconfident based on his ability
    to pass exams in English in Pakistan and then for his MBA degree in the
    UK.   Also relevant was that he was of previous good character and  had
    no adverse immigration history and had been  a  student  who  had  made
    suitable academic progress.
10.  In deciding this case I must apply the principles and findings set  out
    in a number of leading cases, including SM and Qadir [2016]  EWCA  Cave
    1167 and its subject, SM and Qadir v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016]  UKUT  229  (IAC).
    Although  finding  that  the  respondent  had  discharged  the  initial
    evidential burden, the Tribunal  had  serious  reservations  about  the
    strength and quality of the  respondent's  evidence.  At  para  69  the
    Tribunal then addressed the legal burden:

         "69. We turn thus to address the legal burden. We accept Mr
         Dunlop's submission that in considering an allegation of dishonesty
         in this context the relevant factors to be weighed include
         (inexhaustively, we would add) what the person accused has to gain
         from being dishonest; what he has to lose from being dishonest;
         what is known about his character; and the culture or environment
         in which he operated. Mr Dunlop also highlighted the importance of
         three further considerations, namely how the Appellants performed
         under cross examination, whether the Tribunal's assessment of their
         English language proficiency is commensurate with their TOEIC
         scores and whether their academic achievements are such that it was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated."

    Later, in MA (ETS-TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IC), the Tribunal
    also noted that there may be many reasons why a person with some
    proficiency in English might resort to using a proxy to take an English
    language test (para 57).

11.  In assessing the appellant's evidence I note that at both  the  hearing
    before Judge Sweet and before Judge Paul the appellant was able to give
    a detailed account of why he had chosen the test centre, his journey to
    the test centre and the constituent elements of  the  actual  tests  he
    took in May, June and July 2012.  No aspects of  his  description  have
    been challenged by Ms Everett. I also take into  account  that  he  had
    already obtained an access certificate  in  accounting  and  management
    awarded by London College of Accountancy in September 2010 and that  he
    had obtained an MBA at Anglia Ruskin University in September  2012.  He
    had also obtained an MSc from a college in  Pakistan  whose  medium  of
    instruction was English.

12.    I have taken account of the ETS findings, which were  that  both  the
    tests taken by the appellant in June and July 2012  were  invalid.  The
    appellant has not adduced any evidence from the test centre  itself  in
    terms of the voice recording, although it is not disputed by Ms Everett
    that the appellant did attempt to contact the test  centre  at  college
    when he learnt of the respondent's decision. He had said  that  he  had
    made numerous calls and then when he visited was astonished to find  it
    no longer existed and nobody at the building was able  to  provide  any
    forwarding address. It counts against the appellant  that  he  took  no
    steps to obtain the voice recordings, but, like the Tribunal in SM  and
    Qadir I must also take account of the shortcomings and frailties in the
    respondent's generic evidence.

13.  Having considered the evidence as a whole, I agree with Mr  Biggs  that
    the appellant's evidence before  me  should  be  accorded  considerable
    significance. I consider his evidence before  me  had  two  dimensions.
    First, it is clear that even now he is not fluent in  English  and  not
    much has changed since Judge Paul assessed that his "language  speaking
    skills [demonstrated  that]  he  was  a  poor  communicator  having  to
    repeatedly offer further  explanations  to  my  questions"  (para  18).
    Second, at the same time, I found him ingenuous in his  description  of
    what had in fact happened. Whilst he found it hard  to  admit,  he  had
    plainly been overconfident about his abilities to  pass  the  Listening
    and Reading test on 19 June. He clearly believed that because he had an
    exemption from English language requirements when he came to the UK and
    because he had been able to successfully pursue an MBA in this country,
    that he could pass these tests without difficulty. It was only when  he
    learnt  that  he  had  failed  that  he  undertook  full   and   proper
    preparation. I am prepared to accept that he  genuinely  took  the  two
    tests and that in relation to the Listening and  Reading  test  he  was
    able to improve significantly between 19 June 2012 and 11 July. I  note
    that in his account to Judge Sweet it was noted that his  evidence  was
    that "he had done a lot of practice between the two tests  as  he  only
    obtained 140 points on the first speaking and writing test on 19th June
    2012". That was not a new point raised for the first time before me.

14.  In  reaching  my  assessment  I  have  considered  the  fact  that  the
    explanation he gave before me (and prefaced  in  his  grounds  for  the
    error of law hearing) was different from that which he had  been  taken
    to provide before Judge Paul. However, having heard him  give  evidence
    before me, I consider that there is a strong possibility he  failed  to
    explain himself very well before Judge Paul. What he meant to convey by
    referring to the MBA exams was principally, I believe, that these three
    months in his life  were a stressful time for him as he had to take his
    last MBA exam in April and then his TOEIC/ETS exams,  starting  in  May
    2012, and then in June and July.

15.  In reaching my assessment I  have  also  considered  whether  to  count
    against the credibility of his explanation that even now his ability to
    communication in English is relatively weak, a factor which  was  taken
    by  Judge Paul to indicate that he was  not  capable  of  scoring   190
    points (a level 8) in Listening and Reading on the second occasion.  In
    this regard I consider that the appellant strikes me as an example of a
     foreign student whose communication skills  are limited  but  who  has
    nevertheless been able to pass the requisite exams in the UK only  when
    he has laboured hard and benefitted from the  many  revision  aids  now
    available, such as online example papers. I am  satisfied  that  it  is
    likely that he did manage by preparing hard to achieve a level 8 at the
    second attempt.  I considered he has provided an  innocent  explanation
    regarding the circumstances in which he took his TOEIC/ETS tests.

16.  I also bear in mind, that although once the respondent  discharged  the
    initial evidential burden the appellant then has to provide an innocent
    explanation,  the  legal  burden  of  proof  rest  ultimately  on   the
    respondent and at the end of  the  day  I  do  not  consider  that  the
    respondent has discharged that burden in this case. The fact  that  the
    appellant's test result for June 19 as well as for  11  July  2012  was
    classed as invalid means that reliance upon  an  implausible  level  of
    improvement between the test tests is questionable, since  it  requires
    considering why the unlikelihood that the appellant would have employed
    a proxy taker who was inept.

17.  The appellant's is a human rights appeal. It is not in dispute that  if
    he can be accepted to provide an innocent explanation in respect of the
    2012  tests  (and  I  have  so  accepted)  then  the  decision  of  the
    respondent, heavily reliant as it was on the allegation  of  deception,
    cannot be considered a proportionate one.

18.  To conclude:

         I have already set  aside  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Paul  for
             material error of law.


         The decision I re-make is to allow the appellant's appeal on  human
         rights grounds.


No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 23 July 2019

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

