
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02174/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 June 2014                                 |On 29th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            TAHIR MAHMOOD BASHIR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Qureshi, Fawad Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Tahir Mahmood Bashir, was born on 25 April 1983 and is a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  In a decision dated 30  December  2013,  the
    appellant was refused further leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.   The  appellant  appealed  against
    that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Watters)  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 13 March 2014, dismissed his appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. It is not in dispute that, when the appellant submitted his application
    for further leave to remain  on  26  November  2013,  his  sponsor  (St
    Alban's College Limited) was a Highly Trusted Sponsor but, by the  time
    the application was considered and a decision made by  the  respondent,
    it had become a "legacy" sponsor whose  CAS  would  only  be  valid  if
    assigned to a student who was resitting or repeating a module in  order
    to complete a course of study that they had already commenced with that
    sponsor.  The appellant was a new (and not a returning) student seeking
    to study at the college and, for that reason, he received  zero  points
    for "Attributes - Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies" (CAS).

 3. Mr Diwncyz, for the respondent, acknowledged that there was no apparent
    difference between  the  appellant's  circumstances  and  those  of  an
    applicant whose sponsor had been removed from the register but who  had
    been given the opportunity, within a 60 day period, to obtain a new CAS
    for submission with his original application.  There is no dispute that
    the appellant was wholly unaware of the decision of the respondent on 5
    December 2013 (that is, after he  had  submitted  his  application  for
    further leave to remain)  to  change  the  status  of  the  appellant's
    sponsor nor is there any suggestion whatever  that  the  appellant  was
    involved in the downgrading of the sponsor's status.  I find that  this
    is one of those relatively unusual cases where common law principles of
    fairness  are  engaged  with  the  consequence  that  the  respondent's
    decision is to found to be not in accordance with the law;  Mr  Diwncyz
    did not seek to persuade me otherwise.  The proper course of action  is
    for the appeal to be allowed and the  decision  remade  such  that  the
    appellant's  application  for   further   leave   to   remain   remains
    outstanding.  It is to be expected that the respondent will provide the
    appellant with a 60 day period in which to locate  a  new  sponsor  and
    obtain  a  valid  CAS  for  submission  in  support  of  his   original
    application.

 4. Finally, the judge's  determination  in  respect  of  the  respondent's
    decision to remove the appellant under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 is also  incorrect.   The  decision  in
    this appeal was taken after 8 May 2013, the date on which Section 51 of
    the Crime and Courts Act 2013 became effective.  There was,  therefore,
    nothing wrong with the conclusion of a decision to remove the appellant
    in the same notice and the decision to  refuse  him  further  leave  to
    remain.

DECISION

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    13 March 2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appeal is
    allowed and, accordingly, the appellant's application for further leave
    to remain remains outstanding before the Secretary of State.


Signed                              Date 25 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
