
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02730/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28th January 2015                          |    On 9th February 2015     |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MRS NHOMEMANY XAYPANYA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                             REMITTAL & REASONS


   1. In this decision notice I will refer to the parties in  the  style  in
      which they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a female citizen of Laos, born 15  April  1983.   The
      appellant is married to a UK citizen, Mr Richard Thomas.

   3. The appellant first  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in
      December 2008 and re-entered as such on at least one further occasion.
       Subsequently she entered as a visitor for marriage with  leave  valid
      until 1 December 2010.  The  appellant  subsequently  applied  to  the
      respondent for leave to remain as the spouse of a UK citizen, but on 5
      November 2013 the respondent made a decision refusing the  application
      on the basis that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules and in particular Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision before Judge of the First-
      Tier Tribunal Archer on 15 September 2014.  There was an oral  hearing
      and the appellant was represented by her husband, the sponsor.

   5. In a determination dated 26 September 2014, Judge Archer accepted that
      the appellant's marriage was genuine and subsisting, but  found  there
      was no  evidence  that  the  financial  or  language  requirements  of
      Appendix FM had been met and  that  therefore  the  appeal  could  not
      succeed under the rules.  Paragraph 22 of the determination  concluded
      with the sentence "there is no evidence that the requirements  of  the
      rules will be met in the near future".

   6. Having found against the appellant "under the rules" Judge Archer went
      onto consider "the 1950 Convention".

   7. Judge Archer reminded himself of the Court of Appeal  decision  in  MF
      (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and then  went  onto  conduct  a
      balancing  exercise  as  referred  to   in   paragraph   26   of   his
      determination.  He concluded at  paragraph  30  that  removal  of  the
      appellant would not be proportionate to the  legitimate  objective  of
      enforcing immigration control and allowed the appeal under  the  "1950
      Convention".

   8. The respondent sought leave to  appeal  that  decision,  arguing  that
      Judge Archer had failed to give reasons or adequate reasons for making
      his findings, and that he had erred in his approach to the  Article  8
      assessment of the case.

   9. In particular the respondent argued that Judge Archer  had  failed  to
      properly apply MF (Nigeria)  in  acknowledging  that  the  Immigration
      Rules were a complete code and that the judge had failed to take  into
      account Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
      Admin.  Paragraph 6 of the grounds contended that the judge had failed
      to adequately give reasons  why  the  appellant's  circumstances  were
      either exceptional or compelling.

  10. In granting leave to appeal another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      noted that it was evident from the determination  that  the  appellant
      could not meet the requirements of the rules, but that it was  unclear
      from the determination why the appellant's case could be  regarded  as
      exceptional or compelling so as to deal with it outside the rules.

  11. Thus that matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.

  12. As indicated above Mr Richards appeared for the  Secretary  of  State.
      There was no appearance either by the appellant or  her  husband  (the
      sponsor).  I note from the file that notice of the hearing was sent to
      appellant and the sponsor at their last known address, and I  consider
      it appropriate therefore to proceed to deal with this  appeal  in  the
      absence of the appellant.
  13. Mr Richards relied upon the grounds alleging error.   I  indicated  to
      him that I considered there was a  material  error  or  law  contained
      within Judge Archer's determination and that it fell to be set  aside.
      I indicated that there was insufficient fact finding  which  prevented
      me from proceeding to deal with the appeal and that it would therefore
      be appropriate to remit the case back to  the  First-Tribunal.   There
      had been no challenge to the judge's decision in respect of the appeal
      "under the rules", his findings and decision in respect of that aspect
      of the determination must be preserved and stand.

  14. There is no challenge to the judge's determination up to and including
      paragraph 23.  The judge could quite clearly have  come  to  no  other
      decision by reason of the earnings of the sponsor and the lack of  any
      English Language Certificate as required by the Immigration Rules.

  15. The respondent has alleged that the judge failed to  give  reasons  or
      adequate reasons for finding that he could allow  the  appeal  outside
      the Immigration Rules by reference to Article 8.   I  have  to  agree.
      Whilst the judge quite properly sets out some of the factors  that  he
      should take into account in the consideration of such  an  appeal,  he
      has fallen into error in adequately explaining why he  could  look  at
      the  appeal  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  acknowledges  the
      proportionality test, but fails to give explanation as to why he could
      reach a stage whereby proportionality was in issue.

  16. The respondent refers to Gulshan and the need to consider such matters
      as "exceptional and compelling".  Whilst the law  has  moved  on  from
      Gulshan it is still incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  explain  why  the
      circumstances of this case meant that he  could  move  onto  a  "stand
      alone" Article 8 consideration.  It may well be  the  case  that  such
      consideration should be given to the case, but there  is  no  adequate
      explanation as to why circumstances of this couple  required  it.   In
      failing to do this the judge has erred in law, I consider  that  error
      to be material.

  17. For these reasons the determination must be  set  aside.   I  consider
      that the case  falls  within  the  criteria  set  out  in  the  Senior
      Presidents direction and I accordingly remit the case back  to  First-
      Tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge Archer.

  18. As indicated above there was no challenge to the judge's findings  and
      decision under the Immigration Rules, and those findings and  decision
      must stand.  I do not consider it appropriate to preserve any of Judge
      Archer's findings from paragraph 24 onwards and it  will  be  for  the
      next judge to only consider the Article 8 aspects of  the  appellant's
      case.

Decision

  19. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and the  case  it  remitted
      back to the First-Tier Tribunal.

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
