
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02811/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 October 2014                        |On 23 October 2014               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Coffie Osei
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Harris, Counsel instructed by Harperbell
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decision of the respondent to refuse him  a
    residence card in accordance with the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal   allowed   the   appeal   without   further
    qualification and I am quite  satisfied  that  that  was  an  erroneous
    decision.  I say that because the claim  was  based  upon  a  customary
    marriage between the appellant and  a  citizen  of  Germany  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom but there was  no  evidence  before
    the Tribunal to show that  the  laws  of  Germany  recognise  customary
    marriages of the kind that was said to have taken place here.  That  is
    a fundamental omission as was  explained  in  the  decision  of  Kareem
    (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  0024  (IAC).   I  am  therefore
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  should  not  allow  the  appeal
    outright and I set aside the decision.

 3. However, I have to ask myself if the First-tier Tribunal was  satisfied
    that there was a durable relationship between  the  appellant  and  his
    alleged spouse. At paragraph 1 of the determination the judge  says  of
    the appellant and partner:

         "they claimed to have been living together since 2010".

    At  the  very  end  of  the  determination  in  paragraph   17,   after
    acknowledging that the Secretary of State did not believe the  claimant
    and his purported partner, said:

         "I form a very different  view,  having  not  only  considered  the
         answers in detail but also seen the witnesses as  they  gave  their
         evidence.  I formed  the  view  that  I  was  listening  to  honest
         witnesses."

 4. It is clear to me that the found that the  claimant  and  partner  were
    living in a durable relationship.

 5. As Mr Tufan reminded me that I  have  no  power  to  allow  the  appeal
    outright.  Matters like this are within a discretion  that  has  to  be
    exercised by the Secretary of State. What I should do is what the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should have done which is to allow  the  appeal  to
    the extent that the decision is not in accordance with  the  law.   The
    Secretary of State must apply the facts heard by the  Tribunal  to  her
    policies and the law as she understands it and exercise her  discretion
    accordingly.

 6. Mr Tufan endeavoured to make  a  separate  point  which  was  that  the
    reasons supporting the finding that the claimant was part of a  durable
    relationship were just inadequate.  It is often very difficult  to  say
    with any confidence that reasons are inadequate as a matter of law  and
    Mr Tufan's efforts were frustrated by the point not really being  taken
    in the grounds.  The best he could do was to rely  on  ground  6  which
    says "no evidence of a durable relationship had been  provided".   That
    was just wrong.  There was evidence of a durable relationship.  It  was
    the oral evidence of the witnesses who the judge believed.

 7. I realise from the Reasons for Refusal Letter if I did not know  anyway
    that the Secretary of State would much have preferred to have  received
    documentary evidence showing that the couple had  lived  together.   If
    such evidence was available then the appellant and his  partner  should
    not have been reluctant to produce it but as a matter of law it is  not
    necessary. Although Mr Tufan says that the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
    made it plain that there were many inconsistencies I am  not  satisfied
    that is a justified observation.  Certainly there were  differences  in
    the accounts but there were also marked similarities  in  the  accounts
    and I am certainly not prepared to move from the very veiled  criticism
    in ground 6  to  permit  an  argument  that  the  positive  credibility
    findings were perverse or otherwise wrong  in  law  when  that  is  not
    clearly the case.

 8. My decision is that the appeal is allowed to the  limited  extent  that
    the appeal should not have  been  allowed  under  the  Regulations  but
    should have been remitted to the Secretary of  State  to  exercise  her
    discretion and that is the order that I make.
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 October 2014                |

