
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02063/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2016                            |On 9 January 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                Mr ANKIT SHAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Lourdes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of India born on 19 July 1987, applied
    for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

 2. On 25 April 2016 his application was refused.

 3. On 29 April 2016 he lodged an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal where
    he opted, and paid the fee, for his case to be determined on the papers
    without an oral hearing.

 4. On 21 June 2016 the appellant was sent a letter from the Tribunal
    confirming his appeal would be on the papers without a hearing and
    giving him a deadline of 19 July 2016 to submit written evidence.

 5. On 26 June 2016 the appellant wrote to the Tribunal to request an oral
    hearing.  In his letter he undertook to pay the additional fee and
    stated that he would now wait for the Tribunal's response. The letter
    was sent by fax (with transmission report retained as evidence) and
    correctly addressed.

 6. On 20 July 2016 the matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Row
    who decided the appeal solely on the papers. At paragraph 7 of his
    decision Judge Row stated that neither party had requested an oral
    hearing.

 7. The grounds of appeal argue that it was unfair for the hearing to
    proceed on the papers when an oral hearing had been requested.

 8. Before me, Mr Walker accepted that if the letter of 26 June 2016 had
    been dealt with properly, the appeal would have been relisted for an
    oral hearing.  He noted that the appellant had informed the Tribunal
    soon after the appeal was lodged.  Mr Walker's view was that the
    appropriate course of action, given that the issue was one of fairness,
    would be for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr
    Lourdes, on behalf of the appellant, agreed with Mr Walker.

 9. I agree with the parties that this is a case of procedural unfairness
    arising from an administrative error. The appellant's letter of 26 June
    2016 was sent less than a month after he lodged the appeal and
    unambiguously requested an oral hearing.  It was reasonable for the
    appellant to wait for a response and understandable that he did not
    submit evidence for a decision on the papers by the stipulated deadline
    of 19 July 2016 whilst he was waiting for a response to his letter of
    26 June 2016.

10. The consequence of the administrative error in not responding to the
    appellant's letter of 26 June 2016 or addressing the request therein
    was both that:

    (a)  the appeal was decided on the papers when the appellant wanted it
         decided following an oral hearing, and

    (b)  the decision on the papers was made without the benefit of
         evidence the appellant would have submitted had he known that the
         case was proceeding without a hearing, notwithstanding his request
         for a hearing.

11. In these circumstances I am satisfied that procedural unfairness has
    given rise to an error of law. In finding an error of law no criticism
    is made of Judge Row who was clearly not aware of the letter of 26 June
    2016.

12. Having regard to Section 7.2(a) of the President's Practice Statement,
    I am in agreement with both parties that the appeal should be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

  A. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
     law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal
     heard afresh.


  B. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for an oral hearing
     before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Row.



|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 6 January 2017                |

