
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02822/2015
                                                               ia/02830/2015
                                                               ia/02833/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18th February 2016                 |On 14th March 2016                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                            A M (FIRST appellant)
                           Z A S (SECOND appellant)
                            F A (THIRD appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Muguit, Counsel for Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors, Ilford
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan born on 3rd October 1985,  20th
    January 1982 and 20th March 2014 respectively.  The  Second  and  Third
    Appellants are dependent on the First  Appellant.   I  shall  call  the
    First  Appellant  "the  Appellant"  throughout  this   decision.    The
    Appellants appealed against the Respondent's decisions of  6th  January
    2015, refusing the Appellant's application for further leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant and the Second
    and Third Appellants' applications for leave to remain in line with the
    Appellant.  The appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Cas O'Garro on 30th July 2015.  She dismissed  the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights issues in a decision  promulgated
    on 26th August 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly  on  29th  December
    2015.  He found that it was arguable that the Tribunal  had  failed  to
    make its own assessment of the issues raised by the appellant's  appeal
    but instead had  confined  itself  to  an  assessment  of  whether  the
    Respondent's decision was reasonably open to  her  upon  the  evidence.
    The method used by the judge was stated  in  the  grounds  to  be  that
    appropriate to the conduct of a judicial review.  The permission states
    that it is also arguable that the Tribunal erred in law by treating the
    prohibition under Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002, against admission of post-application documents  in  relation
    to "points scoring reasons" as if it were also applicable  to  a  "non-
    points scoring reason". This was in spite of a clear distinction having
    been made by the Respondent between the two types  of  reasons  in  her
    reasons for  refusal  letter.   The  permission  states  that  this  is
    particularly applicable when related to the  Respondent's  reasons  for
    refusing the application on the basis that it had not been proved  that
    the Appellant's business was viable, (a non points-scoring  reason)  in
    respect of which further evidence had been adduced at  the  hearing  of
    the appeal.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response dated 5th January 2016.  This  states  that
    the case of Ahmed and Another (PBS admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365
    (IAC) applies in this case.  The Rule 24 response quotes  the  headnote
    of this case:


         "Where a  provision  of  the  Rules  (such  as  that  in  paragraph
         245DD(k)) provides that points will not be awarded if the decision-
         maker is not satisfied as to another (non-points-scoring) aspect of
         the Rule, the non-points-scoring aspect  and  the  requirement  for
         points are inextricably linked.


         As a result, the prohibition on new evidence in Section  85A(4)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to the non-
         points-scoring aspect of the Rule: the prohibition is  in  relation
         to new evidence that goes to the scoring of points."


     The response states that the judge was constrained  from  consideration
    of the new evidence.


The Hearing


 4. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that he  was  not  challenging  the
    said case of Ahmed re admissibility and that that ground is  not  being
    pursued.

 5. Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  used  too  narrow  a  focus  when
    deliberating what was before  her.   He  submitted  that  she  made  no
    specific findings evaluating the  evidence  herself  but  instead  only
    considered the findings  in  the  refusal  letter.  He  submitted  that
    because of this the decision is flawed.  He submitted that paragraphs 4
    to 13 deal with the refusal letter and what the Respondent  found.   He
    submitted that the judge lists the evidence given  at  the  hearing  at
    paragraphs 20 to 26 but instead of assessing this  herself,  under  the
    heading  "Consideration  and  Findings"  she  again  returns   to   the
    Respondent's findings in the refusal letter.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge did not conduct her own
    view of the evidence. He submitted that she was entitled to review what
    was before the Respondent at the date of decision.  He  submitted  that
    the judge was constrained by the evidence before her as  some  of  this
    evidence was not submitted with the application and  so  could  not  be
    considered by her.  He submitted that all the judge could do  was  look
    at the refusal letter to see if, based on what was submitted  with  the
    application, the Respondent's decision was reasonable and he  submitted
    that she did this and she reached her conclusion based on  this,  which
    she was entitled to do.

 7. The Presenting Officer referred  me  to  the  said  case  of  Ahmed  at
    paragraphs 7 and 8.  He submitted that any finding on  the  genuineness
    of the application is linked  to  the  acquisition  of  points  so  new
    evidence about this could not be considered by the judge.

 8. He submitted therefore that all the judge could do was look at what was
    before the  Secretary  of  State  and  decide  if  there  was  anything
    fundamental in the Secretary of State's findings which could  have  led
    the judge to reach a different decision.  He submitted that  the  judge
    found that the Secretary of State's decision was  fair  and  reasonable
    and there was very little scope for her to consider anything else.

 9. Counsel submitted that the Presenting Officer  is  re-perpetrating  the
    error of the First-tier Judge.  He submitted that to say that the judge
    is obliged to accept the Respondent's conclusion unless it seems to  be
    unreasonable is too narrow a take on how the  judge  should  reach  her
    decision.  He submitted that the judge needs  to  decide  for  herself,
    based on what was submitted with the application, whether  the  refusal
    letter is perverse  or  unreasonable.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    misread the case of Ahmed.  I was referred to paragraph 5 of that case.
     He submitted that this sets out the parameters to enable the judge  to
    come to her decision.  Paragraph 5 states:


         "Where  a  Points  Based  application  is  made  and  refused,  the
         assessment by the Judge is to be of the material  that  was  before
         the decision-maker rather than a new consideration of new material.
          In other words the appeal if it is successful is on the basis that
         the decision-maker with the material before him should have made  a
         different decision, not on  the  basis  that  a  different  way  of
         presenting  the  application  would  have  produced   a   different
         decision".


     Counsel submitted that the judge was constrained regarding  looking  at
    new evidence but she does have to look at the evidence which was before
    the Secretary of State and come to her own conclusion based on this.

10. Counsel submitted that the judge is able to consider the genuineness of
    the scheme based on what was submitted with the application and  it  is
    possible that when  this  is  considered,  the  judge  might  reach  an
    alternative conclusion.

11. He submitted that the judge made an error of law in her decision as she
    did not evaluate the evidence herself.





Decision and Reasons

12. Paragraphs 4 to 13 of the  First-tier  Judge's  decision  set  out  the
    Respondent's findings in the refusal  letter.  Although  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 20 to 26 refers to the evidence before her, when  she  makes
    her decision she does not assess what was before the First-tier  judge,
    she again refers to the Respondent's findings  in  the  refusal  letter
    (paragraphs 32 to 35).

13. The judge was correct not to consider any postdecision evidence but  if
    it was the case that the judge was constrained to such an  extent  that
    she could only consider what the Respondent's findings were, then every
    case would fail.  That is not the purpose  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge has to consider the evidence which  was  submitted  with  the
    application and was before the Respondent and decide if it was possible
    for the Respondent to have reached an alternative conclusion  based  on
    this.  The judge did not do this.

14. Based on the evidence submitted with the application it is clear that a
    different decision might well have been reached by the  judge  had  she
    assessed the evidence herself.





Notice of Decision

15. There is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    promulgated on 26th August 2015 and that decision must be set aside.

16. No findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  can  stand.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider  a
    case are not to include Judge C A S O'Garro.

17. Anonymity has been directed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


