
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02669/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2014                          |On 12 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                M M F K AWAN
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Lighthouse,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by Judge O'Garro,  promulgated
    on 15 July 2014, allowing the appellant's  appeal  against  refusal  of
    leave to remain in the UK as the partner of a UK citizen,  outwith  the
    Rules, on the basis of Article 8 of ECHR.  The  grounds  are  that  the
    judge failed to identify any compelling circumstances not  sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules.

 3. I do  not  find  either  the  respondent's  original  decision  or  the
    determination very well explained; but  it  is  plain  that  the  judge
    thought that the case ultimately turned on an issue similar to that  in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, whether it was proportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant to apply for leave from abroad.  The  appellant  did  not  do
    much to show that an application made from abroad would  succeed.   The
    judge has said little to explain why she thought an  application  would
    succeed in all respects but the requirement to  make  it  from  abroad.
    However, the grounds do not say it was an error to approach this  as  a
    "Chikwamba case".   Nor do they contain anything to suggest  that  once
    identified as such, the judge should have resolved  it  otherwise  than
    she did.

 4. The determination shall stand.



            [pic]


            11 November 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




