
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02456/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 May 2015                                |On 9 June 2015                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                       mrs denise nichola henry-burton
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel instructed via Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision to  refuse
    her application for leave to remain on the grounds that  removal  would
    not place the United Kingdom in breach of  its  obligations  under  the
    Human Rights Act 1998, and  to  give  directions  for  her  removal  to
    Jamaica under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   The
    First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do  not
    consider that the appellant should  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica,  whose  date  of  birth  is  10
    October 1973.  She entered the United Kingdom on 6 June 1999,  and  was
    granted leave to enter for one month.  On 17 June 1999 she applied  for
    leave to remain in the UK as a student,  and  this  leave  was  granted
    until 31 October 2002.  On 19 November 2002  she  married  her  British
    citizen partner, and lived with  him  in  the  UK  thereafter.   On  22
    January 2003 she applied for leave to remain  as  his  spouse.   On  29
    April 2004 her application for leave to remain as a spouse was refused,
    and she was served with an IS151A notice informing her of  a  liability
    to removal.  An IS151B notice was subsequently issued  to  her,  giving
    her an in-country right of appeal.  The appellant exercised this  right
    of appeal.  On 5 May 2006 her appeal came before  Judge  Markham  David
    sitting at Taylor House.  Both parties were  legally  represented.   In
    her evidence, the appellant said she had  ceased  studying  in  October
    2001.  She agreed she had not informed the Home  Office  that  she  had
    stopped studying.  She had discussed the question  of  her  immigration
    status with her husband.  They decided it was better for them to settle
    here in the UK because it was easier for her to adapt to life here than
    it was for her husband to adapt to  life  in  Jamaica.   She  said  her
    husband would not go with her to Jamaica to settle, but he could go for
    a short time.  She agreed that in Jamaica she had her parents  and  her
    two sisters and her 9 year old son.

 3. Her husband, Anthony John Burton, gave evidence.  He said  he  was  not
    ready to go with the appellant  to  Jamaica,  and  he  might  lose  his
    council flat if he went even for a short period.  He  had  had  various
    jobs since their marriage, but his last proper job was two  years  ago.
    His rent was paid by housing benefit.

 4. Judge Markham David found that the  marriage  was  subsisting  and  the
    parties intended to live permanently with each other.  He found against
    the appellant on the issue of proportionality.  In his view, there were
    no circumstances in the case which could possibly be described as truly
    exceptional.  The appellant had failed to observe the Rules:

         It  may  be  the  Secretary  of  State  was  feeling   particularly
         charitable, he might decide it was not necessary for the  appellant
         to return to Jamaica to apply for leave to enter in accordance with
         the Rules.  However, that is entirely a matter for the Secretary of
         State.  It is quite clear that in this case, as in the majority  of
         cases, the maintenance of effective policy of  immigration  control
         outweighs all over factors.

 5. On 5 June 2006 the appellant sought reconsideration by way  of  a  High
    Court review, and on 19 June 2006 this was refused.  She became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 29 June 2006.

 6. On 3 July 2006 Greenland Lawyers LLP wrote to the FLRM Unit of UKBA  in
    Durham on the appellant's behalf.  They said they had  been  instructed
    to  apply  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  him  to  look   on   her
    compassionately in consideration of her matter and to grant her further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom  with  her  husband  for  another
    twelve months.  This request was made exceptionally, having  regard  to
    her particular circumstances.  She was a citizen of Jamaica,  had  been
    living in the United Kingdom with her husband for  nearly  four  years.
    She had strong family ties in the United Kingdom in  the  form  of  his
    brother, aunts, mother-in-law etc. all of whom are present and  settled
    in the United Kingdom.  She had established a private life and lived as
    part of a family unit in the United Kingdom with her  husband  Mr  John
    Burton.  In the accompanying application form, the appellant  said  she
    was not working in the UK, and her husband was  a  jobseeker.   He  was
    receiving income support.

 7. A refusal  decision  was  prepared  in  respect  of  this  application.
    According to internal records,  the  refusal  decision  was  "outcomed"
    against the appellant on 26 September  2006.   However,  the  appellant
    appears not to have been served with the decision, and she was  induced
    to believe  that  her  application  was  still  pending  in  subsequent
    correspondence (see below).

 8. The grounds of refusal  were  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 284 of the Rules for an extension of stay  in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of a person present and settled  here.
    As an overstayer, the appellant failed to meet  at  least  one  of  the
    criteria.   Notwithstanding  that,  guidelines  to  do  with   marriage
    applications and enforcement cases (DP3/96) might allow leave to remain
    to be granted outside the Rules if:

       . the marriage is genuinely subsisting;

       . it predates the service of an enforcement notice by  at  least  two
         years; and

       . it is unreasonable  to  expect  the  settled  spouse  to  accompany
         his/her spouse on removal.

 9. The appellant did not  fall  within  these  guidelines.   Consideration
    nonetheless had been given to whether it  be  right  to  allow  her  to
    remain exceptionally, outside the Rules, taking into account the United
    Kingdom's obligations under the ECHR, with specific regard to Article 8
    of the Convention.  The appellant's removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would not  amount  to  a  breach  of  Article  8  since  there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to her spouse accompanying  the  appellant  to
    Jamaica should this be his wish.

10. On 18 December 2008 the Deputy Chief Executive of UKBA  wrote  to  John
    Austin MP with reference to the appellant's case.   He  confirmed  that
    her application was still awaiting consideration.  That UKBA  can  only
    take a case out of term in very limited circumstances.  This was  where
    the case had been seriously mishandled, or where there was  information
    which  had  not  been  previously  considered,  or  where  there   were
    compelling and compassionate  circumstances.   None  of  these  factors
    applied in her case, as no reason  has  been  put  forward  that  would
    justify proceeding with her case ahead of others.

11. Greenland Lawyers LLP sent a chasing letter on 5 October  2009,  and  a
    different firm of solicitors sent a chasing letter  on  24  July  2012.
    The same firm provided an update to UKBA on 21 May 2013.  They wrote to
    advise UKBA of a significant change in their appellant's  circumstances
    which impacted on her case.  Her husband of over ten  years  had  sadly
    passed away on 12 May 2013.  Their client was devastated by the loss of
    her husband. Their client's case had  been  outstanding  for  over  six
    years, and numerous letters had been sent to  UKBA  expressing  concern
    about the undue delay in determining her case.  Although the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements under the Rules for  bereaved  spouses,
    nonetheless the Secretary of State had  wide  discretionary  powers  to
    grant leave in exceptional cases.  Their client had established  family
    life with her now late husband's family and her relatives  in  the  UK.
    She had remained here with a  legitimate  expectation  that  she  would
    eventually acquire leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

12. The Immigration  Advice  Service  made  further  representations  on  8
    October 2013.  The appellant  remained  very  close  to  her  husband's
    family, and she lived with her husband's mother.  She also looked after
    her ill brother who was a British citizen and settled  in  the  UK,  Mr
    Stafford Henry.  He was separated from his wife and lived alone.

13. In a letter dated 2 September 2013  Mr  Stafford  Henry  said  that  he
    wished he could do more for his sister, but he  suffered  from  chronic
    cluster headaches and, she being his only relative, he tended  to  lean
    on her for emotional support.  She had taken on the role of carer where
    his illness was concerned.  She was the person who accompanied  her  to
    consultant appointments and the  person  that  he  called  whenever  he
    suffered an acute attack, which might vary from two to five  days  some
    weeks.

14. In a letter dated 12 September 2013,  Ms  Janet  Smith  said  that  the
    appellant was still very much part of their family and  she  loved  her
    dearly like a daughter.  The appellant had had to give  up  the  former
    matrimonial home as a result  of  her  status.   She  had  invited  the
    appellant to live with "us", as this was what  her  son  Anthony  would
    have wanted.  Also, with her not being able to work, this was the  best
    they could do for her as a family.

The Reasons for Refusal

15. On 16 December 2013  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her  reasons  for
    refusing her application which had been outstanding since 2006.  Police
    records showed that the appellant received a warning on 11 August  2006
    for  sexual  offences.   The  appellant  had  not  complied  with   the
    conditions of her leave to remain in the UK as a student.   She  ceased
    studying in October 2001 but failed to inform the Home Office that  she
    was no longer studying, thereby failing to observe  the  Rules.   After
    her  student  leave  ran  out,  she  then  spent  a  number  of  months
    overstaying  before  contacting  the  Home  Office  to   make   a   new
    application.  There had been a specific delay in  the  amount  of  time
    that the appellant had been waiting for a decision on  her  application
    of 3 July 2006.  The Home Office did in fact  make  a  decision  on  26
    September 2006 to refuse her application, but an error was made and  it
    did not appear to have been served on her.  It  was  claimed  that  her
    application would have been granted had it  not  been  for  maintenance
    issues.  This was not the case.  Her application of  3  July  2006  had
    been refused because there was no new information to consider and there
    were  no  exceptional  circumstances  to   prevent   the   relationship
    continuing in Jamaica.  Following the dismissal of her  appeal  in  May
    2006, the appellant was  fully  aware  of  her  precarious  immigration
    status and that, because her circumstances were still the same, she was
    also aware that any new application she made would be very likely to be
    refused.  Despite this, she chose to continue to remain in the  UK  and
    made no attempt to return to Jamaica.  Whilst the delay in  considering
    the application was regrettable, this was  not  sufficient  to  justify
    granting the appellant leave to remain in the UK.

16. It was noted that the appellant stated she provided a caring role for a
    British citizen brother who suffered from headaches.  But  her  brother
    could obtain help from the local authorities if required.   No  medical
    evidence had been provided of his medical condition, or  the  level  of
    care that the appellant provided to him.  So this was not a  sufficient
    factor to justify granting the appellant leave on that ground.

17. Her circumstances had been considered in the round, and  whilst  delays
    involved in the case had been unfortunate, she had a  criminal  history
    and had shown disregard for the Immigration Rules.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

18. The appellant's appeal came before  Judge  Miles  sitting  at  Richmond
    Magistrates'  Court  on  22  July  2014.   Both  parties  were  legally
    represented.  The judge received oral evidence from the appellant,  her
    mother-in-law and her brother Mr Henry.  In cross-examination, Mr Henry
    said he had been separated from his wife  for  between  ten  or  twelve
    years.  He suffered from cluster headaches  for  thirteen  or  fourteen
    years, and had last worked about fourteen years ago.  He had last  gone
    to Jamaica for a funeral in June 2014 for three weeks.  He  was  taking
    medication for his headaches, and he  used  an  oxygen  cylinder  which
    helped.  If his sister went back, there was no-one to look  after  him.
    She was cooking him meals every two days.

19. In answer to questions from the judge, he stated he had to take  oxygen
    with him everywhere he went, and that included taking  a  small  oxygen
    cylinder when he travelled to Jamaica for  his  cousin's  funeral.   On
    that journey he had travelled with another cousin and  his  girlfriend.
    He suffered from about four headaches per  day  and  most  occurred  at
    night.  He was to see the consultant  in  2015  and  he  was  still  on
    medication.  He had never really enquired  about  support  from  social
    services.

20. In a comprehensive decision, the judge set out at some length the  oral
    evidence.  At paragraph [25] he set out the  background  facts  to  the
    application which were not materially disputed.  At paragraph  [26]  he
    said it was conceded on behalf of the respondent that  the  application
    should not have been considered  against  the  new  Immigration  Rules,
    given that it was made in July  2006.   The  judge  observed  that  her
    application on that basis was bound to fail  under  the  Rules  in  any
    event, because by the time the application was finally decided, she was
    a person without leave, as indeed was the case when she made her  first
    application for leave to remain as the spouse.

21. At paragraph [27] he said if he was wrong to find that the  application
    should not have  been  assessed  against  Appendix  FM,  the  appellant
    clearly could not succeed under Appendix FM.  He went on to consider an
    Article 8 claim outside the Rules,  in  accordance  with  the  guidance
    given in the Upper Tribunal  in  Shahzad  (Article  8  legitimate  aim)
    Pakistan [2014] UKUT 85.

22. At paragraph [28], he found the appellant did not have family  life  in
    the United Kingdom either with her mother-in-law or  her  brother.   In
    respect to the mother-in-law, although they were very close and treated
    each other like mother and daughter, Mrs Smith lived not only with  the
    appellant, but with her partner; and quite apart from  the  lack  of  a
    biological  relationship  between  them  there  was  no   evidence   of
    interdependence over and above that which might apply in the particular
    circumstances of a mother and daughter-in-law, who  have  both  lost  a
    close family member.

23. In terms of the relationship  with  her  brother,  they  did  not  live
    together and Mr Henry was supported financially by  the  state  without
    assistance from the appellant.  Although she clearly provided  a  great
    deal of sibling support to Mr Henry, the respondent was right to  point
    to the fact that he would be eligible for  appropriate  support   as  a
    British citizen in any event.  He was not satisfied there was a  degree
    of dependence between them to establish family life for the purposes of
    Article 8.

24. From paragraphs [29] onwards the judge addressed proportionality,  with
    specific reference to each of the three factors commented upon  by  the
    respondent in the refusal letter, including the  issue  of  delay.   At
    paragraph [30] he observed that while  the  removal  of  the  appellant
    would clearly disrupt significantly her relationship with her mother-in-
    law and her brother, it would mean that she would be reunited with  her
    own parents, siblings and her son who all lived  in  Jamaica  and  with
    whom she was  in  regular  contact.   Mr  Henry,  despite  his  medical
    condition, was able to travel to Jamaica recently for  the  funeral  of
    another family member, and there was thus no reason why that could  not
    continue.

25. The  judge  concluded  at  paragraph  [34]  that,  notwithstanding  the
    strength of private life that the  appellant  had  established  in  the
    United Kingdom, together with the delay in resolving  her  application,
    her removal would not  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  her
    rights under Article 8 ECHR or with the rights of her mother-in-law and
    brother in that regard, and would thus not be in breach  of  Article  8
    ECHR.

The Initial Refusal of Permission

26. The initial application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    was settled by the Immigration Advice Service, and the application  was
    refused by Judge Saffer on 3 December 2014.  He was not satisfied there
    was any arguable material error of law.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude the family life the appellant had with adult relatives did not
    go beyond those normally existing between adults.  Even if he was wrong
    in that, the judge carefully considered the relevant factors that  fell
    to be considered in the Article 8 proportionality  balancing  exercise.
    The grounds mainly disagree with the findings he was entitled to make.

The Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

27.  Mr  Andrew  Eaton,  who  did  not  appear  below,  settled  a  renewed
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Ground  1
    was the judge had erred in failing to applying the ratio of EB (Kosovo)
    v Secretary of State for Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 to the question
    of delay.  Ground 2 was the judge had failed to consider  Edgehill  and
    Another v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    402 when considering the appellant's length of residence.  Ground 3 was
    the judge had failed to consider the respondent's own policy  regarding
    carers.  Ground  4  was  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  applying  an
    exceptionality requirement to the  existence  of  further  evidence  of
    dependency  under  Kugathas  in  finding  there  was  no  evidence   of
    interdependence over and above that which might apply in the particular
    circumstances of a mother and daughter-in-law, who  have  both  lost  a
    close family member.

28. On 31 March 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted  permission  to
    appeal on all four grounds, although he was less persuaded  as  to  the
    arguable merits of ground 4.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

29. At the hearing before me, Mr Eaton developed the arguments advanced  in
    the permission application which he had drafted,  with  one  exception.
    Although he did not formally abandon ground 2, he acknowledged that  it
    was a much weaker ground following the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in Singh and Another v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74.

30. Ms Fijiwala addressed me on the remaining grounds, and  submitted  that
    no error of law was made out.

Discussion

31. Mr Eaton's main criticism of the judge's approach to  the  question  of
    delay is in respect of the judge's finding at paragraph [33]  that  the
    delay did not prejudice the appellant.  Mr Eaton submits that  this  is
    unsustainable, as if a decision by the respondent had been made  within
    a reasonable time, the appellant's husband would have still been alive,
    and so the appellant would have been able to continue to  rely  on  her
    relationship with her husband as strengthening her family life claim.

32. I consider it was open to the judge  to  find  the  appellant  was  not
    prejudiced by the delay, for the reason which he gave.  He acknowledged
    that the appellant had had  the  strain  of  having  to  wait  for  the
    decision and had suffered a sense of uncertainty as a result,  but  she
    was able to continue to live with her spouse throughout that time until
    his death, which was the basis of the application in the first place.

33. Indeed, the judge could  have  gone  further,  pointing  out  that  the
    application made in 2006 was only  for  the  appellant  to  be  granted
    discretionary leave to remain for a further period of twelve months. So
    by a decision on the application not having been made until some  seven
    years later, the appellant had obtained a de facto extension  of  leave
    seven times greater that  which  her  then  legal  representatives  had
    applied for on her behalf.

34. Mr Eaton referred me to the passage at paragraph [14]  of  EB  (Kosovo)
    where Lord Bingham observed that the applicant may during the period of
    any delay develop closer personal  social  ties  and  establish  deeper
    roots in the community than he could have shown  earlier.   The  longer
    the period of delay, the likelihood this is to be true.  To the  extent
    that it is true, the applicant's claim under Article 8 will necessarily
    be strengthened.

35. But as the claim under Article 8 is  thereby  strengthened,  the  delay
    operates  to  the  applicant's  advantage,  not  to   the   applicant's
    detriment.  The judge fully took into account the respects in which the
    appellant's Article 8 claim had been strengthened by  the  delay,  most
    notably by the length of her residence being extended from  some  eight
    years to some fifteen years.

36. Ground 2 was not pursued by  Mr  Eaton  in  the  light  of  the  recent
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Singh which confines  the  ambit  of
    Edgehill to a limited class of cases decided between  the  introduction
    of the new Rules on 9 July 2012 and an amendment to the new Rules later
    in 2012.

37. Even if Edgehill had applied, no error of law would have been disclosed
    by the judge's approach in paragraph [30].  The judge  assumed  in  the
    appellant's favour that her length of residence should be considered by
    reference to the old fourteen year Rule, and not by  reference  to  the
    new twenty year Rule  introduced  in  July  2012.   The  judge  rightly
    observed that the appellant could not have made  an  application  under
    the old Rule at any time prior to the implementation of the new  Rules.
    This was because, the judge found, she only  achieved  fourteen  years'
    continuous residence in June 2013, which was after the new  Immigration
    Rules had come into force.

38. In fact, the appellant could not have accrued fourteen years continuous
    residence under the old Rule until 2018, as the clock stopped  and  re-
    started for the appellant when she was served with an IS151A notice  in
    2004.  So there was an error in the judge's analysis which operated  in
    the appellant's favour, rather than to her detriment.

39. In Ground 3, Mr Eaton  relies  on  the  respondent's  policy  regarding
    carers as set out in  section  2  of  chapter  17  of  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions.  Of particular relevance  is  paragraph  17.5
    which provides as follows:

         If case workers are intending to  refuse  an  application  from  an
         applicant who wishes to provide care for a relative in the UK,  the
         Secretary of State must be able to  show  that  s/he  is  satisfied
         there  would  be  alternative  arrangements  for  care  should  the
         applicant not be available ... If social services are involved  the
         case worker should send them a letter asking whether the carer  has
         made alternative arrangements and if not what kind  of  alternative
         arrangements could be made.

40. There is no overt consideration of this policy by the respondent in the
    refusal letter, and the judge did not  refer  to  this  policy  in  the
    course of his proportionality assessment.

41. The appellant did not in terms seek leave to remain as  a  carer.   The
    assistance which she provided her brother was not the corner  stone  of
    her application, but a subsidiary consideration which the Secretary  of
    State was asked to take into account.

42. Paragraph 17.3 of the IDIs requires caseworkers to be  mindful  of  the
    following:

         Whilst each case must be looked at on its  individual  merits,  and
         considering whether a period of leave to remain should be  granted,
         the following points are amongst those which  should  be  borne  in
         mind by caseworkers:

           . the type of illness/condition (this should be supported  by  a
             consultant's letter); and

           . the type of care required; and

           . care which is available (e.g.  from  the  social  services  or
             other relatives/friends); and

           . the long term prognosis.

43. Paragraph 17.3.1 provides that initial leave will usually be granted to
    remain for three months on code 3 (no recourse to employment or  public
    funds) outside the Rules.  The applicant must be  informed  that  leave
    has been granted on the strict understanding that  during  this  period
    arrangements are made for the future care of the patient  by  a  person
    who is not subject to the Immigration Rules.

44. The obligation laid on the Secretary of State in paragraph 17.5 of  the
    IDIs needs to be viewed in the context of other aspects of the  policy,
    as adumbrated inter alia in paragraphs 17.3 and 17.3.1 above.

45. As the appellant did not in terms apply for leave to remain as a carer,
    I find that the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  in  terms  refuse  the
    appellant leave to remain as a carer, and therefore she was  not  under
    an obligation to show that  she  was  satisfied  that  there  would  be
    alternative arrangements for care should the appellant not be available
    to continue to assist her brother.

46. Moreover, the information which the caseworker is required to take into
    account under  paragraph  17.3  includes  information  which  only  the
    applicant can provide, including whether care is available  from  other
    relatives/friends.  Accordingly, as submitted Ms Fijiwala, I find  that
    an applicant has a duty to proffer information relevant to the exercise
    of  discretion  under  paragraph  17.3  as  a  necessary  precursor  to
    triggering the obligation on  the  Secretary  of  State  arising  under
    paragraph 17.5.

47. As a result of the additional evidence provided by way of  appeal,  the
    judge had more information within the ambit of paragraph 17.3 than that
    which had been provided in advance of the refusal decision.  But he was
    not asked to consider whether the appellant could thereby bring herself
    within the terms of the policy.  If he had been directed to the policy,
    he  would  have  noted  that  at  best  (and  ignoring  proportionality
    considerations) the appellant was only in line for an initial grant  of
    leave to remain of three  months,  on  the  strict  understanding  that
    during this period arrangements would be made for the  future  care  of
    the patient by a person who was not subject to the Immigration Rules.

48. While the judge accepted  that  the  level  of  care  provided  by  the
    appellant to her brother  was  substantial,  he  also  noted  that  the
    brother had recently travelled to Jamaica with another relative and his
    girlfriend.

49. In conclusion, for the reasons given above, I am not persuaded that the
    judge's failure to consider the respondent's policy  on  carers,  which
    was not in any event relied upon by the legal  representative  for  the
    appellant who appeared before him, renders his decision  unsafe.   From
    the evidence available to the judge, it was open to the judge  to  find
    that Mr Henry would not have to fend for himself if the  appellant  was
    no longer in the United Kingdom.  It was also open to him to find  that
    if support was required, then the local authorities were under duty  to
    provide it to Mr Henry, given his status as a British citizen.

50. Ground 4 was regarded by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  as  being  the
    weakest of the four grounds.  I do not  consider  that  the  judge  has
    misstated or misapplied the Kugathas criteria.  There is no bright line
    here, and the inbuilt imprecision  of  the  Kugathas  criteria  reflect
    this.  The judge has  given  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    relationship between the appellant and her mother-in-law falls short of
    a relationship of dependency sufficient to constitute family  life  for
    the purposes of Article 8.  Likewise,  the  judge  has  given  adequate
    reasons for finding the appellant does not enjoy family life  with  her
    brother for the purposes of Article 8.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson







