
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02332/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2014                                |On 3 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                               Mr Albert Awuku

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals  with  leave  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Raikes allowing the appellant's appeal  under
    Regulation 7 of the 2006 EEA Regulations,  as  the  spouse  and  family
    member of an EEA national.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 10  October  1973.   On  28
    August 2013 an  application  was  made  on  his  behalf  by  his  legal
    representatives for a residence card as a confirmation of  a  right  to
    reside in the UK as the spouse of an EEA national who is exercising her
    free movement rights.  The appellant provided  a  marriage  certificate
    dated 13 August 2013 that showed his date of  marriage  as  4  February
    2013, with the marriage having taken place  in  Ghana.   The  appellant
    provided the Home Office with a Ghanaian passport and an EEA national's
    German passport.  As there were no entry or exit stamps from  Ghana  or
    the UK to demonstrate that he had attended his  wedding  ceremony,  his
    marriage was considered to have taken place by proxy.  The Secretary of
    State was not satisfied  that  the  appellant's  claimed  marriage  was
    registered in accordance  with  the  Ghanaian  Customary  Marriage  and
    Divorce (Registration) Law 1985.  Accordingly the  Secretary  of  State
    could not accept the registration of marriage or statutory  declaration
    submitted as being valid  and  lawfully  issued  and  evidence  of  the
    appellant's relationship.  His application was therefore  refused  with
    reference to Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations 2006 (as amended)

3.   As the appellant's marriage was deemed not to have been  contracted  in
    accordance with the law, the appellant's application was considered  as
    an unmarried partner under Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations  2006
    (as amended).  The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant  had
    provided sufficient evidence to  suggest  that  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship.

4.   The respondent stated that since the appellant had  not  made  a  valid
    application for Article 8 consideration, consideration was not given as
    to whether his removal from the UK would breach Article 8 of the  ECHR.
    Additionally, it was pointed out that  her  decision  not  to  issue  a
    residence card/permanent residence card does not require the  appellant
    to leave the UK if he can otherwise demonstrate that he has a right  to
    reside under the Regulations.

5.   The judge was satisfied that the appellant  had  produced  evidence  to
    show his marriage to his EU spouse as claimed.  He produced a  marriage
    certificate that shows the date of marriage in Ghana as 4 February 2013
    by proxy and  that  the  marriage  was  registered  with  the  district
    registrar on 3 August 2013.  This certificate  indicated  that  neither
    party had been married prior to entering into this agreement.

6.   The judge found that in addition the  appellant  produced  a  statutory
    declaration to support the marriage and application  for  registration.
    She noted that whilst the respondent  had  raised  concerns  about  the
    relationship of those making the statutory declaration to the appellant
    and the EEA national, the related documents had not  been  disputed  by
    the respondent.  She noted  that  the  registration  of  the  customary
    marriage is optional, the parties voluntarily registered their marriage
    and she was satisfied that on the evidence  the  parties  are  Ghanaian
    nationals or have direct familial links to Ghana as required.  She  was
    therefore satisfied that this type of marriage  is  recognised  in  the
    country in which it took place, that the appellant's proxy marriage  to
    the  sponsor  has  been  properly  executed  such  as  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the law of the country in  which  it  took  place,  and
    there is nothing in the law of either party's country of domicile  that
    restricts the freedom to enter into the marriage.   She  was  therefore
    satisfied that the appellant is a family member of his EU sponsor.

7.   She was satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  his  sponsor  are  family
    members and are related as claimed.  She was also  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor was exercising treaty rights in the UK.

8.   The judge then considered the position in relation to  the  appellant's
    human rights under Article 8.  She found  that  the  appellant  is  the
    family member of his EU  spouse.   The  consequences  of  removing  the
    appellant from the UK will inevitably interfere with  his  private  and
    family life.  The interference is in accordance  with  the  law.   Such
    interference is necessary in a democratic society in order  to  enforce
    its immigration controls.  The judge then relied  on  her  findings  of
    fact to find that as a family member of the EU national the removal  of
    the appellant would be a  disproportionate  breach  of  their  family's
    right to a family or private life under Article 8.

9.   I  note  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  durability  of  the
    relationship.  This was not appealed by the appellant.

10.  The respondent was granted  permission  on  the  respondent's  argument
    that the judge had no regard to the case of Kareem (Proxy  marriages  -
    EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24.  There was clear merit in the  argument
    that the judge should have considered whether the type of marriage  was
    recognised in the EEA state of the sponsor, namely Germany, and did not
    do so that the judge erred in finding that there was a disproportionate
    interference  with  his  Article  8  rights  when  her  findings   were
    inextricably linked to the EEA Regulations which  the  appellant  could
    not meet.

11.  Mr Nath relied on the respondent's grounds of appeal.

12.  Counsel relied on head notes (b) and (d) of Kareem, in  particular  (b)
    which states:

         "The production of a marriage certificate  issued  by  a  competent
         authority (that is, issued according to the  registration  laws  of
         the  country  where  the  marriage  took  place)  will  usually  be
         sufficient."


    Counsel also relied on head note (d) and  (d).   (d)  says  that  where
    there is no such marriage certificate or where there is  doubt  that  a
    marriage certificate has been issued by a competent authority, then the
    marital relationship may be proved by other evidence.  (e) says in such
    an appeal, the starting point will be to decide whether a marriage  was
    contracted between the appellant and the qualified person according  to
    the  national  law  of  the  EEA  country  of  the  qualified  person's
    nationality.
13.  Counsel submitted that Kareem is very much misunderstood.  What  it  is
    saying is that if there is no doubt about the marriage certificate,  as
    the judge found  in  this  case,  then,  the  appellant  can  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 7. He submitted that the respondent has  not
    challenged the competency of the authorities  in  Ghana  to  issue  the
    marriage certificate.  This was a paper case.  Kareem did not form part
    of the respondent's reasons for refusing the  appellant's  application.
    The judge decided the application  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary
    evidence before her and her findings cannot be impugned.

14.   Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  considered  Article  8   as   an
    alternative.  English law  recognises  proxy  marriages.   The  judge's
    Article 8 findings do not rely on Kareem  or  the  nationality  of  the
    appellant's  spouse.   Accordingly  the  judge's  Article  8   findings
    disclosed no error of law.

15.  I find that the judge made an error of  law.   The  respondent  refused
    the appellant's application on 28 November 2013.  Kareem did  not  form
    part of the respondent's refusal because it was  heard  on  30  October
    2013 and was promulgated on 16 January 2014. The judge  determined  the
    appellant's appeal on 4 March 2014.  She  did  not  make  reference  to
    Kareem even though it was a reported decision and she should have  been
    aware of it.  It was not brought to her attention because the appellant
    had requested that the appeal be determined on the papers.

16.  Nevertheless, Kareem is very helpful in deciding a  marriage  by  proxy
    where one of the parties is an EEA national and I rely on it.

17.  At paragraph 11 of Kareem the Upper Tribunal held as follows:

         "We conclude that in EU law the question of whether a person is  in
         a marital relationship is governed by  the  national  laws  of  the
         member states.  In other words, whether a person is  married  is  a
         matter that falls within the competence of  the  individual  member
         states."

18.   At  paragraph  13  the  Upper  Tribunal  states  that  the  CJEU   has
    established that a member state  can  expect  persons  claiming  to  be
    family members to establish that they meet the requirements of  EU  law
    (cf Jia (C-1-05) [2007] Imm AR 439, para 37ff).  It goes on to say that
    Article 10(2)(b) of the Citizens Directive (2004/38/EC) indicates  that
    non-EEA nationals can establish that they are  family  members  by  the
    production of a  document  attesting  to  the  existence  of  a  family
    relationship.

19.  At paragraph 13 the Tribunal goes on to say:

         "From this we infer that usually a marriage certificate issued by a
         competent authority will be sufficient evidence that a marriage has
         been contracted.  Of course, a document which merely calls itself a
         marriage certificate does not have any legal status.  A certificate
         will only have legal status if it is issued by  an  authority  with
         legal power to create or confirm the facts it attests, that is,  by
         an authority that has such competence.  Where a  marriage  document
         has no legal status or where such status is unclear, other evidence
         may be used to establish  that  a  marriage  has  been  contracted.
         However, once again we find that these principles do  not  help  us
         determine whether a person is a spouse because it  will  depend  on
         identifying the authority with legal power  to  create  or  confirm
         that a marriage has been contracted."

20.  Counsel relied on this paragraph  to  say  that  because  the  Ghanaian
    authorities  have  issued  a  document  stating   that   the   marriage
    certificate was issued by the Ghanaian authority which  had  competence
    to issue it, the  marriage  certificate  was  a  valid  document  which
    confirmed that the marriage contracted by the  appellant  and  his  EEA
    spouse was valid.  I find  that  if  that  alone  were  the  case,  the
    appellant would have satisfied the requirement of being a family member
    of an EEA national.  However, we come to paragraphs 17 and 18 of Kareem
    which say as follows:

         "17. Spouses' rights of free movement  and  residence  are  derived
             from a marriage having been contracted and depend on  it.   In
             light of the connection between the rights  of  free  movement
             and residence and the nationality laws of the  member  states,
             we  conclude  that,  in  a   situation   where   the   marital
             relationship is disputed, the question of whether there  is  a
             marital relationship is to be examined in accordance with  the
             laws of the member state from which the Union citizen  obtains
             nationality and from which therefore that citizen derives free
             movement rights.


         18.  The same conclusion may readily  be  reached  by  a  different
             route.  Within EU law, it  is  essential  that  member  states
             facilitate the free movement and  residence  rights  of  Union
             citizens and their spouses.  This would not be achieved if  it
             were left to a host member state to  decide  whether  a  Union
             citizen has contracted a marriage.   Different  member  states
             would be able to reach different conclusions about that  Union
             citizen's marital status.  This  would  leave  Union  citizens
             unclear as to whether their spouses  could  move  freely  with
             them; and might mean that the Union citizen  could  move  with
             greater freedom to one member state (where the marriage  would
             be recognised) than to another (where it might not be).   Such
             difficulties  would  be  contrary  to   fundamental   EU   law
             principles.  Therefore, we perceive EU law  as  requiring  the
             identification of the legal system in which a marriage is said
             to have been contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the
             Union citizen's  marital  status  is  not  at  risk  of  being
             differently determined by different member states.  Given  the
             intrinsic link between nationality of a member state and  free
             movement rights, we conclude that  the  legal  system  of  the
             nationality of the Union citizen must itself govern whether  a
             marriage has been contracted."

21.  I  interpret  these  passages  to  mean  that  it  is  for  the  German
    authorities to determine whether the appellant's  marriage  to  the  EU
    spouse by proxy is valid and recognised by Germany.  At paragraph 14 of
    Kareem the Upper Tribunal held:

         "A lack of evidence of relevant foreign law will normally mean that
         the party with the burden of proving it will fail."

22.  I find that no evidence was adduced by the appellant to show  that  his
    marriage by proxy to a German national  is  recognised  by  the  German
    authorities.  Accordingly, the appellant has failed  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof on him and the judge's decision cannot stand.

23.  I  remake  the  decision  and  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  under
    Regulation 7 of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

24.  I find  Counsel's  argument  that  the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal as freestanding from the  EEA  Regulations
    to be a fallacious argument.  The judge's finding was  clear  that  the
    appellant was a family member of an EEA national.  As the appellant had
    not produced any evidence to support his claim that  his  marriage  was
    recognised by the  German  authorities  as  being  valid,  the  judge's
    Article 8 decision cannot also stand.

25.  The judge's decision allowing the appellant's appeals  under  the  2006
    EEA Regulations and under Article 8 of the ECHR cannot stand.  I remake
    the decision and dismiss the appellant's appeals on both grounds.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

