
                                                                   [pic]


Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/02400/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 23 February 2015                          |On: 24 February 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                        Anumiyu Omolara Bature Mamza
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a Nigerian national, born 1 August 1983.  She  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 4 September 2014. Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Zucker thereafter granted the appellant  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. By way of a letter to the Upper Tribunal dated the 18 February 2015  the
    appellant states that she wishes to cancel her appeal hearing and return
    to her homeland. I treat this as an application  to  withdraw  her  case
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as  a  whole,
    and observing the terms of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and  the
    fact that the Secretary of  State  was  the  successful  party  in  that
    decision, I give such consent to the appellant to withdraw her case.

 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the  appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

Date: 23 February 2015













































