
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02503/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 3 November 2015                   |9 November 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SUKHBIR SINGH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co.,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 19 September 1987.   He
    came to the UK as a student.  After his  initial  course,  he  obtained
    further leave until 28 July 2014 to take a degree in accountancy at the
    same college.  The college had its licence revoked around  the  end  of
    2011.  The appellant says he could not enrol at an alternative  college
    due to financial constraints.  He ceased studying, but remained in  the
    UK.  He married Harinder Kaur Sandu on 4 June 2014.   He  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain as her spouse on 12 July 2014.

 3. The respondent refused that application by  letter  dated  18  December
    2014, both in terms of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  for  absence  of
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules.

 4. By determination promulgated on 3 June 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal McGrade allowed the appellant's appeal against that  decision,
    outside the Rules, finding that removal would be disproportionate.

 5. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:

      1. The Judge has allowed the appeal under Article 8.

      2. The Judge has made a finding that the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
         financial requirements of Appendix FM.

      3. The Judge has correctly given a self direction for the requirements
         for an Article 8 appeal  to  succeed  on  the  basis  of  the  test
         identified in Razgar at paragraph 22 of the determination.

      4. The law, currently on Article 8 is well summarised at paragraph  28
         of Agyarko and others [2015] EWCA Civ 440  where  at  paragraph  28
         Sales LJ states:

             "So far as concerns Mrs Agyarko's claim under  Article  8  for
             leave to remain outside the Rules since her  family  life  was
             established with knowledge that she had no right to be in  the
             United Kingdom and was therefore precarious  in  the  relevant
             sense, it is only if her case is exceptional for  some  reason
             that she will be able to establish a violation of Article 8  :
             see Nagre, paragraphs [-] [41]; SS  (Congo),  paragraph  [29];
             and Jeunesse  v  Netherlands,  paragraphs.  [108],  [114]  and
             [122].

      5. ... the Judge at paragraph 31 of the determination  has  failed  to
         identify an exceptional factor in this case.  He accepts  that  the
         appellant  may  have  [wording  here  incomplete  in  the  grounds]
         difficulties in obtaining entry clearance if the appellant and  his
         partner return to India, he further accepts  that  if  his  partner
         remains in this country the period of separation  may  well  exceed
         two  years.   However  ...  the  correct  test  is  whether  it  is
         exceptional and in failing to assess the  factual  matrix  of  this
         case against the test of  exceptionality,  the  Judge  has  made  a
         material error of law.

    The determination is flawed and, in law, cannot stand.

 6. Mrs Saddiq submitted thus.  At paragraph 17 the judge identified the  2
    matters on which the appellant relied as  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK.   At  paragraph  19,  the  judge
    rightly rejected his case on both.  The  judge's  final  conclusion  at
    paragraph 31 did not reflect  his  earlier  assessment,  which  was  in
    effect that there were no exceptional  circumstances.   There  were  no
    such circumstances to justify the conclusion reached.

 7. Mr Winter submitted along the following lines.  The Secretary of  State
    had accepted that the appellant's  spouse  could  not  be  expected  to
    relocate.  (The refusal letter says that while it may not be reasonable
    to expect her to  relocate  to  India  permanently,  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable for her to accompany the appellant for a short time  while
    he made his entry clearance application, or for  him  to  do  so  alone
    while she remained in the UK.)  That was also the line  the  respondent
    took in the First-tier Tribunal (paragraph 27  of  the  determination).
    The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal failed to acknowledge  that
    approach.   The  question  for  the  judge  had  been  whether  it  was
    proportionate to expect the appellant to apply again from  India.   The
    appellant's spouse had at one time been  earning  enough  to  meet  the
    income threshold from two employments, but she lost one of those.   She
    was in process of setting up her own grocery business.  The indications
    were that the separation was likely to be fairly lengthy, and the judge
    found that it might well be in excess of 2 years.  Although  the  judge
    did not accept what the appellant said about insurmountable  obstacles,
    he had to consider these circumstances: the spouse is a UK citizen; her
    family is here; she has a young sister, whom she assists  in  her  care
    needs; if she were to return to India with her husband, there would  be
    "an adverse effect in  particular  upon  her  sister"  (paragraph  25);
    return would result in her loss of employment, accommodation,  and  the
    chance to pursue her business, and would  make  it  difficult  for  the
    appellant to satisfy the financial requirements of the Rules (paragraph
    29).  The respondent's  grounds  complained  that  the  judge  had  not
    applied the test of exceptionality but that expression has itself  been
    rejected recently by the Inner House.  It  has  different  meanings  in
    different contexts, and can be confusing.  The correct formulation  may
    be put in various ways,  but  in  effect  they  all  come  back  to  an
    assessment of proportionality.  The  grounds  in  substance  were  only
    disagreement with the proportionality assessment made by the judge.  As
    Carnwath LJ (as he then was) said in Mukarkar v SSHD [2007] Imm  AR  57
    at paragraph 9, there was a danger of over complicating such cases; and
    at paragraph 40:

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not  easy,  but  ...  not
         made easier or better by excessive legal  or  linguistic  analysis.
         It is the  nature  of  such  judgments  that  different  tribunals,
         without  illegality   or   irrationality,   may   reach   different
         conclusions on the same case ... The mere fact  that  one  Tribunal
         has reached what may seem an unusually generous view of  the  facts
         of a particular case does not mean that it is made in error of  law
         ..."

    The determination should stand.

 8. Mrs Saddiq in response acknowledged that the respondent in the  refusal
    letter and in the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the appellant's wife to  relocate  permanently  to
    India.  However, she submitted that  the  respondent's  grounds  showed
    more than a semantic quibble over the test to be  applied.   The  judge
    failed to set out any  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances,  and
    referred  only  to  a  period  of  separation,  which  was  simply  the
    consequence of the Rules.  The judge was  not  entitled  to  give  that
    matter the weight which he did.  In all the circumstances, the decision
    should have been to the contrary.

 9. I indicated that the SSHD's appeal would not succeed.

10. Of all the cases dealing with the formulation of the  correct  approach
    to cases based on Article 8 outside the Rules, the grounds  perhaps  do
    not find the one most suited to the respondent's argument.  This is not
    a case where family life was established while  the  appellant  had  no
    right to be in the UK.  He had  a  formal  grant  of  leave.   Even  if
    reliance upon it became somewhat questionable once the licence  of  his
    college was revoked, the respondent did not take it away from him.

11. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal accept that the judge  gave
    himself the correct  self-direction  in  terms  of  Razgar.   There  is
    nothing in the citation in the grounds which  required  him  to  decide
    otherwise than as he did.

12. If the judge had specified a test of  exceptionality,  without  further
    explaining the different meanings that term has in different  contexts,
    that again might have opened the way to legal debate.

13. The judge found this  a  finely  balanced  appeal.   It  might  not  be
    difficult  to  find  quite  similar  cases  which  have  gone   against
    appellants, and another judge might have decided another way, but  each
    case does turn eventually on its own particular facts.

14. Although the Rules, case law  and  statute  have  all  moved  on  since
    Mukarkar the respondent did not suggest that it is  not  a  good  guide
    (even  if  not  often  cited  with  such  enthusiasm   by   appellants'
    representatives).  I further note from it that the eventual  issue  for
    the judge was one of factual judgment, not law (paragraph 12)  and  not
    open to challenge unless on grounds of perversity (paragraph 38).

15. The grounds amount to disagreement  with  the  final  judgment  on  the
    facts, rather than to identification of legal error.

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           7 November 2015
