
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02874/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 October 2013                             |On 8 October 2013            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                             ELVINA NADEGE KPADE
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
 For the Appellant:        Mr C J McNicholas, Counsel
For the Respondent:        Ms H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant is a citizen of C�te d'Ivoire born on  24  June  1991.
      She appeals with permission against a decision of Judge of the  First-
      tier Tribunal Fletcher-Hill dismissing her appeal against  a  decision
      of the respondent, made on 5 January 2013, refusing to vary her  leave
      to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. The main  reason  for
      refusal was that the appellant did not  qualify  for  the  points  she
      needed  under  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  a  valid
      Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS"). A CAS was assigned  to
      the appellant on 7 September 2012 to enable her to study on a one-year
      course for an extended diploma in management at St Stephen's  College,
      commencing on 24 September 2012. However, by the time  the  respondent
      considered the application, the CAS had been withdrawn by the sponsor.




   2.   In her grounds of appeal,  the  appellant  explained  she  had  been
      studying in the UK since October 2011. She had previously  studied  at
      Bliss College but its sponsorship licence was revoked in  March  2012.
      The respondent limited the appellant's leave to 60 days in  order  for
      her to find a new college. The  appellant  enrolled  at  St  Stephen's
      College, which assigned the CAS. Her understanding  with  the  college
      had been that she would not attend the course until  the  Home  Office
      had made its decision. However, the  sponsor  had  not  contacted  her
      before withdrawing the CAS. She produced a letter  from  the  college,
      dated  26  June  2013,  stating  that  her  CAS  had  been   withdrawn
      accidentally. Her grounds of appeal relied on the principle of  common
      law fairness and cited the case of Thakur (PBS decision -  common  law
      fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC).

   3.   After an oral hearing on 2 July 2013 at Hatton Cross, Judge Fletcher-
      Hill dismissed the appeal. She found the appellant was not entitled to
      30 points for her CAS. She also found there was "simply  no  evidence"
      as to why the sponsor decided  to  withdraw  its  sponsorship  and  no
      evidence the appellant had sought to discover the reason.

   4.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal  do  not  argue  the  judge
      should have allowed the appeal under the rules. However,  the  judge's
      findings about the withdrawal of sponsorship were "out of kilter  with
      the evidence". In particular, the respondent should have contacted the
      appellant following the withdrawal of sponsorship. Reliance was placed
      on Rodriguez (Flexibility Policy) [2013] UKUT 00042 (IAC).

   5.   Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  because
      it was arguable:

               1) the judge erred in finding there was "simply no evidence"
                  as to why  the  sponsor  had  withdrawn  its  sponsorship
                  because there was evidence before the tribunal that  this
                  had resulted from a mistake on the part of the college;
               2) she erred in failing to give any consideration to article
                  8; and
               3) she did not make any finding as to  whether  the  sponsor
                  was on the approved list  of  sponsors  at  the  relevant
                  time.

   6. I heard oral submissions  as  to  whether  the  decision  contains  an
      arguable error of law.


   7. Mr McNicholas said the central issue was the CAS but conceded no valid
      CAS was in existence as at the date of  decision  and  none  had  been
      assigned to the appellant subsequently. He said  the  judge  had  been
      wrong to state, in paragraph 38, that there was simply no evidence  as
      to why the sponsor decided to withdraw the CAS. She had overlooked the
      letter the appellant had  produced  explaining  it  was  withdrawn  in
      error. He also argued the judge had failed to make  a  finding  as  to
      whether the college was on the  register  at  the  material  time.  He
      framed his arguments about fairness within the principles  established
      in Rodriguez and the Evidential Flexibility Policy. He said  the  Home
      Office  should  have  contacted  the  appellant  and  given  her   the
      opportunity to provide a valid CAS. There  was  a  strong  element  of
      unfairness in the  case.  Finally,  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to
      consider the appellant's private life.

   8. Ms Horsley opposed the  appeal.  She  said  the  appellant  could  not
      succeed under the rules  because  there  was  no  valid  CAS.  It  was
      therefore immaterial whether or not the college was  on  the  approved
      list. She argued that the judge must have intended to say  that  there
      was explanation of the basis on which the CAS  had  been  accidentally
      withdrawn. The appellant said she was in touch with  the  college  but
      she had still not obtained one. Rodriguez did not assist the appellant
      because  she  had  submitted  all  the  required  documents  with  her
      application. There was no reason the  Home  Office  would  have  known
      there had been anything untoward about the withdrawal of the  CAS.  It
      was difficult to  see  what  the  judge  was  supposed  to  have  done
      differently. Article 8 had not been pursued in any meaningful way.

   9. I reserved determination on the question of  whether  Judge  Fletcher-
      Hill made a material error of law such that her decision should be set
      aside. After considering the arguments carefully I have  decided  that
      her decision should stand. My reasons are as follows.

  10. The salient facts are not in dispute. The appellant arrived in the  UK
      on 5 November 2011, aged 20, with the  intention  of  studying  for  a
      diploma in business management. However, she was  unable  to  complete
      the course because her college lost its licence. Having been given  60
      days to find a new college, the  appellant  sought  further  leave  by
      making an in-time application in order to pursue a one-year course  at
      St Stephen's College leading to an extended diploma in  management.  A
      CAS was assigned to her on 7 September  2012  and  she  submitted  her
      application the following  day.  She  did  not  commence  her  studies
      because she was advised by the college to wait until she  was  granted
      leave by the Home Office. At some point her  CAS  was  withdrawn.  The
      first the appellant knew of  this  was  when  she  received  the  Home
      Office's decision, which was dated 5 January 2013. Shortly before  the
      hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal  the  principal  of  St  Stephen's
      College wrote a letter stating that, "[d]ue to an administrative error
      [the  appellant's]  CAS  was  accidentally  withdrawn  and  I   accept
      responsibility for the mistake." However, no CAS has been issued since
      then.


  11. In these circumstances, it is clear the appellant  could  not  succeed
      under the rules.  Paragraph 245ZX(c) required her to score  30  points
      under Appendix A. Paragraph 116(c) states  that  points  will  not  be
      awarded for a CAS if the sponsor has withdrawn the offer since the CAS
      was issued.

  12. It was submitted to the  judge  by  the  presenting  officer  that  St
      Stephen's College was no longer on the list of approved colleges as at
      the date of hearing and it has been argued the judge erred by  failing
      to make a finding as to whether the college was on the list as at  the
      date of decision. The written grounds argue that the judge appeared to
      take this matter into account when finding against the  appellant.  It
      seems to me likely that the college would have been on the list as  at
      the date of decision for no other reason than  that,  if  it  had  not
      been, the respondent would very likely have given this  as  a  further
      reason for refusal. In any event, there is no material  error  in  the
      determination  on  this  point  because  the  appeal  could  not  have
      succeeded under the rules whatever the status of the college's licence
      because the appellant no longer had a valid CAS. I see  no  basis  for
      arguing that the judge somehow took this point against the appellant.

  13. The judge was wrong to state there was simply no evidence  before  her
      as to why the sponsor decided to withdraw the  offer  of  sponsorship.
      There was evidence that the CAS was withdrawn by  mistake.  The  judge
      did not have to accept that evidence but, if she did not, she  had  to
      give reasons why not. I do not agree with Ms Horsley that paragraph 38
      should be read as meaning the  judge  was  not  satisfied  as  to  the
      "basis" for the withdrawal. On the face of Mr Gupta's letter,  it  was
      an administrative error. The main thrust of Mr McNicholas's  arguments
      was that these circumstances created unfairness in the manner in which
      the appellant's application was dealt with.

  14. I shall remind myself of  the  principles  established  in  the  cases
      relies on by the appellant.

  15. The case of Thakur considered  the  factual  situation  in  which  the
      college was no longer on the register as  the  date  decision  and  no
      warning of this  was  given  to  the  applicant  before  refusing  the
      application. The Upper Tribunal held as follows:

         "1.  A decision by the Secretary of State to refuse further  leave
         to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  was  not  in
         accordance with the law because of a failure  to  comply  with  the
         common law duty to act fairly in the decision making  process  when
         an applicant had not had an adequate opportunity  of  enrolling  at
         another college following the withdrawal of his  sponsor's  licence
         or of making further representations before the decision was made.

         2.  The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote:  what
         fairness demands is dependent on the context of  the  decision  and
         the particular circumstances of the applicant."

  16. These principles  were  confirmed  in  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor
      licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).


  17. The case of Rodriguez was concerned with cases in which documents were
      missing from applications. The Upper Tribunal held as follows:
         "Since August 2009 UKBA has  operated  a  policy  relating  to  the
         processing and determination of applications under the Points Based
         System ("PBS"). This was revised with effect from May 2011.  In its
         policy letter  of  19th  May  2011,  UKBA  states  that  during  an
         unspecified  trial  stage  applicants  will  be   contacted   where
         mandatory evidence is missing from their applications and given the
         opportunity to provide this. UKBA is under a  public  law  duty  to
         give effect to this policy in all cases to which it applies.


         As regards all other applications, to which the policy letter  does
         not apply, UKBA case workers and decision makers must be  aware  of
         and  give  full  effect  to  its  "Evidential  Flexibility"  policy
         document.  This requires  due  appreciation  of  the  discretionary
         powers  enshrined  therein  to  request  further  information  from
         applicants in any case and the exercise thereof in accordance  with
         established legal principles  viz  the  duties  to  appreciate  the
         existence of and  correctly  understand  and  give  effect  to  the
         policy; to act fairly and rationally;  to  take  into  account  all
         material considerations; to disregard immaterial considerations; to
         observe the requirements of a  procedurally  fair  decision  making
         process; and to act compatibly with such  ECHR  rights  as  may  be
         engaged in a particular case, in accordance with section 6  of  the
         Human Rights Act 1998."


  18. A decision which did not take account of and apply  the  policy  would
      therefore be not in accordance with the law and  an  appeal  could  be
      allowed on the basis that a lawful decision had not yet been made.

  19. The policy on which the appellant must be taken to rely  is  that  set
      out  as  Appendix  B  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  determination.   The
      introduction states in relevant part as follows:

     "In response to significant feedback from  the  caseworking  teams,  as
                  well as from our customers, from August  2009  a  flexible
                  process was adopted allowing PBS  caseworkers   to  invite
                  sponsors and  applicants  to  correct  minor   errors   or
                  omissions  in  applications  both   main   and   dependant
                  submitted under Tiers 1, 2, 4 and 5.

                  The instruction enabled caseworkers to  query  details  or
                  request further information, such  as   a   missing   wage
                  slip  or  bank  statement  from  a sequence. Three working
                  days was given to the customer to  provide  the  requested
                  information.

                  This instruction only applied  to  cases  which  would  be
                  refused solely on the absence of a piece  of  evidence  or
                  information. Where the application would  fall for refusal
                   even   if   the   missing  evidence   was   submitted,  a
                  request to submit this further information  would  not  be
                  made.

                  The introduction of this instruction resulted in a reduced
                  refusal rate. However, those that fell for  refusal  where
                  multiple pieces of information  were  missing  were  often
                  successful on appeal.

                  Following analysis of allowed appeals  and  feedback  from
                  the National Audit  Office  (NAO)  and   Chief   Inspector
                  (CI),  the  original  Evidential  Flexibility  instruction
                  has  been reviewed to meet the recommendations put forward
                  in these reports whilst  continuing  to  provide  improved
                  levels customer service."

  20. Annex A of the policy lists the missing  documents  which  it  may  be
      appropriate to request in Tier 4 cases in relation to  the  CAS.  They
      include evidence of progress detailed on the CAS  or  the  CAS  itself
      where the sponsor is an approved sponsor. Another is the evidence used
      to assess suitability for the course. However, there is no  suggestion
      that I can see that the policy catches a failure to  provide  a  valid
      CAS because it has been withdrawn by the sponsor.


  21. Mr McNicholas relied specifically on paragraph 12 of  Rodriguez.  This
      part of the decision refers to  the  broad  policy  described  in  the
      Oppenheim letter, set out at Annex A. There is no evidence  that  that
      policy  was  still  in  force  in  January  2013.   However,  I   have
      nevertheless considered whether the broad policy intent  described  in
      the letter could assist the appellant in this case to  the  extent  it
      has survived into the Evidential Flexibility Policy (Annex B) and also
      whether the common law duty of fairness should have  been  applied  by
      the judge.

  22. One weakness in the appellant's arguments is that it is far from clear
      whether these  points  were  made  to  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  As noted, the grounds of appeal filed  by  the  appellant's
      solicitors cited Thakur but the unfairness complained of was that  the
      college had not contacted the appellant before  withdrawing  the  CAS,
      not that the Home Office had failed to contact the appellant. There is
      no reference in the determination or  the  record  of  proceedings  to
      either Thakur or Rodriguez and  Mr  McNicholas,  who  represented  the
      appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, was unable to  confirm  that  he
      had made specific submissions on either ground. The judge did refer to
      submissions made on behalf of the appellant in paragraphs 33 and 34 of
      her determination that the appellant was blameless and she  should  be
      granted leave to continue her studies. The first reference to the case
      of Rodriguez I can find  is  in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
      appeal.

  23. In any  event,  even  if  the  judge  should  have  dealt  with  these
      arguments, perhaps on the basis they were obvious  points,  I  do  not
      think her error could have been material because  the  arguments  were
      bound to  fail.  The  situation  was  straightforward  from  the  Home
      Office's point of view.  Following  the  correct  application  of  the
      Thakur/Patel principle to give the appellant the opportunity to enroll
      on a new course following the loss of  its  licence  by  her  previous
      college, the appellant sought leave to study at St Stephen's  College.
      However, at some point between 8 September 2012 and  5  January  2013,
      the CAS originally assigned to the appellant was withdrawn.  There  is
      no reason to suppose the Home Office knew the reason for  this.  There
      is no reason they should suspect the appellant had not  been  informed
      by the college. There could be any number of reasons for a  CAS  being
      withdrawn and it must be a fairly commonplace occurrence.

  24. This was not a case in which a mandatory document was missing from the
      application.  A  CAS  had  been  assigned  and  submitted   with   the
      application but it was no longer valid. This is cannot be classed as a
      "minor" omission. A CAS is fundamental to an application  for  Tier  4
      leave.  Nor  did  the  circumstances  fall   within   the   Evidential
      Flexibility Policy. The Home Office was not under a public law duty to
      contact the appellant about the omission before proceeding to  make  a
      decision.

  25. In any event, it was not an omission which the  appellant  could  have
      overcome. She has still not obtained  a  new  CAS  from  St  Stephen's
      College despite telling the judge at the hearing that they were  ready
      to give her one.

  26. If there has been any unfairness in this case, it is in the  college's
      mishandling of the appellant's enrolment. However,  the  circumstances
      do not engage the common law principle of fairness or the  flexibility
      policy.

  27. That leaves article 8. There  is  a  reference  to  the  Human  Rights
      Convention in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and the
      judge appears to have overlooked it. She makes no findings  about  the
      appellant's private life. The grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal
      refer to the judge's failure to strike a fair balance and cite  Razgar
      [2004] UKHL 27.

  28. Mr McNicholas did not make detailed submissions about article 8 and  I
      see from the record of proceedings that  he  made  no  submissions  on
      human rights grounds to the First-tier Tribunal either. Any  error  on
      the part of the judge in failing to consider the human  rights  ground
      of appeal could not be material because I see no  possibility  of  the
      appeal being allowed on article 8 grounds. The appellant had only been
      in the UK for 20 months at the date of hearing. She has not  disclosed
      any significant family ties in the UK. The only evidence called at the
      hearing in the First-tier Tribunal related to her ambition  to  pursue
      studies in the UK. She has not been able to study since Bliss  College
      lost its licence in 2012. She has not achieved any  qualifications  in
      return for her investment in fees. Neither has she been able to secure
      a CAS to take her studies forward. The evidence does not  provide  any
      detail of her ties or connections in the UK such that the judge  could
      have been satisfied that article 8 was engaged in these circumstances.
      Alternatively, given the few ties she has established in the UK during
      her brief residence, the appellant's removal  in  consequence  of  the
      decision would plainly be proportionate.




DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and her decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

     No anonymity direction made.

     No fee award.
                               Signed                 Date 7 October 2013




                               Neil Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
