
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 02043 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2013                            |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 MONIR KHAN

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Wattoo, Solicitor of Sky Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  who  I  will
    call the claimant, against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    refusing him further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant under the points-based system.

 2. The claimant has been in the  United  Kingdom,  with  permission,  since
    2009.  Nothing discreditable has been alleged against him in the  course
    of these proceedings.  His leave could not be extended under  the  Rules
    because he did not have his degree certificate  at  the  required  time.
    His application was made on 20 March 2012 but the degree was not awarded
    until 30 May 2012, which was more than  twelve  months  after  his  last
    leave had been granted.  This failure to meet the  requirements  of  the
    rules is in no  way  the  claimant's  fault;  it  is  a  result  of  the
    administrative procedures of the  University  of  Wales  which  in  this
    respect at least is by no means unusual.

 3. The application was not finally refused until 31 December and the First-
    tier Tribunal, understandably, given the then state of the law,  allowed
    the appeal with reference to the decision in Khatel  and  Others  (s85A;
    effect of continuing application) [2013] UKUT 00044  IAC.  We  now  know
    that Khatel was wrongly decided because the Court  of  Appeal  had  made
    that extremely clear in the case of Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Raju & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ 754.  It follows that the reason
    for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal,  namely  that  an
    application continuance until it is determined, is  just  wrong,  and  I
    have to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. I then have to ask myself how I should progress the  case  further.   Mr
    Wattoo for the claimant says that many people in  circumstances  similar
    to the claimants have had  their  leave  extended  but  he  produced  no
    evidence to substantiate that.  I am not suggesting he is making up  his
    claim which no doubt reflected his instructions and his  experience  but
    there was no evidence about it and certainly nothing which enables me to
    analyse the circumstances in which people have been given leave  to  see
    if any pattern emerges which would make it unlawful  not  to  treat  the
    claimant in a similar way.  That is not a conclusion that  I  can  reach
    properly on the information is not before me.

 5. If the appeal is to be salvaged for the claimant  then  it  must  be  on
    human rights grounds. These were clearly pleaded at an early  stage  and
    Mr Wattoo seeks to rely on them today.  It is an interference  with  the
    private and family life of the claimant to  require  him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. Immigration Rules  exist,  to  interfere  with  people's
    private and family lives but very often decisions under the  immigration
    rules comply with the United Kingdom's  obligation  under  the  European
    Convention on Human Right because they are lawful and proportionate to a
    proper purpose.   Mr Wattoo does not suggest the claim  engages  any  of
    the stronger weighty matters that can sometimes  make  a  difference  in
    Article 8 claims.  For example, the claimant has not married somebody in
    the United Kingdom or father children there.  In  some  ways  of  course
    that is very much to his personal credit. He came to the United  Kingdom
    to study and that is what he has done.  Be that as it may, there are  no
    weighty factors on which the claimant can rely. Rather he has  developed
    the ordinary kind of social life that a student  might  be  expected  to
    generate during a quite long stay in the United Kingdom.   This  is  not
    something that counts for very much in a balancing exercise.

 6. The Rules are perfectly plain and I have to ask myself if this is a case
    where, exceptionally, the ordinary requirements of the Rules should  not
    apply, and I can see no reason why I should  reach  such  a  conclusion.
    Things have been said about fairness and legitimate expectation but  the
    only legitimate expectation is a decision in accordance with  the  Rules
    at the time the application is made, which is  what  the  claimant  got.
    Clearly he hoped he would be allowed to stay longer but the  Rules  have
    changed and he cannot satisfy them.

 7. I take  no  pleasure  whatsoever  in  reaching  this  decision.   I  can
    understand from the claimant's personal point of view that he must  feel
    rather hard done by.  I stress there is no evidence he has done anything
    wrong but his circumstances do not meet the requirements of  the  Rules.
    There is nothing before me which makes it a disproportionate decision to
    exclude him now.

 8. I set the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 December 2013                |








