
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02357/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2015                    |On 15 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               Miss Awanat Oluwadamilola Abodunion Ajoke Lisa
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, counsel instructed by Omnis Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           ERROR OF LAW & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 9 July 1983. She  made
an application in May 2014 for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  based
on her medical condition and the fact that she has a daughter who  was  born
in the United Kingdom on 5 July 2010. This application  was  refused  on  18
December 2014 and the Appellant appealed against this decision.  Her  appeal
came before Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  Kempton  for  hearing  on  the
papers only on 13 April 2015. In a determination  promulgated  on  20  April
2015, the Judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that  she  was  not  in  a
position to allow the appeal  as  there  was  simply  insufficient  evidence
before her; she did not have copies of the medical evidence referred to  and
it was a pity that the Appellant had not  sought  an  oral  hearing  as  she
could have provided more by way of explanation for her application  had  she
been present to give evidence and she had not provided any  further  grounds
of appeal or any further documents in support of her case.

2.    An application for permission to appeal was made  by  the  Appellant's
solicitors on 28 April 2015 on the basis that the Judge had made a  material
error of law in that there  were  documents  before  him  which  could  have
resulted in a different outcome. Attached to the application for  permission
to appeal was an index to a bundle of documents  posted  to  the  Court  and
proof of recorded delivery postage dated 6 March 2015.

3.    On 17 June 2015, Judge Chohan  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  granted
permission to appeal  on  the  basis  that  an  Appellant's  bundle  with  a
covering letter of 5 March 2015 had been  received  by  the  Tribunal  on  9
March 2015 and that clearly a bundle of documents  had  been  submitted  but
that it appeared that it had not  been  placed  before  the  Judge.  It  was
arguable that had the said documentary evidence been before  the  Judge  the
Judge may have made a  different  decision  and  accordingly  there  was  an
arguable error of law.

4.    At the hearing before me, Mr Whitfield stated  that  he  agreed  there
had been a material error of law. Ms Appiah helpfully took  me  through  the
documents contained in the Appellant's bundle and I am  satisfied  that  the
error of law is material in that there is evidence contained in that  bundle
which may have caused the Judge to have reached a different conclusion.

5.    Ms Appiah informed me that  the  Appellant  wished  to  have  an  oral
hearing. Therefore, I remit the appeal back to the First Tier  Tribunal  for
a hearing de novo, not  to  be  listed  before  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Kempton.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

20 August 2015
