
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
IA/02566/2016

                                                 IA/02567/2016

                                                 IA/02568/2016

                                                 IA/02569/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13th October 2017                  |       On 20th October 2017           |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                Mr fahad ali
                               mrs ruby fahad
                            master syed ayan ali
                                miss iraj ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Miah (instructed by Lee Valley Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the appellants.

 2. The appellants are husband, wife and their two children  born  in  2006
    and 2009.

 3. The first appellant was granted leave to enter the UK as a  student  in
    2004. His leave was thereafter variously extended, most recently  as  a
    Tier 1 (General) Migrant until 29  March  2014.  The  second  appellant
    entered the UK as the first appellant's dependent and the two  children
    were born in the UK.

 4. The appellant made an application for further leave to remain as a Tier
    1 (General) migrant in March 2014 on the  basis  that  he  is  a  self-
    employed businessman who also has three employed  jobs.  His  wife  and
    children made applications as his dependents.

 5. All four applications  were  refused  on  7  November  2016.  All  four
    appellants lodged notices of appeal.

 6. All the appellants elected and paid for their appeals to be dealt  with
    on the papers.

 7. The matter was placed before a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Suffield- Thompson) on 19 January 2017 and she dismissed the appeals in
    a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 3 February 2017.

 8. Permission to appeal that decision was granted by a Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal on 14 August 2017. He found it to be  arguable  that  the
    Judge had applied the wrong standard of proof when he used  terms  such
    as "I cannot be sure" and "it is not possible to be certain."  He  also
    found that the decision under the rules was relevant to the  Article  8
    assessment.

 9. The Secretary of State sought to defend the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that the  appellants  had  lodged  no  additional
    evidence in support of the appeal.

10. That is of  course  correct.  However,  what  is  striking  about  this
    decision is that the Judge had four appellants  to  deal  with.  It  is
    clear from the heading of the Decision and Reasons that the  Judge  was
    aware that there were four appellants. However, throughout the Decision
    and Reasons she deals only with the first appellant. It is  correct  of
    course that the application that was made under the  Immigration  Rules
    was on the basis of the first appellant  with  the  other  three  being
    successful or not dependent upon his situation. However, when it  comes
    to consideration of human rights and in particular  those  of  the  two
    children, both of whom have been in the United Kingdom  for  more  than
    seven years, the Judge was required to look at each appellant and reach
    a conclusion on each appellant's appeal.

11. At paragraph 23 the Judge referred herself to paragraph  276  ADE  (iv)
    with regard to a child who has been in  the  UK  for  more  than  seven
    years, although the  Judge  misunderstands  what  that  Rule  provides.
    Despite referring to paragraph 276ADE the Judge fails to deal with  the
    question of whether it is reasonable to expect the  children  to  leave
    the UK. She says only that the appellant had not provided any  evidence
    to the Tribunal about his children or why it is in their best interests
    to remain in the UK.

12. The Judge then goes on to consider section 117B of the Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and notes that although the children have lived in  the
    UK for more than seven years she had  no  evidence  before  her  as  to
    whether the appellant had any relationship with the children  and  that
    he provided nothing to show that he was still living with his wife  and
    children or if he was separated whether he had regular contact. That is
    puzzling indeed given that the family had made a joint application  and
    the Secretary of State clearly treated them as a family unit.

13. There is a clear material error of law in the Decision and  Reasons  in
    that  three  of  the  four  appellants  have  not  had  their   appeals
    determined.

14. So far as the first appellant is concerned I do not find that the Judge
    applied the wrong standard of proof. Her choice of words is unfortunate
    but it is clear that she did apply the right  standard  of  proof.  She
    found it was not possible to be certain to  the  relevant  standard  of
    proof where the money the appellant claims to have  been  self-employed
    earnings actually came from.

15. I therefore preserve the finding that the first appellant did not  meet
    the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  relation   to   his
    application as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant. However,  the  second  third
    and fourth appellants all need to have their appeals determined and the
    first  appellant  needs  his  Article  8  appeal  to  be  given  proper
    consideration taking into account the other members of the family.

16. I therefore set aside  the  Decision  and  Reasons  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal save for the preserved finding indicated above. As the  second
    third and fourth appellants have never had their appeals determined  it
    is appropriate that the matter be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a rehearing on all matters save the first  appellant's  ability  to
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules as a  Tier  1  (General)
    migrant.

17. There is an indication the appellants now wish to have an oral  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Thus far they have paid only for  paper
    disposal. If they wish to have an oral hearing then  they  must  notify
    the first-tier Tribunal accordingly and pay the appropriate fee.

18. No anonymity direction having been requested, none is made.






Signed                              Date 18th October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




