
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02117/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2016                    |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               Mr Zohaib Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Heybrook, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese (hereafter, the judge), promulgated on 26 March
    2015,  in  which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's  decision  of  19  December  2013,  refusing  to  issue  a
    residence card as the extended family member of an EEA  national  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (hereafter,
    the Regulations).

 2. The EEA national in question was and is a Portuguese  citizen.   He  is
    the Appellant's uncle (hereafter, the sponsor).

The hearing before the judge

 3. Before the judge, the Appellant, the sponsor, the  sponsor's  wife  and
    the Appellant's aunt  all  gave  oral  evidence.   The  judge  directed
    himself to the case of Dauhoo [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC).   At  paragraph  13
    the judge did not accept that the Appellant had shown that he had  been
    dependent upon the sponsor whilst still in Pakistan.  This finding  was
    based essentially on the apparent  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    mentioned  the  sponsor  or  his  dependency  thereon  in  his  student
    application for entry clearance made back in 2010.

 4. At paragraph 14 the judge employed the same  reasoning  to  reject  the
    evidence of the other witnesses, and in addition stated that it was not
    apparently credible that the Appellant's own parents had not been  able
    to provide for him whilst he was in Pakistan.   The  judge  did  accept
    that the Appellant was presently dependent upon the sponsor.

 5. In light of the  above,  the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Regulations.  He did go on to consider the claim under Article 8 but in
    light of more recent case-law on this issue  that  is  not  a  relevant
    matter before me now.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds of appeal asserted that the judge had in effect  failed  to
    give any or any adequate reasons for his findings on the core issue  in
    the appeal before him.  Permission was granted in very clear  terms  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 6 October 2015.

The hearing before me

 7. At the  outset  of  the  hearing  I  indicated  to  Mr  Avery  that  my
    preliminary view in this case was that there were  material  errors  of
    law in the judge's decision.  In fairness to Mr Avery he did  not  seek
    to argue to the contrary.

 8. In the event I did not feel it necessary to call upon Miss Heybrook  to
    make any submissions.

Decision on error of law

 9. In my view there are clear errors of law in the  judge's  decision,  as
    asserted in the grounds of appeal, and as  are  readily  apparent  from
    paragraphs 13 and 14 of the decision.

10. There are no, or certainly no adequate, reasons given by the  judge  as
    to why the Appellant could or should have  mentioned  the  sponsor  and
    dependency thereon in the Tier 4 Student application made in 2010.   It
    appears to me from the papers that the 2010 application was not even in
    evidence before the judge.  Even if it  had  been,  some  reasoning  at
    least would have been required to justify the finding upon which it was
    based.  This same error is replicated in paragraph 14.

11. In addition, there are no reasons given as to why the combined evidence
    of the other witnesses was rejected in its totality, and there  are  no
    reasons given as to why the Appellant's own parents  should  have  been
    able or did in fact provide for the Appellant when he was still back in
    Pakistan.

12. These  errors  are  sufficient  to  render  the  decision  as  a  whole
    unsustainable.  I would add  that  there  are  other  elements  of  the
    judge's decision which, on my reading, are unclear to  say  the  least,
    and there was certainly a contradiction within paragraph 14  itself  as
    to whether there was present dependency upon the EEA national.

13. In light of the above I set aside the judge's decision.

Remaking of the decision: submissions

14. Both representatives were agreed  that  I  could  remake  the  decision
    without remitting the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.  There was  no
    new evidence from the Appellant despite standard directions having been
    issued by the Upper Tribunal and the fairly significant passage of time
    between the First-tier Tribunal hearing  and  the  hearing  before  me.
    There was no application to adduce any new evidence or any  application
    by the Appellant to adjourn this matter for a further  hearing  in  due
    course.

15. I therefore remake my decision on the basis of the Respondent's  bundle
    and the Appellant's bundle (indexed and paginated 1 to  125),  both  of
    which were before the First-tier Tribunal.  I have taken  all  of  this
    evidence into account.

16. By way of submissions, Miss Heybrook referred me to the money  transfer
    receipts, particularly a summary at page 68 of the Appellant's  bundle.
    She submitted that this evidence supported the  rest  of  the  evidence
    relating to financial support sent by the sponsor  to  the  Appellant's
    family in Pakistan prior to his departure in 2010.  She relied  on  the
    witness statement evidence of the sponsor, his wife and the Appellant's
    aunt.  She submitted that when the Appellant was in Pakistan there  had
    been material financial support for his essential needs.

17. Mr Avery submitted that the evidence before me was  not  sufficient  to
    make out the Appellant's case. I should examine the evidence with  some
    caution in light of the decisions in Moneke [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC) and
    Ihemedu [2011] UKUT 340 (IAC).  I should not assume that post-departure
    evidence in relation to remittances necessarily meant  that  there  had
    been pre-departure financial support.

18. Mr Avery did accept that there was present dependency and/or membership
    of the Sponsor's household.

19. Both representatives were agreed that if I were to allow this appeal on
    the basis that the Appellant was in fact an extended family member then
    this would only be to a limited extent, given the discretion yet to  be
    exercised under Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations.

Remaking of the decision: findings and conclusions

20. I find that the Appellant is presently dependent upon the  sponsor  and
    is a member of his household in the United  Kingdom.   This  point  has
    been conceded by Mr Avery and in light of the evidence before me it was
    a concession quite properly made.

21. In respect of prior dependency, however, I am not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has shown that he was even  partly  dependent  upon  material
    financial support for his essential needs whilst residing in Pakistan.

22. I note from the sponsor's evidence that he only  became  a  citizen  of
    Portugal in September of 2009, and having regard  to  the  evidence  of
    remittances in that year I find that only two sums of money  were  sent
    back by the sponsor to the family in  Pakistan  (see  page  67  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).  There is no other documentary evidence in respect
    of the period prior to the Appellant's departure from Pakistan on 8 May
    2010. I do not have an explanation  as  to  why  no  records  of  money
    transfers were available for the period between the end of 2009 and May
    2010.  On balance, I do not accept that  further  funds  were  in  fact
    remitted prior to departure. This in turn is indicative of  an  absence
    of need for funds in terms of showing on  going  dependency  under  the
    Regulations.

23. I accept that money has been  sent  back  in  subsequent  post-decision
    years, but of course my focus is on whether this  particular  Appellant
    was dependent upon the sponsor whilst he (the Appellant) was  still  in
    Pakistan.

24. It is right that the witness statement evidence of the  Appellant,  the
    sponsor,  the  sponsor's  wife,  and  the  aunt,  refers  to  financial
    provision having been sent back over the course of time, including  the
    period when the Appellant was still there. There is also  reference  in
    this written evidence to some form of "financial hardship" faced by the
    Appellant's   family.   However,   living   in   straitened   financial
    circumstances is not, in and of itself, sufficient  to  prove  relevant
    dependency.

25. Further, and in light of Moneke and Ihemedu, I scrutinise the  evidence
    in  this  case  with  care  (whilst  applying  only  the   balance   of
    probabilities standard).  There is nothing in the  evidence  before  me
    that particularises the reasons  for  the  money  being  sent  back  in
    respect of what it was used for and whether these funds related to  the
    "essential needs" of the Appellant and his family.

26. It is important in my view for the Appellant (and indeed any appellant)
    to be able to provide specific evidence  as  to  dependency,  and  this
    includes a need to show that any money  sent  back  was  for  essential
    needs; be that the provision of food, utilities or perhaps medical care
    and such like. In this case the only evidence I have is, in effect,  of
    a very generalised nature. I have,  for  example,  no  evidence  as  to
    household expenses, shortfalls, or any other income.

27. Given the importance of this particular issue in the appeal both before
    the First-tier Tribunal and now, almost a year later, before me in  the
    Upper Tribunal, one  perhaps  might  have  expected  further  and  more
    detailed evidence to have been produced. It has not, and  in  light  of
    the absence of detailed evidence, what I have said previously about the
    limited remittances, and on the balance of probabilities, the Appellant
    has not made out his case that he was dependent upon the sponsor  prior
    to arriving in the United Kingdom.

28. This conclusion is not to be taken as a finding that the Appellant  and
    his witnesses have lied: it is simply that the burden of proof has  not
    been discharged.

29. The Appellant is not an extended family member of the sponsor  and  the
    appeal must be dismissed under the Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 26 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 26 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
