
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/02139/2015

                                                  IA/02141/2015

                                                  IA/02143/2015

                                                  IA/02145/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 June 2017                           |On 16 June 2017                  |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                        mrs s c p - first respondent
                         mr d a m- second respondent
                      master j s a c - third respondent
                        miss a c a- fourth respondent
                         (anonymity direction MADE)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr E Fripp, Counsel.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use the titles by
    which the parties were known before the First-tier  Tribunal  with  the
    Secretary of State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mrs SCP -  first
    Appellant, Mr DAM - second Appellant, Master JS AC  -  third  Appellant
    and Miss CAA - fourth Appellant as "the first, second, third and fourth
    Appellant" respectively.

 2. The Appellants are all  citizens  of  Bolivia.  The  first  and  second
    Appellants are wife and husband and the third and fourth Appellants are
    their two minor children. They appealed a decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 16 December 2014 refusing their applications  for  permission  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds. Their appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nightingale who in a decision
    promulgated on 3 October 2016 allowed the appeals.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. On 2 May 2017 Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Mark Davies granted that application.  His  reasons
    for so doing were:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
             of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge)  promulgated  on  the  3rd
             October 2016 who allowed the  Appellants  appeal  against  the
             decision to refuse them leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

          2. The decision is wholly inadequate.

          3. The Judge does not appear to have  considered  the  burden  of
             proof upon the Appellants.

          4. The Judge has not identified  what  exceptional  circumstances
             exist for consideration of  an  Article  8  claim  on  a  free
             standing basis.

          5. The Judge, whilst making reference to S117B has not considered
             all the appropriate subsections.

          6. The grounds and the decision do disclose an arguable error  of
             law."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. At the outset Mr  Fripp  handed  up  a  copy  of  the  decision  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 along with his response,  dated  1  June
    2017, to the notice of appeal. Mr Fripp was content that I  annex  that
    response to this decision which I am happy to do.  It  is  duly  marked
    Annexed 1.

 6. Whilst relying on the grounds of appeal Mr Clarke acknowledged that the
    third Appellant is now a British citizen and that even this appeal were
    to be  remade  the  Respondent  could  not  succeed.  The  Respondent's
    position being that in this appeal there is a family unit which it  has
    always been acknowledged should remain intact.

 7. For his part Mr Fripp, for all the  reasons  outlined  in  his  annexed
    Response, urged me to accept that the Judge's decision was "impeccable"
    and that there is within it no error of law.

 8. I do not intend to repeat here what is said  by  Mr  Fripp  within  his
    annexed Response. For all the reasons therein  contained  I  share  his
    analysis that this decision of Judge Nightingale contains  no  material
    error of law whatsoever.

Conclusion

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  do  not  set  it  aside.  Judge
Nightingale's decision stands.

An anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 15 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard










