
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02104/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 June 2013                                 |On 10 July 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                              MR Md. YEASIN MIA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M I Hossain
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  9  January
    1989.  On 30 July 2012 he applied for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system.  The application was refused.  A  decision  was  also  made  to
    remove the appellant from the United Kingdom by way of directions under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The reasons for refusal state that the  appellant  submitted  documents
    purporting to  have  been  issued  by  Mercantile  Bank  Limited.   The
    Secretary of State was satisfied  that  the  documents  are  false,  as
    Mercantile Bank Limited confirmed that they did not issue them.  On the
    basis that false documents  had  been  submitted  in  relation  to  the
    application it was refused under paragraph 322(1A) of  the  Immigration
    Rules and as a result there was a refusal of the application for  leave
    to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  under  paragraphs
    245ZX(a), 245ZX(d) and 322(1A).

 3. The appellant appealed that decision.  The case came before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Braybrook.  In a determination promulgated  on  2  April
    2013 the judge dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    found that the  decision  to  remove  under  paragraph  47  is  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted.  It was found arguable that the judge
    erred in failing to consider Article 8 ECHR when it was clearly  raised
    and argued before her.  Although it was not considered that there  were
    merits in the other grounds raised, all were found to be arguable.

 5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 31 May 2013.   The  response
    is to the effect that the judge was fully entitled to conclude that the
    course that the appellant was on did not  represent  academic  progress
    and that there was  no  adequate  evidence  to  overturn  the  Document
    Verification Report ("DVR").  The burden fell on the respondent to  the
    balance of probabilities to establish that the bank statement  was  not
    reliable and it was open to the judge to conclude that it was made out.
     Although the failure to consider Article 8 may amount to an  error  in
    law, on the evidence before the judge and in light of the  findings  on
    the substantive immigration issue, the respondent  considered  that  no
    properly directed Tribunal would have found a  disproportionate  breach
    of the appellant's Article 8 rights.  It is asserted that  the  grounds
    are a disagreement with the findings and do not disclose  an  error  of
    law.

 6. The grounds for seeking permission to appeal submit that  although  the
    judge noticed the ambiguity of the DVR  she  nevertheless  went  on  to
    support the finding that the bank statement from  Mercantile  Bank  was
    false.  The respondent needs to prove the allegation brought by her  to
    a higher standard but she has failed to do so.  The allegation  against
    the  appellant  is  a  serious  one  which  has  very  serious   likely
    consequences for him.

 7. In relation to the academic progress it  is  asserted  that  the  judge
    overreacted and "diverted from the issue".  The  judge  emphasised  how
    the appellant travelled to and from Lancashire whereas that is not  the
    issue in the case.  The judge  failed  to  identify  that  the  refusal
    letter had been sent to the appellant at  his  Birmingham  address  and
    that later the appellant changed his address.  The  judge  ignored  the
    important matter that the respondent failed to show the transcript  she
    relied upon and the appellant submitted a CAS which clearly stated that
    he had completed his previous level 5 course and  naturally  progressed
    towards level 6 thereafter.  The judge also failed  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's Article 8 position.

The error of law finding

 8. I heard submissions and I have taken them into account.  I announced at
    the hearing that I found that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    should not stand.  This was mainly by reason of the judge's handling of
    the issue as to whether the document from Mercantile Bank Limited was a
    false one.  The judge was faced with (at D1 of the respondent's bundle)
    a letter dated July 11 2012 from Mercantile Bank Limited  in  Dhaka,  a
    bank statement at D2 of the same bundle and a copy letter dated March 3
    2013 from the same bank at 21 of the appellant's bundle.

 9. There is no direct reference to the burden and  standard  of  proof  in
    appeals of this nature anywhere in the determination.  That  would  not
    necessarily matter if it were made clear that the judge considered  the
    serious consequences for the appellant in  making  a  finding  that  he
    produced a false document or documents in support of  his  application.
    There is reference to being "satisfied that the  DVR  states  that  the
    information from the bank was that the account does not exist and  that
    there was no ambiguity on this core point"  and  to  applying  "Tanveer
    Ahmed".  There is no self-direction or similar in the determination  to
    indicate that the judge in fact applied the relevant case  law.   There
    is the additional point that the judge failed to deal with Article 8 at
    all and as a result I announced that I did not find the decision to  be
    a safe one.

The further Hearing before me

10. I indicated to Mr Hossain that I would therefore proceed  to  hear  the
    appeal de novo.  I was already aware that his  client,  the  appellant,
    was not present in court and I asked if he had an application  to  make
    with regard to the  possibility  of  adjourning  the  proceedings.   Mr
    Hossain responded that he wished to proceed  on  the  day.   He  relied
    solely on  what  was  before  the  previous  judge  and  there  was  no
    additional evidence, although I observed that the obvious evidence that
    was missing would be that from the appellant himself made orally.

11. Ms Tanner commented that it would be difficult to proceed without sight
    of the transcript (from the previous course provider) which is referred
    to  by  the   respondent.    However,   the   appellant   through   his
    representatives wished to proceed and the burden is on the appellant to
    prove his case.

12. I had before me the same documentation that was before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The overseas DVR is the first matter that I deal with.
     The basis of the document being verified as false  is  that  an  Entry
    Clearance Assistant with UK Border Agency Visa Services in the  British
    High Commission Dhaka for more than six years gave details  as  to  how
    the document was so verified and did this in the following terms:-

         "I contacted the above-named bank at 14:03  hours  on  18  November
         2012.  I contacted the bank on telephone number  8333016,  which  I
         obtained  from  our  phone  directory.   The  bank   representative
         confirmed that the bank records indicate that this account does not
         exist.

         The information held by the bank differs from what is  detailed  in
         the documents that were provided  in  support  of  the  application
         form.  As such I am  satisfied  that  the  statement  and  solvency
         letter for account number 013441110052189 are non-genuine."

13. It was on that basis that the refusal under 322(1A) of the  Immigration
    Rules was made.

14. The general grounds for refusal section 4 - v 13.0 valid from 21  March
    2013 issued by UKBA makes clear that for a refusal  to  be  made  under
    paragraphs 322(1A) or 322(2) there must be positive evidence  to  prove
    that the applicant has lied or submitted a false document.  The  burden
    of proof is said to be to a "higher standard  of  probabilities"  which
    means that it must be more likely than not that the applicant has  made
    false representations or given forged documents to obtain leave.  It is
    said not to be  appropriate  to  refuse  a  current  application  under
    paragraph 322(1A) simply because you (the caseworker) are not satisfied
    that the appellant is telling the truth.  Later in the same guidance at
    page 12 under "standard of proof" it is stated

         "to confirm that a document  is  false  you  must  get  independent
         evidence.  Ideally, you should ask the authority which  issued  the
         document or information to  confirm  in  writing  that  it  is  not
         genuine.  When this is not possible, you  should  consider  whether
         you can refuse the application for substantive reasons".

15. I see little argument with the guidance that is set out as quoted above
    to caseworkers.  The standard of proof in proceedings of this  type  in
    the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal is the civil one of the balance  of
    probabilities.  Although Lord Hoffman in B (Children) Re [2008] UKHL 35
    emphasised in such appeals that the seriousness of the consequences  do
    not require a different standard of  proof  or  a  specifically  cogent
    standard of evidence, for the respondent to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof on the balance of probabilities he/she needs to furnish  evidence
    of sufficient strength and quality and that evidence must be  submitted
    to critical scrutiny.

16. This has not been done  in  this  appeal.   The  person  who  made  the
    telephone call to the bank did not name the person to whom  he  or  she
    spoke at the bank.  There is no indication that a request was ever made
    to the bank to confirm in writing the information that was  given  over
    the telephone or that if a request was made but refused, or  there  was
    no response, the reasons given for refusing or the fact that there  was
    no response.

17. These I find to be important omissions and  subtract  from  the  weight
    that I would otherwise give to the DVR. As a result I am  not  able  to
    find to the appropriate standard that the application should have  been
    refused under paragraph  322(1A).  Having  submitted  the  evidence  to
    critical scrutiny it is of insufficient quality to  show  that  on  the
    balance of probabilities the respondent has proved  the  appellant  has
    made a false representation or provided a false document.

18. Having come to that finding I proceed to consider the evidence that  is
    before me. It is unexplained to me why the letter of July 11 2012  (D1)
    lodged in support of the application to the respondent makes  reference
    to an account balance of Tk.14, 45,771.23  as  does  the  letter  dated
    March 3 2013 provided to the Tribunal at 21 of the  appellant's  bundle
    when the bank statement itself that was produced and  generated  on  11
    July 2012 refers  to  a  different  amount,  the  balance  being  Tk.1,
    454,771.23.  I  do  not  understand  why  the  same  mistake  would  be
    perpetrated in two letters written some eight months apart.

19. Furthermore I have no idea  why  the  letter  of  July  11  2012  makes
    reference on it to "the seal and signature of the  attestor  is  hereby
    attested on 12 July 2012  by  Md  Asghar  Hussain  Assistant  Secretary
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs Dhaka" when it was signed by what appear to
    be two bank  officials  the  previous  day.  Why  would  the  Assistant
    Secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs have attested the document
    at all? I do not know the answer and the  appellant  in  his  statement
    does not refer to it and was not available to give oral evidence.

20. The letter dated 3 March 2013 from the bank confirms  that  it  has  no
    record of investigation of the above account from any  authority.   Had
    the respondent named the person to whom the assistant had  spoken  this
    is a matter that might have been resolved when the appellant apparently
    contacted the Bank himself.

21. These matters do not prove that the documents provided  are  false  but
    neither do I find that it is proved to the relevant standard that  they
    can be relied on.

22. I now turn to the substantive reasons for refusal of the  appeal.   The
    refusal was under paragraph 245ZX(a) which refers to the applicant  not
    falling for refusal under the general grounds for refusal.  That  point
    now falls away.  Paragraph 245ZX(d) requires that  the  appellant  must
    have a minimum of 10 points under paragraphs 10 to 14  of  Appendix  C.
    An applicant in this category must score 10 points  for  funds.   There
    are question marks over the evidence provided to show  that  there  are
    sufficient funds to provide for the course fees and maintenance for the
    period of the course.  If the amount in the bank account in  July  2012
    was in the amount asserted then that equates to a sum in the region  of
    �12,000 which more than covered the requirement and  as  a  result  the
    appellant would be entitled to 10 points  for  funds  if  the  evidence
    produced is accepted.

23. The remaining reason for refusal is that the appellant under Attributes
    - Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies - claimed 30  points  but  was
    awarded none.  This was on the  basis  that  the  CAS  stated  that  he
    intended to study a Diploma in Management at NQF/QCF level 6  and  that
    his current course  represented  progression  from  studies  previously
    undertaken at NQF level 5.  However, the transcript provided from Metro
    College of Management Sciences is  said  to  show  that  the  appellant
    previously studied at NQF level 6.  The Tier 4  sponsor  has  therefore
    not  sufficiently  demonstrated  how  the  appellant's  current  course
    constitutes academic progression.  That is the  reason  for  no  points
    having been awarded for the CAS.

24. The transcript referred to provided  by  Metro  College  of  Management
    Sciences was not in  the  respondent's  bundle.   There  is  a  written
    statement from the appellant dated 25 March 2013 at  3  and  4  of  the
    appellant's bundle of documents. There is a signature on that statement
    but underneath it is  stated  "instructed  over  the  phone".  In  that
    statement  the  appellant  says  that  his  current  course  represents
    academic progression from his previous course as the previous  one  was
    at NQF level 5 and his current course is NQF  level  6.   That  concurs
    with the CAS provided by St  John's  College.   This  states  that  the
    current course is higher than the previous one which was at  NQF  level
    5.  Under "other evidence" for making that statement the  documentation
    used to obtain the offer included  a  Diploma  in  Business  Management
    issued from Metro College of  Management  Sciences  UK.   Whether  that
    included the transcript the CAS does not state.

25. The  respondent  has  referred  to  the  transcript  showing  that  the
    appellant previously studied at NQF level 6 but has not  produced  that
    transcript.  The appellant has not produced it either  and  although  I
    have no direct evidence about it Mr  Hossain  said  that  it  had  been
    lodged with the respondent and a copy was not kept.  The appellant does
    not refer to that transcript in his statement and does  not  appear  to
    have made any effort to obtain it. Its production would prove  one  way
    or the other the status of the previous course.  I note,  however,  and
    give weight to the fact that according to the CAS the  previous  course
    followed by the appellant was a "Diploma in Business Management  issued
    from Metro College of Management Sciences, UK" and the  current  course
    is "Diploma in Management". On the face of  their  titles  the  courses
    sound very similar indeed.

26. Paragraph 120A (a) of Appendix  A  states  that  points  will  only  be
    awarded for a valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ...  if  the
    sponsor has confirmed that the course for  which  the  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies has been assigned represents  academic  progress
    from previous study as defined in 120A (b) undertaken during  the  last
    period of leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a student where the
    applicant has had such leave.  Under (b)  for  a  course  to  represent
    academic progress from previous study the  course  must  be  above  the
    level of the previous course for which the applicant was granted  leave
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a student or involved further study
    at the same level, which the Tier 4 sponsor confirms  as  complementing
    the previous course for which the applicant was granted leave as a Tier
    4 (General) Student or as a student.

27. Although the transcript  provided  from  Metro  College  of  Management
    Sciences has not been produced it is difficult to  understand  why  the
    respondent would refer to it  specifically  as  showing  the  appellant
    studying previously at NQF level 6 unless  that  were  indeed  so.  The
    other possibility is that the respondent simply made a mistake and  the
    transcript either said nothing of the sort or was produced in  relation
    to someone else entirely. Either possibility I find is unlikely  as  it
    formed one of the cornerstones of refusal.

28. The  appellant  asserts  simply  that  the  current  course  represents
    academic progression and to give weight to that assertion refers to the
    information provided in the CAS.  However, nowhere has he  specifically
    dealt with the transcript  point  or,  seemingly  attempted  to  obtain
    further evidence in relation to it either from  the  respondent  or  by
    contacting Metro College of Management Sciences  to  obtain  a  further
    transcript.  He did not give oral  evidence  before  me  and  I  remind
    myself that the burden is upon the appellant to prove his case and this
    is on the balance of probabilities.

29. This is all very unsatisfactory. The documentation produced in relation
    to the bank account as I have already found  does  not  show  that  the
    appellant produced false documents but I do not find I am able to  rely
    upon that documentation entirely and this is  for  the  reasons  stated
    above.

30. The appellant has been represented throughout and yet has not  provided
    the evidence that may have persuaded me that he has complied  with  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. He made the decision, it  seems,
    not to  give  oral  evidence  and  be  tested  under  cross-examination
    preferring to rely on written documentation. His written statement does
    not deal with the important issues in  any  depth.  He  does  not,  for
    instance, refer anywhere to the transcript point.  He  does  not  state
    that the respondent is entirely mistaken as to what it said or that  it
    said something other than the  respondent  asserts  or  even  that  the
    transcript itself does not reflect the true position.

31. Weighing all these matters in the round I am  unable  to  find  on  the
    balance of probabilities that the appellant has proved that he succeeds
    under the Immigration Rules and the claim therefore fails  under  those
    rules.

Article 8 ECHR

32. I now turn to the Article 8 claim.   The  appellant  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since 31 March 2011.  He will have developed  a  private
    life since arrival that is worthy of respect.  He  does  not  have  any
    expectation of remaining in the United Kingdom.  His  statement  refers
    to returning to Bangladesh at the end of his studies here.  There is no
    evidence before me to which I can  attach  any  weight  that  tells  me
    anything about the appellant's social  ties  and  relationships  formed
    during his period of study. A  student  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
    temporary basis has no expectation of a right to  remain  in  order  to
    further these ties and relationships if the  criteria  of  the  points-
    based system are not met.  The character of the appellant's  individual
    private life is ordinarily by its very nature of a  type  that  can  be
    formed elsewhere albeit through  different  social  ties  after  he  is
    removed from the United Kingdom.  I conclude that  the  respondent  has
    shown that the public interest  in  proper  and  effective  immigration
    control in the circumstances of this appeal outweigh the  private  life
    claim of this appellant as  put  before  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    myself.

33. As the judge in  the  First-tier  found  the  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant being contained as it is within  the  same  document  as  the
    reasons for refusal is not a decision made in accordance with  the  law
    and it will be for the respondent to decide if a lawful decision is  to
    be made.  As it stands the appeal fails under Article 8 ECHR also.

Decision

34. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law for the reasons given above.
     I substitute for that decision  that  the  decision  to  refuse  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules cannot stand  but  that  the
    appellant has not satisfied the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    and the appeal is therefore dismissed under those Rules.

35. For the above reasons also the appeal  is  dismissed  under  Article  8
    ECHR.

36. No anonymity direction has been made; there was no argument for me that
    one should now be made and  I  see  no  good  reason  to  make  such  a
    direction.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

