
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02129/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |On 12 February 2015           |
|On 16 January 2015                            |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                     RR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell of Counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka having been born  on  12  July
    1986.  He applied for further leave to remain in the UK on the basis of
    his private life under Article 8 of the ECHR which was refused  by  the
    respondent on 10 December 2013.  He had been  served  with  a  One-Stop
    Notice under Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 in response to which he had merely stated that he  had  an  asylum
    claim but had not it is fair to say given full details with  regard  to
    that claim or at any rate the details which he gave  were  insufficient
    to give this claim much chance of success.  In particular, and this  is
    relevant in light of what is said below, his claim was not supported by
    a medical report.

 2. His appeal was then heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Conrath
    sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  8  July  2014  and  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 15 September 2014 she dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds but also, more importantly for present purposes on
    asylum grounds as well.

 3. The appellant has appealed against  this  decision  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on a date which
    is unclear within the file who set out his reasons as follows:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal... against a decision
             of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Conrath)  who,   in   a
             determination promulgated on 25 September 2014  dismissed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
             to refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The  judge
             also found  not  credible  the  Appellant's  claim  on  asylum
             grounds raised in the grounds of appeal.

         2.   The grounds argue unfair failure by  the  judge  to  recognise
             that the Appellant had followed the  correct  procedure  under
             the S120 notice for raising asylum concerns.   It  is  further
             argued that the judge failed to take account of the fact  that
             under this procedure and in the absence of any decision by the
             respondent to interview the Appellant his  statement  produced
             for the hearing was the  first  chance  he  had  had  to  give
             evidence about his concerns.  There is also alleged failure to
             consider the explanation offered for the  absence  of  medical
             evidence - which appears to be that he was poorly  advised  by
             his previous representatives.  Although the determination as a
             whole is adequately reasoned,  it  may  be  that  the  adverse
             credibility conclusions reached  on  these  points  amount  to
             errors of law capable of being material to the outcome of  the
             asylum appeal...".

 4. I do not need to examine all the  arguments  advanced  in  the  grounds
    because for the reasons which follow  I  consider  that  this  decision
    cannot stand.

 5. Among the reasons argued before me why the decision should be set aside
    was the judge's reliance on the inadequate preparation  of  the  asylum
    appeal  and  in  particular  the  failure  of  the  appellant  or  more
    relevantly his then  solicitors  to  support  his  claim  that  he  had
    sustained injuries at the hands of the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  by  a
    medical report.  In particular at  paragraph  24  the  judge  found  as
    follows:

         "24. In addition, there was no medical report  in  support  of  the
             Appellant's claim that he had been tortured or caused harm  at
             the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities.  When  he  was  asked
             about this in cross-examination, he stated that he  was  going
             to see his GP for an appointment the following Friday.  It  is
             clear that this Appellant has been represented  by  solicitors
             since, at least, the filing  of  the  Notice  and  Grounds  of
             Appeal, which were dated the 30th December 2013, and I have no
             doubt that, had he raised  the  fact  that  he  had  sustained
             injuries in the way that he claims at  the  hands  f  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities, his  solicitors  would  have  organised  a
             medical report in relation to such alleged injuries  prior  to
             the hearing of this matter in July 2014"[my emphasis].

 6. It is asserted on behalf of the appellant that as a matter of fact this
    finding by the judge was factually incorrect because the appellant  had
    told his solicitors that he had sustained injuries in the  way  claimed
    and they had not organised such a medical report as the  judge  had  no
    doubt would have been prepared.  In support of  this  assertion  I  was
    shown a letter which the appellant's current solicitors, that  is  Jein
    Solicitors, had obtained from the appellant's  previous  solicitors,  S
    Satha Solicitors of 376-378 High Street North Manor, Manor  Park.   The
    appellant's current solicitors had written  requesting  an  explanation
    from Satha & Co as to why it was that "you did not advise the client to
    get medical evidence in support of his claim to have been detained  and
    tortured and why you advised him that  he  should  wait  for  the  Home
    Office to call him for interview".  The  solicitors  also  asked  Satha
    Solicitors to "please explain why you did  not  explain  the  procedure
    where a One-Stop Notice has been issued as in this case".

 7. The relevant parts of S Satha's response provides as follows:

         "We refer to your letter dated 24/09/2014 and express our dismay at
         the tone of the letter...

         The client mentioned his wish to claim asylum but at that stage  he
         did not provide us with details for the basis  of  his  claim.   He
         told us that he would produce the  statement  in  Tamil  with  full
         details of the basis for his claim.   He  told  us  that  he  would
         provide a statement in Tamil with full details  of  the  claim  and
         supporting evidence, if any, in due course.  Bearing  in  mind  the
         limited time to file an appeal to the  Tribunal  and  the  risk  of
         client's asylum claim being  considered  under  the  detained  fast
         track procedure, it was agreed with client to file  his  appeal  to
         the Tribunal first and then later consider the basis of the  asylum
         claim after obtaining his  statement.   The  appeal  was  therefore
         lodged on 30/12/2013 and the grounds raised the asylum  issue.   We
         believed that once the appeal was lodged with among other  reasons,
         an asylum ground, the asylum would be considered by an  Immigration
         Judge as a preliminary issue  and  then  remitted  to  Home  Office
         Asylum team for proper consideration of the asylum claim.

         Secondly in preparation for his appeal hearing, we  discussed  with
         client the issue of his detention  and  torture  in  2007  and  the
         injuries suffered.  He made us aware that his injuries  had  healed
         with time but he had some scars at  his  back.   We  discussed  the
         possibility of obtaining medical report on the scars to support the
         claim as well as the financial cost involved.  The client agreed to
         provide photographs of the scars instead  of  obtaining  a  medical
         report at this stage.  The need for a  medical  report  was  to  be
         revisited on the understanding that the matter would be remitted to
         Home Office for consideration of the asylum claim...".

 8. When writing this letter, the appellant's previous solicitors  did  not
    appear to appreciate just how wrong their advice had been, nor is it at
    all clear why, when it should  have  been  apparent  to  any  competent
    solicitor during the hearing before Judge Conrath that their advice was
    at the very least misguided, they did not at  this  stage  ask  for  an
    adjournment in order to enable a medical report to be  prepared  or  at
    least inform the court  as  to  why  a  medical  report  had  not  been
    produced.  The net effect was, as appears to be  clear  in  this  case,
    that this appellant was deprived of a proper  opportunity  to  put  his
    case before the Tribunal.

 9. On behalf of the respondent Mr Wilding accepted that in  light  of  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in FP (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 13 it was open to this Tribunal  to
    find that the total failure of the appellant's previous  solicitors  to
    give the appellant adequate or proper legal advice as it is  clear  was
    the case here was such as to amount to a procedural  irregularity.   In
    FP (Iran) the situation was that an applicant had not been notified  of
    the date of hearing and consequently the case proceeded in his absence;
    the Court of Appeal in  that  case  considered  that  albeit  that  the
    Tribunal had been unaware that the applicant had not been  informed  of
    the hearing of the court this was nonetheless a  material  irregularity
    because the situation was so unfair that it needed to be remedied.   In
    this case I would and do set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Conrath for procedural irregularity,  although  in  this
    regard I make it clear that she was of course unaware that  the  advice
    which the appellant had been given was so incompetent.

10. I also consider that in any event it is  clear  from  what  is  put  at
    paragraph 24 that the judge proceeded on the basis of a  factual  error
    which was that the appellant had been  given  competent  legal  advice,
    which as is clear from the letter which I have set out  above  was  not
    the case and the judge should not have assumed without any enquiry that
    these solicitors would have acted in a  competent  manner.   While  one
    would like to assume that solicitors usually act competently this is by
    no means always the case and a judge should be wary of  making  blanket
    assumptions that this is always so.

11. Accordingly, in my judgment the appropriate course must be to set  this
    determination aside for procedural irregularity and I  agree  with  the
    submissions made on behalf of  both  parties  that  in  light  of  this
    decision the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    re-hearing because the effect of the irregularity is that the appellant
    has not had a fair trial.







Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to
be heard at Hatton Cross by any  Immigration  Judge  other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Conrath.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:


         [pic]             Date: 6 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

