
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02099/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2016                             |On 19 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                          Celcila Yoe-Anyi Kawakuvi
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Not legally represented
For the respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birk promulgated 13.4.15, dismissing on immigration  and
    human rights grounds her appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State to refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK as the
    victim of domestic violence. The Judge heard the appeal on 13.4.15.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  White  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    24.8.15.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 18.4.16 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. I can only interfere with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal if  I
    find an error of law in the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sufficient to require the decision of Judge  Birk  to  be  set
    aside. For the reasons set out below, I find no such error.

 5. The appellant was not legally represented before me and  was  similarly
    not represented at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing. Before Judge
    Birk the appellant stated that she thought she was  to  be  represented
    but was told by her representative that he was not licensed to speak on
    her behalf. She made no application to adjourn.

 6. During the course of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant said that she had given  her  solicitors  documents  for  the
    hearing, which she believed had been sent in.  Judge  Birk  found  that
    whilst some documents are referred in the solicitors'  covering  letter
    of 9.10.14 submitted with her application, they were not found  in  the
    case papers. However, as far as I can see,  with  the  exception  of  a
    letter from the hospital, everything listed in that letter is now  with
    the case papers. It appears likely  that  the  hospital  letter  either
    referenced the then pending  birth  of  her  child,  or  treatment  for
    injuries arising from her claim to be the victim of domestic  violence.



 7. The grant of permission to appeal by Judge White was on  the  basis  of
    the appellant's assertion that she could  provide  further  information
    from the police. Judge White stated, "It is  arguable  that  there  may
    have been procedural unfairness in not adjourning the hearing in  order
    to allow the appellant to produce such information that may  have  been
    material to the issues. Accordingly I am satisfied that the grounds and
    decision and reasons disclose an arguable error of law."

 8. It is not at all clear which documents the appellant was referring  to,
    or  what  Judge  White  considered  their  relevance  to  be.  In   the
    handwritten grounds of appeal, the appellant stated that she could  not
    get a reply from the officer who handled her  domestic  violence  case.
    The solicitors' letter made no reference to any  information  from  the
    police, other than two West Midlands Police Contact cards, one of which
    has the single word 'assault' on it.

 9. The remainder of the grounds assert  that  she  should  be  allowed  to
    remain in the UK on human rights grounds because her  relationship  had
    ended with a child and it will be difficult for her to  return  to  her
    country because she would have no one to turn  to.  Her  father  is  in
    Ireland and cannot financially sponsor the appellant and her  son.  She
    also said that she was taking medication for depression.

10. The appellant first came to the UK in 2012 with  leave  as  a  student,
    subsequently extended to October 2013. She  stopped  studying  in  June
    2013. She has remained in the UK without leave since the expiry of  her
    leave. On 10.10.14 she applied for settlement in the UK as  the  victim
    of domestic violence, arising from a relationship outside  of  marriage
    with [NN], which she claims broke down on 24.8.14.  She  has  a  child,
    RKM, born after the end of the relationship, on 17.10.14.

11. As Judge Birk found, the appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    the Rules for leave to remain as the victim of domestic violence.

12. I am not satisfied that any adjournment could or  would  have  assisted
    the  appellant.  It  is  not  necessarily  the  case  that  the   judge
    disbelieved her account of having been the victim of domestic violence,
    but assuming that she had been, she was no longer with the partner  and
    not at risk from him  on  return  to  Cameroon.  Even  before  me,  the
    appellant still had not obtained the evidence she  spoke  of  from  the
    police. On enquiry, she told me that the evidence she sought  consisted
    only of confirmation from  a  police  officer  that  she  had  reported
    domestic violence. No police action or prosecution had taken place.  In
    the circumstances the appellant  was  not  prejudiced  by  the  judge's
    alleged failure to grant an adjournment.

13. The appellant told me at the hearing that she has now  discovered  that
    her son, whose birth certificate does not name any father, is  not  the
    child of the partner with whom her relationship ended in  August  2014.
    She has discovered through DNA  testing  that  he  is  the  son  of  an
    entirely different man, [FB], a national of the DRC, with whom she told
    me she had a 'one-night stand,' and  with  whom  she  has  no  on-going
    relationship. Apparently this gentleman, whom the appellant states  has
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK, is attempting to register himself
    as the father of her child and to obtain British  citizenship  for  the
    child. If that is the case,  the  appellant  may  have  an  alternative
    avenue to pursue for leave to remain in  the  UK.  However,  those  are
    matters outside the remit of this  appeal  and  over  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal has no control.

14. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal took proper account of  all
    the appellant's circumstances in considering her application for  leave
    to remain on human rights grounds. There was no procedural  unfairness.
    No error of law is disclosed in the decision and thus this appeal  must
    fail.

Conclusions:

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

