
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02763/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2013                            |On 4 December 2013           |
|Prepared on 14 November 2013                  |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                mr danavdeep

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bajwa, Legal Representative, of A Bajwa & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 2 May 1989, is a citizen of  India.   He
    applied for further leave to  remain  in  this  country  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant under  the  points-based  system  and  for  a
    biometric immigration document, but his application was refused by  the
    respondent on 7 January 2013.  The refusal letter  is  dated  the  same
    date.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker, sitting at Hatton Cross on  13
    May 2013.  In a determination promulgated on 4 June 2013, Judge  Walker
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  this  decision,  and  was   granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish.   Following
    the grant of permission to appeal, this appeal was listed before me  on
    30 July 2013.

 4. As I recorded in my Note  of  Hearing  and  Directions  following  that
    hearing, a key issue in this appeal is whether or not Section 50 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, to which  the  appellant
    was not entitled to study at any other institution than that which  was
    his sponsor, applied.  The basis of Judge Walker's  decision  was  that
    Section 50 did  apply,  as  he  made  clear  at  paragraph  22  of  his
    determination.  Accordingly, Judge Walker found at  paragraph  23  that
    the appellant, by undertaking a course of study at a different college,
    had not complied with the conditions attached to his leave to enter.

 5. It was submitted in the grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal that  the  respondent's  case-worker  had  written
    "SECTION 50 does not apply" [to the  appellant]  in  her  notes.   When
    granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frankish
    stated as follows:

        "...

         2.   The application for permission  to  appeal  asserts  that  the
             appellant was ruled against for switching  without  permission
             on the basis that Section 50... applied when the  respondent's
             own file is endorsed in large letters that it does not.

         3.   The finding against the appellant is indeed on  the  basis  of
             S50 (para 22).  The appellant is effectively stating that  the
             respondent has conceded that it does not  apply.   If  so,  an
             arguable error of law has arisen.  The  appellant  should  not
             take too much comfort from this, however, as it is for him  to
             demonstrate the concession and it is certainly  not  what  the
             refusal letter says (final paragraph page one)."

 6. As I recorded following the hearing on  30  July  before  me,  at  that
    hearing Mr Bajwa had referred me first to the refusal letter, where  it
    was stated that Section  50  applies,  but  then  to  the  case  notes,
    contained within the respondent's bundle at page D4, where it was  said
    in terms under "Minute/Case Notes", that "Section 50 does  not  apply".
    It was also then further stated,  at  the  bottom  of  the  page  under
    "ELIGIBILITY", "Able to switch? Yes".  Mr Bajwa submitted that if  this
    had been communicated to the appellant, it would not be  fair  now  for
    the appellant to rely upon Section 50.

 7. At that hearing, Mr Walker, who was then representing  the  respondent,
    asked for an adjournment in order to obtain a full statement  from  the
    caseworker in this appeal, a Ms J Fowler, as to how the document at  D4
    came to be compiled.  Mr Bajwa agreed that such a statement  should  be
    obtained.

 8. I accordingly gave directions that the respondent must before Friday 23
    August 2013, file with the Tribunal  and  serve  on  the  appellant,  a
    statement from Ms  Fowler,  as  to  how  the  document  at  D4  of  the
    respondent's bundle, referred to above,  came  to  be  compiled,  which
    statement should exhibit all the correspondence with the appellant  and
    should also set out any instructions which the appellant was given with
    regard to the conditions of his visa.  Mr Bajwa informed  the  Tribunal
    that he would not wish to make any response to  this  statement  and  I
    directed further that I would give further directions as appropriate in
    light of whatever evidence was received on behalf of the respondent.

 9. The respondent not having served any further evidence,  notwithstanding
    my directions, on 4 September 2013 I gave further directions  that  the
    appeal would be re-listed for hearing on 10 October 2013, but that  the
    respondent may serve further evidence provided that this was filed with
    the Tribunal and served on the appellant's solicitors by no later  than
    Friday 27 September 2013.  No such further evidence was filed.

10. The appeal then was re-listed for hearing before me on 10 October 2013,
    at which hearing I heard submissions on behalf of both parties.   As  I
    recorded these submissions contemporaneously and they are contained  in
    my Record of Proceedings, I shall not set out  below  everything  which
    was said to me during the course of the hearing.  However, I  have  had
    regard to everything which was said, and to all the documents contained
    within the file, whether or not the same is  specifically  referred  to
    below.

11. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis informed the  Tribunal  that  he
    had spoken to the caseworker, who was unable to recall how  the  record
    sheet came into being.  She had only worked in this department briefly,
    before moving on to another team.  However, this record was a  complete
    red herring.  The record, which should not  have  been  made,  was  not
    relevant, because the appellant had no right to switch colleges  unless
    he made an application to do so.  At the worst, a caseworker had made a
    mistake, but this caseworker did not even  recollect  what  Section  50
    was.  That was why no evidence had been put before the Tribunal.

12. The relevant Rule was 245ZW, which was cited in the refusal letter  and
    it is clear from subparagraph (iv) that an applicant is  not  permitted
    to study except at the institution recorded in the CAS as the  sponsor.
    This appellant entered, stating that it was his intention to  study  at
    the College of Technology, London (as recorded at paragraph 7 of  Judge
    Walker's determination) but then moved to another college, the Kingston
    College, starting there on 22 July 2010.  He had  not  applied  to  the
    respondent to change colleges, and accordingly Section 50 of  the  2009
    Act, which amended Section 3(1)(c)(i)(a) of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 1971, which allows the respondent to impose  restrictions  relating
    to an applicant's studies, applied.  This  provision  commenced  on  21
    July 2009 and accordingly the appellant was in breach of a condition of
    his entry.  There is no suggestion in  the  Rules  that  there  is  any
    exception.

13. Whatever was recorded in the respondent's case notes,  this  cannot  be
    seen as a concession, first because it would be unlawful  but  secondly
    because the application was actually refused, so there was no  decision
    to grant permission.  The only way in  which  this  could  be  seen  as
    relevant  is  through  a  combination  of  Article  8  and   legitimate
    expectation, but that could only get off the ground  if  the  appellant
    was able to show that when he switched colleges in 2010 he thought that
    the respondent would not apply the law to him in the  future  when  she
    became aware that he  had  switched  colleges.   In  this  case,  there
    happened to be a case record sheet, disclosed after  the  time  he  had
    actually switched colleges.  His claim could not now succeed because he
    has never suggested, by way of  evidence,  that  he  was  told  by  the
    respondent's caseworker at the material time when he switched  colleges
    in 2010 or before he made the application to  extend  time  to  remain,
    that he had been contacted or told that the Rule  would  not  apply  to
    him.  So his argument could not succeed.  While Mr Jarvis on behalf  of
    the respondent apologised for the administrative error, and  also  that
    the respondent had not complied with the direction originally  made  by
    the Tribunal, nonetheless this appeal must fail.  As it had never  been
    suggested that the appellant ever received  a  communication  from  the
    caseworker to the effect that Section 50 did not  apply  to  his  case,
    there was no basis for arguing that there was any error of law in Judge
    Walker's determination.

14. For the sake of completeness, Mr Jarvis referred the  Tribunal  to  the
    Court of Appeal decisions in Naik [2011] EWCA Civ  1546  and  Rahman  &
    Others [2011] EWCA Civ 814.  It was the respondent's  case  that  while
    there might be an error in the case record, this had no bearing on this
    appeal, because this appellant did  not  come  within  the  Rules.   at
    paragraph 19 of Naik,  the  court  set  out  the  principles  governing
    reliance on legitimate expectation as follows:

         "The general principle, as the judge said... is not in  doubt.   He
         referred to the leading case, R  v  North  and  East  Devon  Health
         Authority ex p Coughlan [2001] QB 213, where  this  court  accepted
         that, where a lawful promise or practice has induced  a  legitimate
         expectation  of  a  benefit  which  is  substantive,   not   simply
         procedural, the  court  will  consider  whether  to  frustrate  the
         expectation is so unfair that to take a new  and  different  course
         would amount to an abuse of power, and in  so  doing  will  draw  a
         balance between  the  interests  of  a  person  with  a  legitimate
         expectation and the interests that weigh against fulfilling it".

15. What was necessary was first that there  was  a  communication  of  the
    promise to the appellant and second it must be a lawful promise.

16. The respondent also relied on the statement of the Court of  Appeal  in
    Rahman, at paragraph  42,  that  "I  remain  of  the  view,  shared  by
    Professor  Christopher  Forsyth  that   the   concept   of   legitimate
    expectation is normally  otiose  in  cases  where  there  has  been  no
    representation, by  words  or  conduct,  by  the  public  authority  in
    question to the claimant seeking to rely on it".  At  paragraph  43  of
    that judgment, it was made clear that  in  those  cases,  none  of  the
    appellants knew about the policy being relied on and so could not  draw
    any legitimate expectation from it.

17. In this case it could not be right for this  appellant  to  be  granted
    leave when everyone else  would  have  to  be  refused,  especially  in
    circumstances where he had not been told that he would  be  allowed  to
    switch  colleges.   What  has  happened  in  this  case  is  that   the
    appellant's advisers had seen the documents and then tried to  rely  on
    it.

18. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to whether it was  correct
    that this appellant had not given evidence that he  had  been  told  he
    could switch colleges, (that is that Section 50  would  not  be  relied
    upon) Mr Bajwa confirmed that that was correct.  The appellant had  not
    given evidence to this effect.

19. When asked by the Tribunal what Mr Bajwa now said,  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, the error of law had been in Judge  Walker's  determination,
    Mr Bajwa said that initially, the respondent's previous  representative
    (this is a reference to Mr Walker at the hearing before me on  30  July
    2013) had assured the Tribunal that he would provide some evidence from
    the caseworker, but this evidence had not been provided.

20. In answer to another question from the Tribunal  as  to  how  something
    written on a piece of paper which was never shown to the appellant  and
    which was in  fact  wrong  could  give  the  appellant  any  legitimate
    expectation that the Rule would not be applied in his  case,  Mr  Bajwa
    said that no reason had been given by the caseworker  as  to  why  this
    would not apply.  In answer to an observation from the Tribunal that  a
    concession would not apply because it was the law that it would not, Mr
    Bajwa again relied on the fact that the  respondent  had  not  complied
    with directions which had been given.  As to  the  error  of  law,  the
    caseworker was saying that it had been noted that the discretion  would
    be exercised in  favour  of  the  appellant.   All  caseworkers  had  a
    discretion in Tier 4 cases.  In this case the caseworker  was  able  to
    say that Section 50 would not apply.

21. In any event Section 50  should  not  apply  anyway,  so  long  as  the
    appellant has a CAS letter and funds, he could apply.   The  respondent
    had given no reason why the caseworker had said that Section  50  would
    not apply.

22. At the end of the day all the appellant was doing was applying to study
    at another college.  By the time he applied Section 50  was  irrelevant
    because all he needed to show was that he had funds and a CAS letter.

23. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to why paragraph 322(3) of
    the Rules (which provided that where a condition attached to  leave  to
    enter had not been complied with, leave should normally be refused)  Mr
    Bajwa replied that this was discretionary.  On his passport, there  was
    no restriction on his switching colleges.  In  evidence  the  appellant
    had said that he had been asked for a higher  fee,  although  Mr  Bajwa
    conceded that his evidence had not been accepted.

24. However, at the end of the day the respondent was not able to  say  why
    the caseworker had written that the record of the case notes were  "not
    for disclosure outside UKBA".  The caseworker had said he was  able  to
    switch, Section 245ZW was discretionary and but for paragraph 322(3) of
    the Rules, the application would have succeeded.

25. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis accepted that the sole basis  of
    refusal was paragraph 322(3).   The  appellant  had  been  awarded  the
    points as claimed.  However, the Rules provided that this appellant had
    not been allowed to switch, that had been a condition of his permission
    previously given.  Although there was a discretion in the Rules, it was
    virtually inevitable that this application would be refused because  of
    the previous breach of the condition.  It was also  important  to  note
    that Judge Walker had not accepted the reasons given by the  appellant,
    so could not find any basis upon  which  discretion  should  have  been
    exercised in the appellant's favour.  It had also been accepted that no
    one knew of the error on the respondent's file until it was seen, which
    was after the date of refusal in any event.



Discussion

26. In my judgment, there is no arguable error of  law  in  Judge  Walker's
    determination.  It is clear from paragraph  245ZW(iv)  that  it  was  a
    condition of the appellant's previous leave that he was not allowed  to
    switch colleges without permission.  It is not suggested that he either
    applied for or was granted permission to switch colleges, and so he was
    clearly in breach of that condition.

27. It is also clear that the appellant in this case cannot rely  upon  the
    principle of "legitimate expectation", because at no time was  he  made
    aware of what was (clearly wrongly) contained within  the  respondent's
    record.   What  seems  to  have  happened  in  this  case  is  that  an
    inexperienced caseworker made a mistake on the  record  she  made,  but
    that mistake was never communicated  to  the  appellant  until  it  was
    inadvertently disclosed  in  the  course  of  these  proceedings.   Not
    unreasonably, the  appellant's  representatives  then  sought  to  take
    advantage of  this,  but,  in  my  judgment,  without  making  out  any
    sustainable argument that there had been  any  error  in  the  decision
    which had been made.

28. Paragraph 322(3) of the Rules is clear.  It provides as follows:

         "Refusal of leave to remain, variation of leave to enter or  remain
         or curtailment of leave

         322. In addition to the grounds for refusal of  extension  of  stay
             set out in parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following  provisions
             apply in relation to the refusal of  an  application  for  ...
             variation of leave to... remain...

         Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused...

         (3)  Failure to comply with any condition attached to the grant  of
             leave to enter or remain...".

29. In other words, where, as in this case,  an  applicant  has  failed  to
    comply with a condition attached to a previous grant of leave to  enter
    or remain, an application for further leave to remain or  variation  of
    leave to remain should normally be refused.  It is in this context that
    consideration  must  be  given  to  paragraph  23  of  Judge   Walker's
    determination, in which he found as follows:

         "23. As the appellant undertook  a  course  of  study  at  Kingston
             College of IT and Management he  has  not  complied  with  the
             conditions attached to his leave  to  enter.   Following  from
             this it is clear that  paragraph  322(3)  of  the  Immigration
             Rules apply.  This is one of the Grounds  on  which  leave  to
             remain should normally be  refused.   The  appellant  has  not
             provided any evidence or provided any special or compassionate
             circumstances to show why his situation should be an exception
             to the normality of this particular Rule.  Indeed he was asked
             by Ms Leyshon [who  represented  the  respondent  before  him]
             whether there was any reason why he could not go back to India
             now and he accepted that there was no reason.   The  appellant
             has achieved a qualification.  The course he is  intending  to
             take is not one at a higher level; it is the same level as his
             existing qualification.  He has not offered any explanation as
             to why he is wishing to take this particular course."

30. Then at paragraph 24, Judge Walker went on to find as follows:

         "24.  I  therefore  find  that  there  are  no  special  or   other
             circumstances which would lead to paragraph 322(3)  not  being
             applied."

31. Mr Bajwa has not suggested before me that Judge Walker did not consider
    properly  whether  or  not  discretion  should  be  exercised  in   the
    appellant's favour, and it is clear that he applied the  correct  test.
    He understood that paragraph  322(3)  is  not  a  mandatory  ground  of
    refusal, and considered whether there were any  factors  in  this  case
    which would allow him to depart  from  the  normal  consequences  which
    would follow where an applicant has failed to comply with  a  condition
    attached to a previous grant of  leave  to  enter  or  remain.   Having
    considered the circumstances of this  case,  Judge  Walker  found  that
    there were not, and gave proper reasons for so finding.

32. In my judgment, that finding was clearly open to him  on  the  evidence
    before him and indeed, it would be  arguable  that  any  other  finding
    would, in the circumstances of this case, have been perverse.  The only
    reason put forward by Mr Bajwa on the  appellant's  behalf  is  that  a
    caseworker had marked her file that Section 50 would not apply, but  as
    this was clearly an error and  as  it  cannot  be  suggested  that  the
    appellant even knew of this, this cannot be a  reason  why  the  normal
    consequences should not follow.

33. Accordingly, there being no material error of  law  in  Judge  Walker's
    determination, this appeal must be dismissed and I will so order.



Decision

There being  no  error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                 Dated:  22 November 2013

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
