
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02552/2013
     IA/02555/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2013                             |On 2 September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                KAMRUL HASSAN
                                SHAMMI AKTER


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel, instructed by PGA Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought  by  the  first  appellant  Mr  Hassan,  (the
    second appellant  is  his  dependant),  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 4 January 2013.  The judge assessed the  evidence
    and concluded that the burden of proof under the  Rules  had  not  been
    discharged and that the appeal fell to be dismissed.

2.   The decision was challenged on a number of bases. It  was  argued  that
    the judge applied the wrong standard of proof, that he erred in respect
    of the guardian and also that issue of the removal directions issued by
    the respondent concurrent to the refusal letter was not addressed.

3.   These matters were  all  considered  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    considering whether or not to grant permission to appeal and he limited
    the grant of permission to the Section 47 point.  Today it is argued by
    Mr Khan that there is a fairness issue here in  respect  of  the  third
    party support.  The problem with that, as Mr Avery points out, is  that
    it was not a matter that was explored before the judge so I think it is
    not a matter on which it is appropriate to allow  a  variation  of  the
    grant of permission to extend to that point as  there  is  no  arguable
    error of law in that regard.  So permission on that is refused.

4.   That leaves us simply with the  Section  47  point  and  Mr  Avery  has
    withdrawn the decision  in  that  regard.   That  is  the  only  matter
    outstanding and I record the withdrawal of  that  decision.   Otherwise
    the appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
