
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/02615/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 January 2018                           |On 20 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                          Geethapriyan Selvanayagam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel, instructed by Lova
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Walters promulgated on 22  February  2017  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  16  December  2014
    refusing both asylum and leave to remain on human rights grounds.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 20 February  1996.   He
    left Sri Lanka at the age of 13 on 21 February 2009, and arrived in the
    United Kingdom on the following day,  where  he  was  received  by  his
    paternal uncle, Mr Nadesan  Pathmanathan.   On  24  February  2009  the
    Appellant claimed asylum.  His application  was  refused  on  17  April
    2009, but he was granted discretionary leave to remain  for  two  years
    pursuant to the Respondent's policy in on unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
    children.


3.   The Appellant made an application for further leave to  remain  by  way
    of form HPDL, signed by him on 5 April 2012.  Amongst other  things  it
    was stated in that form: "The applicant has no one  in  Sri  Lanka  and
    therefore he is unable to return to  Sri  Lanka"  (Respondent's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal, at C4).


4.   Pursuant to his application, the Appellant was  granted  further  leave
    to remain on 28 May 2013 until 20 August 2014.


5.   I interject in the chronology to observe the  following.  Although  the
    Appellant had declared in April 2012 that he had nobody to return to in
    Sri Lanka, I note from the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that
    the Appellant stated that he had re-established contact with his mother
    in 2011: "The Appellant said that after he left Sri Lanka on 21.2.09 he
    lost contact with his mother and sister, Kishoka. He states that he re-
    established contact with them in 2011." (paragraph 36 of  the  Decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters). I further note  in  this  regard
    paragraph 44 wherein  the  Judge  records  that  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's uncle was "that the Appellant's mother and sister  are  now
    living with [his sister] and have done so since 2011".


6.   Towards the end of the Appellant's leave, on 31 July 2014,  he  applied
    again for further leave to  remain.   However,  on  this  occasion  his
    application was refused for reasons set out in a decision letter  of  5
    December 2014.  Thereafter the decision of 16 December 2014 that is the
    subject of these proceedings was made.


7.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


8.   His appeal was heard in  the  first  instance  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid, who allowed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  5
    January 2016.  However, Judge Majid's decision was set aside  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins in a decision promulgated  on  6  October  2016.
    Thus it came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Walters  to  remake  the
    decision in the  appeal  with  all  issues  at  large.   Judge  Walters
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  both  protection  grounds  and  on
    human rights grounds for the reasons set out in his Decision.


9.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


10.  Permission to appeal was refused in the first  instance  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farrelly on 9 October 2017.   However,  on  19  December
    2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted permission to appeal.  In doing
    so Judge Coker refused permission  to  appeal  on  protection  grounds,
    stating that there was  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  that  regard.
    However, permission to appeal was granted "solely on the limited  basis
    of Article 8 grounds" in that it was considered arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had "failed to engage sufficiently  with  s117B  in
    the specific characteristics of the appellant".


11.  Mr Paramjorthy candidly acknowledged that he had hoped  that  he  would
    have had the opportunity to argue the protection case as pleaded in the
    grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal -  which
    were drafted by him.  The seeming wistfulness of this  observation  was
    underscored by his later acknowledgement of the  force  of  Mr  Tufan's
    submission in answer to the ground of challenge in respect  of  Article
    8.


12.  The ground pleaded and relied upon by the Appellant is  essentially  in
    respect of section 117B(3) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The grounds put the matter this way:


         "Paras 62-64 - the FTTJ has materially erred in his  assessment  of
         proportionality pertaining to the A's Article 8 right to a  private
         and family life here in the UK. The A entered the UK  as  a  minor,
         has matured into an adult, in studying  at  University,  is  not  a
         burden on the taxpayer, is supported financially by his  Uncle  and
         the FTTJ has failed to properly engage with paragraph  117B(3),  in
         that the A does not  have  permission  to  work  and  therefore  is
         dependent on his Uncle.  The FTTJ has failed to  rationally  engage
         with proportionality and the fact that  the  A's  removal  will  be
         arguably  disproportionate  to  the  maintenance  of  an  effective
         immigration control policy.  The whole ethos  of  section  117,  is
         that the A should not be a burden on the state and  further  should
         be able to speak English, all of which the A qualifies."


13.  The particular focus is on the supposed error  in  respect  of  section
    117B(3).


14.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with the Article 8  aspect  of  the
    case from paragraph 54 onwards of his Decision.  In context I note that
    the Judge made  a  number  of  observations  and  findings  essentially
    favourable to the Appellant.  He noted the Appellant's age upon arrival
    in the United Kingdom and  his  present  age.  He  noted  that  he  had
    attended secondary school and was presently studying at the  University
    of Greenwich on a course paid for by his uncle  on  the  basis  of  the
    rates of a foreign student.  It was accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    formed a family life with his  uncle  and  his  uncle's  wife  and  two
    children. The Judge found that the fact that his  uncle  was  financing
    the Appellant's university degree meant that  the  Appellant  was  more
    than normally emotionally dependent on his uncle.  The Judge also found
    that the Appellant's proposed removal would amount to  an  interference
    with the exercise of his right to respect for private and family  life.
    The Judge also concluded that the extent of the interference  would  be
    of such gravity as to engage  Article  8.   The  Judge  therefore  made
    specific and detailed findings on the evidence entirely  in  accordance
    with the way matters were put to him on behalf of  the  Appellant,  and
    concluded that the first two Razgar questions were to  be  answered  in
    the Appellant's favour.


15.   The  Judge  dealt  with  the  third  and   fourth   Razgar   questions
    uncontroversially at paragraphs 59 and 60 of the Decision.


16.  The Judge then moved to a consideration of the fifth  Razgar  question,
    proportionality. In doing so he expressly specified that he was  having
    regard to sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act (paragraph 61).


17.  At paragraph 62 the Judge says this in respect of section 117B(3):

    "I find that s. 117B(3) applies in that it is in the interests  of  the
    economic well-being of the United Kingdom  that  persons  who  seek  to
    remain are financially independent.  The Appellant is obviously not."


18.  The Judge otherwise took into account section 117B(5), and  noted  that
    the Appellant's immigration status was precarious and  to  that  extent
    little weight could be accorded to his  private  life  (paragraph  63).
    The Judge also observed that there was no evidence given to the  effect
    that the Appellant could not return to live  with  his  mother  in  Sri
    Lanka or that it would be unreasonable or difficult for him  so  to  do
    (paragraph 64).


19.  The Judge took into account that the Appellant was studying, but  noted
    that it was open to him to apply for a student visa (paragraph 65).   I
    pause to note that no  particular  complaint  has  been  made  in  this
    regard, and indeed Mr Tufan has reminded me today of the well-known now
    words of Lord Carnwath in the case of Patel & Ors [2013] UKSC 72 to the
    effect that the "opportunity for a promising student  to  complete  his
    course in this country, however desirable in general terms, is  not  in
    itself a right protected under Article 8."


20.  The grounds of  appeal  in  substance  plead  that  the  Judge  wrongly
    accorded adverse weight to the public interest consideration identified
    under section 117B(3) in circumstances where the Appellant  was  of  an
    age and experience where he could not be financially independent -  but
    was nevertheless not financially dependent  on  the  State  or  anybody
    other than his uncle.  To that extent, in substance the  grounds  argue
    that any 'mischief' identified under the public interest considerations
    need not be a concern on the facts of this particular case.


21.  In answer to that challenge Mr  Tufan  indicated  that  the  Respondent
    relied upon the case of Rhuppiah v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803 and in particular at paragraph 63, which
    is in these terms:

         "Finally, I turn to consider the meaning of the phrase 'financially
         independent' in section  117B(3).   This  is  an  ordinary  English
         phrase, and the FtT gave it  its  natural  meaning,  as  indicating
         someone who is financially independent  of  others.   This  is  the
         correct interpretation.  The FtT was also entitled on the  evidence
         to find that the Appellant was not financially independent in  this
         sense, and that this was a factor which counted against her in  the
         Article 8 balancing exercise."




22.  It seems to me absolutely clear that the Judge's conclusion  herein  in
    respect of section 117B(3) was entirely in accordance with the  meaning
    indicated by the Court of Appeal.  The Appellant was  not  'financially
    independent of others'.  As I  have  indicated  above,  Mr  Paramjorthy
    acknowledged the force of this submission.  It seems to  me  that  once
    that submission is identified and seen to be sound,  the  substance  of
    the Appellant's challenge is lost.


23.  Were it otherwise, I note that at best the Appellant could have  argued
    that a potentially adverse matter should have been  taken  out  of  the
    balance, to be replaced by what would otherwise have been essentially a
    neutral matter.  In my  judgment  this  would  have  made  no  material
    difference to the outcome in the appeal.  The details  of  the  factual
    premises of the Appellant's case are clear and  straightforward;  there
    is nothing in the premises that suggest - by way of analogy -  that  he
    could satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules with regard  to
    paragraph 276ADE - bearing in mind that the Judge expressly found  that
    there  was  no  evidence  of  any  difficulties   in   relocating   and
    reintegrating into  life  in  Sri  Lanka.   Otherwise,  no  exceptional
    circumstances are identifiable in the evidence or the findings  of  the
    Judge such that would  suggest  a  disproportionate  interference  with
    private and/or family life  such  as  to  warrant  departure  from  the
    Immigration Rules. Those  matters  in  the  grounds  spun  as  positive
    factors - "should not be a burden on the state...  should  be  able  to
    speak English, all of which the A qualifies" - are in substance neutral
    factors not positive factors informing entitlement to remain.


24.  Had the merits of the appeal required further consideration,  it  seems
    to me more would need to be explored in respect of what, on  its  face,
    appears to have been an inaccurate statement  in  the  application  for
    variation of leave to  remain  previously  made  in  2012.   I  invited
    observations in this regard  from  the  Appellant  during  the  hearing
    today.  After a few moments for Mr Paramjorthy  to  take  instructions,
    the Appellant responded to the effect that although his mother had gone
    to live with his uncle's sister in 2011 it was not until some time much
    later that the Appellant had learnt of this.


25.  I note  in  the  first  instance  that  such  a  response  is  entirely
    discrepant with what the Judge has recorded  to  the  effect  that  the
    Appellant re-established contact in 2011. Moreover, when the  Appellant
    was invited to explain why, in circumstances where he had lost  contact
    with his mother and sister and they had then come to live  safely  with
    another relative, he was not told at the time, the Appellant  suggested
    it was because telling him that his mother and sister were  safe  would
    mean revealing that his father had died.  I remind myself that  at  the
    time when it  became  known  his  mother  and  sister  were  safe,  the
    Appellant  did  not  know  the  whereabouts  of  his   father   anyway.
    Accordingly, telling him that his mother and sister were safe would not
    necessarily put  him  in  any  worse  position.   When  I  invited  the
    Appellant to comment on whether or not he was worried about his  mother
    at this time (i.e. when missing) he replied "not really".   Bluntly,  I
    did not  find  the  Appellant  to  be  truthful  in  this  regard.  The
    impression left is that it would have been safe and  possible  for  the
    Appellant to return to Sri Lanka in 2011/2012 but  it  was  elected  to
    tell a lie about the whereabouts of family members in order  to  secure
    further leave to remain in a preferred  environment  and  access  to  a
    continuity of education.


26.  However, in the event it is  unnecessary  for  me  to  reach  any  firm
    findings in this regard because ultimately, in my judgement, the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge made no error of  law  in  his  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's Article 8 case.



Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    stands.


28.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


29.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:                                 Date: 18 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

