
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02783/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                    A T O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adeolu, David & Vine, Solicitors, Stratford
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  19  November  1974.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  5  January  2015
    refusing him leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  his
    family and private life here.  His appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Mayall on 12 June 2015.  He  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 July 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First  Tier  Tribunal  Heynes.   The
    permission refers to the grounds of application which  state  that  the
    Judge erred in making  findings  contrary  to  the  concession  of  the
    Respondent,  wrongly  asserted  that  the  relationship   between   the
    Appellant and his son was an issue and applied the  wrong  standard  of
    proof in relation to Section 117.  The permission states that while the
    Judge was entitled to make findings on  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his son on the basis of the evidence before  him  at  the
    Hearing, it is arguable that insufficient reasons were  given  for  the
    Judge's findings in relation to Section 117B and Article 8.

The Hearing

 3. The Appellant's representative submitted that the  subsistence  of  the
    relationship of the Appellant  and  his  child  should  not  have  been
    considered by the Judge as the refusal letter accepts that there  is  a
    subsisting relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  his  child.   He
    submitted that because the Judge made a decision on this he became  the
    primary decision maker on this issue which is unsatisfactory.

 4. The representative went on  to  deal  with  whether  the  Appellant  is
    suitable and eligible in terms of the Immigration Rules.  He  submitted
    that the Appellant did not deceive the Respondent.  He did not disclose
    that he was the father of a child in the United Kingdom because he  did
    not think he was.   His application was made on 10 May  2013  and  this
    child was born on 16 April 2013.  The representative submitted that the
    Appellant's relationship with the child's mother had been casual and it
    was only when he had a DNA test done that he  realised  the  child  was
    his.  He submitted that there was no  deception  on  the  part  of  the
    Appellant.

 5. I put to the representative that in the refusal letter  the  Respondent
    states that in the Appellant's  most  recent  application  he  did  not
    disclose  that  he  has  a  child  in  Nigeria,  born  in  2009.    The
    representative submitted that this was not deliberate  deception.  What
    motive could the Appellant possibly have had for  not  declaring  this?
    He could not have benefitted in any way.  He submitted that this should
    not be classed as deception and should  not  stop  the  Appellant  from
    being granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  He submitted that
    this is not a material issue.

 6. I asked the Appellant's representative if he finds that all  the  terms
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  have  been  satisfied  by  the
    Appellant and he said they have when EX1 is taken into account.

 7. The Presenting Officer made his submissions referring to  the  evidence
    given by the Appellant at his First Tier Hearing.   When  he  made  his
    application to come to the United Kingdom  his  evidence  was  that  he
    would be staying with the mother of his child and  his  child,  in  the
    United Kingdom but at the First Tier Hearing he told the Tribunal  that
    he and the child's mother had split  up.   His  son  is  British.   The
    Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 June 2014  with  a  visit
    Visa to visit his sister.  The Appellant's evidence  before  the  First
    Tier Tribunal was that he and the child's mother had lived together for
    just over three months and the child's  mother  was  unable  to  attend
    Court for the First Tier Hearing.   The  Presenting  Officer  submitted
    that  there  has  been  a  fundamental  change   in   the   Appellant's
    circumstances since he made his application.  He submitted that that is
    how the Judge approached the Appellant's relationship  with  his  child
    and because of this  fundamental  change  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
    question whether the Appellant has a subsisting relationship  with  his
    child.

 8. I was referred to  Paragraph  29  of  the  decision.   The  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain is dated  29  September  2014  and  his
    evidence before the First Tier Tribunal was  that  he  split  from  his
    partner in September 2014.  He submitted therefore, that the First Tier
    Judge's concern was based on a different set of circumstances from  the
    circumstances when the refusal letter was issued.   He  submitted  that
    because of this change of circumstances the judge was entitled to  make
    findings about the Appellant's relationship with his child and  whether
    it is subsisting or not.  He submitted that the Judge found that  there
    was no subsisting relationship and based on what was before him he  was
    entitled to this finding.  There was a deficiency  of  evidence  before
    the First Tier Judge about the Appellant's relationship with his child.
     His ex-partner did not attend the Hearing and the Judge found that  if
    the Appellant had been looking after the child in the  way  he  states,
    surely his partner would have attended the Hearing to give evidence  on
    his behalf.

 9. The decision makes it  clear  that  the  Judge  found  the  Appellant's
    evidence not to be reliable and he adequately explained why he made his
    finding about the Appellant having no subsisting parental  relationship
    with  his  child  in  the  United  Kingdom.    He  submitted  that  the
    permission states in any case, that the  Judge  was  entitled  to  make
    these findings because of the change in the Appellant's circumstances.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge's findings relating  to
    Section 117B(6) are adequate and I was referred to Paragraph 31 of  the
    decision.  He submitted that it is difficult to see  how  Section  117B
    can assist the Appellant's claim.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that proportionality was assessed  and
    reference was made to the need for effective immigration control having
    to be considered  when  public  interest  is  dealt  with.   The  judge
    referred to the manner of the Appellant entering the United Kingdom and
    his deception and submitted that this Appellant cannot avail himself of
    Paragraph 117B(6) because of the  Judge's  findings  in  Paragraph  31.
    These findings resulted in the  Judge  not  being  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant has a genuine parental relationship with his  child.   He  is
    not living with his partner or his child.  The Judge  does  not  accept
    the Appellant's evidence.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge  has  given
    sufficient reasons for  his  findings  relating  to  Section  117B  and
    Article 8.   He submitted that the  Judge's  decision  is  sustainable.
    The Appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  and  does  not  have  sole
    responsibility for his child.  The child stays with  his  mother.   The
    Appellant came to the United Kingdom as a  visitor  and  the  terms  of
    Paragraph 276ADE cannot be satisfied as the Appellant has only been  in
    the United Kingdom for four months.  He submitted  that  there  are  no
    significant obstacles to this Appellant's integration into Nigeria  and
    the Judge was entitled to refuse his claim  under  Family  and  Private
    Life.

12.  With  regard  to  exceptional  circumstances  the  Presenting  officer
    submitted that the Appellant states that he provides  for  his  partner
    and his child but he has only been in the  United  Kingdom  since  June
    2014 and the child was born in  April  2013.   It  is  clear  from  the
    Appellant's evidence that he was not supporting  the  child  before  he
    came to the United Kingdom.  The child has always been with his mother.
     The Appellant only stayed with his child for a  short  period  and  no
    longer stays with him. He submitted that the Appellant  can  return  to
    Nigeria. He has a child there who was born in 2009 and  he  has  family
    life in Nigeria.

13. The Presenting Officer referred to the Appellant's  son  being  British
    but submitted that the evidence before  the  First  Tier  Judge,  of  a
    subsisting relationship, is lacking.

14. I was referred to the case of SS Congo and others (2015) EWCA  Civ  387
    and the Presenting Officer submitted that compelling circumstances  are
    required for the Appellant's claim to succeed  under  Article  8.   The
    Judge has found that the Appellant is not credible or honest  and  when
    proportionality is assessed it would be not be disproportionate for the
    Appellant to return to Nigeria.

15. The Appellant's representative referred  me  to  paragraph  29  of  the
    decision.  He submitted that a subsisting  relationship  with  a  child
    must go beyond actually living with the child.  He submitted  that  the
    best interests of the child have  to  be  taken  into  account  and  he
    submitted  that  this  Appellant's  relationship  with  his  child  has
    continued since he left his ex-partner.  He submitted  that  the  Judge
    was wrong to base his decision on the Appellant no longer living in the
    same household as the child.

16. I pointed out to the Appellant's representative that the only  evidence
    of the Appellant's relationship with his child is his oral evidence  as
    his ex-partner was not at the Hearing.

17. The representative submitted that the Judge has made an error of law by
    not considering Article 8 of ECHR.  He submitted that this  has  to  be
    considered along with Section 55.

18. I pointed out that the  grounds  of  application  make  no  mention  of
    Article 8.  He submitted that Article 8 is imputed within number one of
    the grounds.  I was asked to set aside the decision of the  First  Tier
    Judge and find there are material errors of law in the decision.

Decision

19. The Judge did not err by making findings contrary to the concession  of
    the Respondent relating to the relationship between  the  Appellant  as
    his son as there has been a fundamental change in his circumstances and
    in his relationship with his son since his application was made.

20. With regard to deception it is plausible that  the  Appellant  did  not
    think he was the father of his son in the United Kingdom although  this
    is not accepted by the First Tier Judge but I have noted that  when  he
    applied to visit his sister in the United Kingdom he  did  not  mention
    his child in Nigeria, who was born in 2009.  His representative  states
    that this was not deliberate as this  could  not  have  benefitted  the
    appellant in any way but nonetheless, this should have  been  disclosed
    and this may have been another reason for the First Tier Judge  finding
    the Appellant's evidence to be unreliable.

21. The terms of the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied  under  Appendix
    FM or Paragraph 276ADE.  The Judge has explained why in  his  decision.
    This has to be taken into account in  the  proportionality  assessment.
    The Appellant cannot qualify under the "parent" route as the  Appellant
    does not have sole responsibility for his child.  The child stays  with
    his mother and has only had his father staying  with  him  for  a  very
    short period and that has now ended.  The Judge has found that he  does
    not have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his child.
     The Appellant cannot benefit from EX.1.  At  Paragraph  33  the  Judge
    correctly states that there have to be compelling circumstances for  an
    appeal to be considered under Article 8 of ECHR.

22. With regard to Section 117B and Article 8 I have considered the way the
    Judge dealt with Section 117B(6).  The child is a qualifying child  but
    the Appellant does not fall within the provisions of Section 117B  (6).
    There is no evidence that the Appellant is financially independent  and
    when  Article  8  and  Section  117  are   considered   there   is   no
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights  or
    those of his son if he is removed from the United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error of law in the Judge's decision.

24. The decision promulgated on 28 July 2015, by Judge of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal  Mayall,  dismissing  the   Appellant's   appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules and on Human Rights grounds must stand.

25. Anonymity is directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray


