
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02359/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2015                           |On 17 March 2015              |
|Prepared on 18 February 2015                  |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                           mr rana mahommed masood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 19 October  1981.   He
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Powell
    sitting at Newport on 14 August  2014  who  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on the papers against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  11
    December 2013 to remove the Appellant.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  8  October  2010  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  He made  a  number  of  unsuccessful
    applications to extend his leave to  remain  as  a  student  under  the
    points-based scheme.  He did not  have  a  right  of  appeal  as  those
    applications were submitted out of time.  The Appellant complained that
    his failure to meet the requirements of the points-based  scheme  arose
    because his solicitors let him down  and  did  not  send  the  relevant
    documents to the Respondent in time.  The Appellant's leave expired  on
    31 December 2011 and he has had no leave since then.

3.   The Respondent refused applications of the  Appellant  on  30  December
    2011 and 5 April 2012.  On 6 August 2012 the Appellant made  a  further
    application which was refused by the Respondent  on  7  December  2012.
    The Appellant sought to judicially review that decision but  since  his
    application of 6 August 2012 was not a human rights claim and since  he
    did not have leave at the time of making his application the Respondent
    was entitled to refuse that application without a right of appeal.  The
    judicial review proceedings were ultimately  unsuccessful.   Permission
    was refused on the papers by Deputy  High  Court  Judge,  Mr  Alexander
    Nissen QC and it appears that the judicial review  proceedings  finally
    ended on 6 October 2013.

4.   The Appellant filed an application for further leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on 23 November 2013.  That was returned to  him  because
    he had not paid  the  relevant  fee.   The  Respondent  took  steps  to
    administratively remove the Appellant  which  led  to  a  raid  on  the
    Appellant's home on 11 December 2013 when he was  served  with  notices
    IS151A and IS151B.  IS151A stated that the Appellant was a  person  who
    was considered to have failed to observe a condition of leave to  enter
    or remain because his leave had expired before  the  Sponsor's  licence
    was revoked on 14 September 2012.  The Appellant's application on  form
    FLR(O) on 23 January 2013 was  refused  on  4  December  2013  and  the
    Appellant was therefore an overstayer.  Form IS151B  acknowledged  that
    the Appellant had made a human rights claim and  that  a  decision  had
    been taken to remove him from the United Kingdom.   The  Appellant  was
    advised in that form that if he appealed he did not have to  leave  the
    United Kingdom while the appeal was in progress.



The Proceedings at First Instance



5.   Judge Powell found that the Appellant had a  right  of  appeal  against
    the decision in the form IS151B (the decision to remove  the  Appellant
    administratively) and his appeal was in time  because  the  IS151B  was
    dated 11 December 2013 (there is a typographical error at paragraph  24
    of the determination which refers to the date of the IS151B as being 11
    December 2014).  The difficulty for the Appellant was that he had  only
    submitted a short witness statement dated 5 August 2014 but  not  other
    evidence to show that he met the requirements of either Appendix FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.

6.   The  short  statement  gave  a  history  of  the  Appellant's  previous
    unsuccessful applications including his application for judicial review
    and his application on 13 December 2013 for discretionary leave on  the
    basis  of  exceptional  circumstances.   As  soon  as  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain he said he would resume his  studies  and
    achieve graduation and postgraduate degrees.  He had built  up  a  very
    strong private and family life in the United Kingdom which he described
    as "I am habituated with the culture and norms of the UK where  I  have
    adopted with the environment to all extent.  I  always  spend  my  time
    with some of the  British  friends  and  thereby  I  have  become  very
    integral part of their family". The  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal.



The Onward Appeal



7.   The Appellant appealed arguing that the Judge had  failed  to  consider
    the flexibility policy following the case of Rodriguez. The  Respondent
    should have contacted the Appellant for further information as  to  why
    the Appellant had failed to  produce  evidence  to  show  that  he  had
    genuinely exceptional circumstances.  The Judge had failed to find  out
    why the Appellant had not been granted leave to remain  as  a  student.
    The points-based system had become more complex and  applications  were
    being refused on mere technicalities.  His own application for a Tier 4
    visa  was  refused  merely  for  technical  reasons.   The  Judge   had
    overlooked the Appellant's private life. The Appellant had been in  the
    United Kingdom for  almost  five  years,  undergone  education,  gained
    experience within the period that he had been in the United Kingdom and
    invested money, time and effort in studying.  It was not  proportionate
    to ask him to simply pack up and leave.

8.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 9  January  2015.   In
    granting permission to appeal he wrote:

         "This case was determined on the papers.  At  paragraph  3  of  the
         determination the Judge states that it was  the  Respondent's  case
         that the Appellant is an overstayer and liable  for  administrative
         removal.  The basis  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  continued,  is
         unsupported by any documentation apart from a hand-endorsed  IS151A
         dated 11 December 2013.  This referred to an  application  made  by
         the Appellant on 23 November 2013 for leave  to  remain  which  was
         said to have been refused on 4 December 2013.   The  Appellant  was
         entitled to assume that the Respondent  would  have  presented  the
         history of the  case  so  that  the  Judge  could  proceed  upon  a
         sufficient foundation in relation  to  the  fact-finding  exercise.
         The Judge was prevented from doing this."

9.   The Respondent replied to the grant of permission on  22  January  2015
    stating:

         "The Respondent opposes the Appellant's  appeal.   In  summary  the
         Respondent will submit inter alia that the Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal directed himself appropriately.  The  IS151A  was  not  an
         appealable  decision.   It  would  appear  from  the   Respondent's
         database that the Appellant was served with  IS151B.   However  the
         IS151B was certified as clearly unfounded  and  as  stated  on  the
         document there  was  therefore  no  in  country  right  of  appeal.
         Therefore it is not clear on what  basis  the  Judge  was  able  to
         consider the appeal.  The Respondent considers that there  was  not
         an in country right of appeal and that therefore the  determination
         is materially flawed for want of jurisdiction."



The Hearing before me


10.  When the hearing was called on before me there  was  no  appearance  by
    the Appellant.  He was not represented but I was satisfied that  notice
    of the hearing was sent to him at his address at  27B  Station  Parade,
    Cockfosters Road, Barnet on form IA113 on 27 January 2015.  There being
    no reasonable cause for the Appellant's absence I decided to proceed in
    his absence.  I heard brief submissions  from  the  Presenting  Officer
    before reserving my decision.  The Presenting Officer indicated that if
    the decision had  been  certified  then  under  Section  94(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 there was  no  in  country
    right of appeal.


Findings


11.  The difficulty with the Respondent's argument on certification is  that
    there was no  evidence  on  the  file  before  Judge  Powell  that  the
    Appellant's application had been certified.  Form IS151B which was  the
    notice of immigration decision to remove the Appellant referred  to  an
    attached letter giving  the  Respondent's  reasons  for  the  decision.
    There was no such letter on the file and in those circumstances  it  is
    not surprising that Judge Powell decided to treat the IS151B as meaning
    what it said and giving a right of appeal to the Appellant.  I  do  not
    consider that there was an error of  law  on  Judge  Powell's  part  in
    treating the appeal as valid.

12.  I do not find it easy to understand the permission to appeal  decision.
     Judge Hollingworth appears to have  been  under  the  impression  when
    granting permission that Judge Powell was unaware of the reason for the
    refusal on 4 December 2013.  The letter dated 4 December 2013  refusing
    the Appellant's application was on file and Judge  Powell  specifically
    referred to the point at paragraph 21 of  the  determination  where  he
    wrote:

         "The Appellant filed an application for further leave to remain  in
         the United Kingdom on 23 November 2013.  It  was  returned  to  him
         because the Appellant had not paid the relevant fee.  The  decision
         to return the application which is not an immigration decision  was
         dated 4 December 2013."

13.  Had Judge Hollingworth  directed  himself  to  that  paragraph  in  the
    determination he might not in fact have granted permission to appeal at
    all.  Judge Hollingworth was concerned that the  Respondent  might  not
    have presented the history of the case in such a  way  that  the  trial
    Judge had an insufficient foundation  for  his  fact-finding  exercise.
    The only omission I can see in the determination is the  absence  of  a
    letter said to accompany the IS151B.  However that does  not  prejudice
    the Appellant because in his absence as I have indicated  Judge  Powell
    was entitled to consider that  the  Appellant  had  a  valid  right  of
    appeal.

14.  The core issue in the case was whether the Appellant  had  demonstrated
    that he had a private and/or family life in this country which would be
    disproportionately interfered  with  if  he  were  to  be  returned  to
    Bangladesh under the terms of the IS151B.  Judge  Powell  came  to  the
    view that there was so little information from the Appellant  that  the
    Appellant could not make out such a case.  Having considered the papers
    in this case I consider that Judge Powell was  entirely  right  in  his
    conclusion.  The evidence such as it is in the Appellant's statement is
    sparse to say the least.  That the Appellant complains about advice  he
    has received over the years from immigration  advisers  concerning  his
    applications  to  study  bears  little  weight.   Similarly  that   the
    Appellant has made friends whilst he is  here  carries  little  weight.
    Such private life as the Appellant has built up he has built up  whilst
    his status has been unlawful.  Pursuant to Section 117B of the 2002 Act
    little weight is to be given to  his  private  life  in  the  balancing
    exercise  to  determine  the  proportionality  or  otherwise   of   the
    interference with his private life. That interference  is  pursuant  to
    the legitimate aim of  immigration  control  since  the  Appellant  has
    overstayed his visa.

15.  I see no evidence in the file that the Appellant has  formed  any  kind
    of family life in this country.  He merely asserts that he  has  become
    an integral part of his friend's family but without  more  that  cannot
    found a claim to have established a family life in this country.  There
    is no supporting evidence  from  any  of  the  Appellant's  friends  to
    confirm the relationship.

16.  The Appellant has sought  to  prolong  his  stay  in  this  country  by
    lodging a series of completely hopeless applications which have  wasted
    the time and resources of the Respondent in  dealing  with  them.   His
    application for a judicial review was clearly without any merit at  all
    as Judge Nissen pointed out.  The decision to remove the  Appellant  is
    entirely proportionate to the legitimate aim being pursued  because  of
    the little weight to be attached to the Appellant's  private  life  and
    the considerable weight to be attached on the other side of the  scales
    to the public  interest  in  removing  the  Appellant.   There  are  no
    compelling or compassionate circumstances in this case  such  that  the
    Appellant should be granted leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction as there is no public  policy  reason  for  so
    doing.

Signed this 16th  day of March  2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the Appellant's appeal there can be no fee award.


Signed this 16th day of March 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

