
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02313/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 November 2014                  |On 24 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                              amma obiri brenya
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Owusu, a solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   In this appeal I will refer to the parties by their designation  before
    the First Tier Tribunal even though those roles are reversed.

2.   I have been taken to some case law  in  this  matter,  principally  the
    case of Kareen (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  24  (Kareem),  a
    decision of the  Upper  Tribunal.  In  that  case  Mr  Ockelton,  Vice-
    President, said that "there must be  sufficient  evidence  in  a  claim
    under Regulation 7 of the  EEA  Regulations  which  deals  with  family
    members to  show  that  the  marriage  between  the  parties  would  be
    recognised within the country of the other spouse, in other  words  the
    non-UK national's nationality.  Mere assertions were  insufficient  and
    they would not carry sufficient weight".  I have also been referred  to
    the case of TA & Others (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316.
    That was a decision of Mr O'Connor in  June  2014  in  which  he  said:
    "there must always be evidence that the marriage has been  examined  in
    accordance with the laws of the Member  State  for  the  union  citizen
    concerned".

3.   In this case the application, as I understand it, was for  a  residence
    card on two alternative bases.  The appellant relied on both Regulation
    7, which deals with  "family  members",  including  spouses  and  civil
    partners and Regulation 8(5) which  deals  with  the  partners  of  EEA
    nationals other than civil partners. Under the  latter  regulation  the
    appellant had to prove to the decision maker  that  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national.

4.   The conclusions of Immigration  Judge  Cohen  (the  Immigration  Judge)
    were challenged on both bases.  The grounds are succinctly  drafted  by
    Mr Jarvis's colleague, Anna Hill. They assert that Kareem had not  been
    referred  to  by  the  Immigration  Judge.   It   should   have   been.
    Furthermore, the decision that the appellant was  an  "extended  family
    member" of an EEA national was reached without adequate findings on the
    durable nature of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor.

5.   I will deal with Article 8(5) first.

Whether the appellant was an "extended family member" of an EEA national?

6.   The appellant described the nature of her relationship with Mr  Oppong,
    her husband, in her witness statement.   This  is  dealt  with  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) at paragraphs  6  to
    9.The appellant's evidence was unchallenged (see  paragraph  7  of  the
    determination).  In  particular,  the  Immigration  Judge  states    in
    paragraph 7 that there was no cross-examination of the appellant.   The
    Immigration Judge also heard oral evidence from the sponsor,  who  gave
    evidence in English. He adopted his witness statement as  part  of  his
    evidence and relied on  the  documentation  filed  in  support  of  the
    appeal.  Ms Vatish, the Secretary of  State's  representative  at  that
    hearing,  simply adopted the  refusal  and  did  not  cross-examine  or
    otherwise challenge any of the  evidence.   In  the  circumstances  the
    Immigration Judge was entitled to conclude that sufficient evidence had
    been produced of a  durable  relationship  and  the  assertion  in  the
    grounds of appeal that the Immigration Judge insufficient or inadequate
    findings  for  his  conclusions  that  the  appellant   fulfilled   the
    requirements of Regulation 8 (5) is not made out. I find there to be no
    material error of law in relation to that regulation.

Whether the appellant was a "family member" of an EEA national?

7.   The second challenge under Kareem causes the Upper  Tribunal  a  longer
    pause for thought. It is not  clear  that  the  Immigration  Judge  was
    referred to Kareem but he plainly should have been.  For recognition of
    marriages conducted outside the EEA the requirements  of  Regulation  7
    had to  be  fulfilled  before  the  marriage  to  Mr  Oppong  could  be
    recognised.

8.   A document had been obtained from the Austrian Embassy  in  German  and
    translated into English dated 7 March 2014. I am told by Mr Jarvis, who
    appears for the Secretary of State, that document was before the First-
    tier Tribunal. It states that, according to the laws  of  Austria,  the
    sponsor's country of nationality in this case,  the  form  of  marriage
    celebrated by these  parties  was  recognised.   It  was  according  to
    Austrian law a form of marriage which would be accepted as  sufficient.
    The Austrian Embassy representative went on to say the proof of whether
    the marriage took place and the form that it actually took place in are
    generally provided by the foreign marriage certificate. I am told  this
    is not disputed.  This was provided in the form of a letter from a firm
    of  solicitors  called  Bernard  Wiseman  Family  Solicitors   who,   I
    understand, have now changed their name to BWF Solicitors

Conclusions

9.   There was an error in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    failing to refer to Kareem or properly set out the law. However, having
    considered all the evidence before the FTT, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    error was not a material one having regard to that  evidence.  If  that
    evidence is properly looked at  it  is  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    appellant was indeed the spouse or civil partner of  an  EEA  national,
    namely Mr Oppong.  I am satisfied that the appellant was the spouse  of
    an Austrian citizen and that the marriage that they went through  under
    Ghanaian law, which was undisputed, was  recognised  according  to  the
    laws of Austria. In the circumstances, they qualified under  Regulation
    7 as well as Regulation 8 (5) of the EEA Regulations.

Decision

10.  It is a matter for the Secretary of State to decide whether to grant  a
    residence card or not but I have decided  that there  was  no  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  therefore
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    stands.



Signed        Date 21 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

