
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02266/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 16 September 2015                 |
|Prepared 1 August 2015               |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C G WARD


                                   Between

                                     k m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, counsel, instructed by Longfellows
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of St Vincent and  the  Grenadines,  date  of
    birth 13 March 1983,  appealed  the  Respondent's  decision,  dated  16
    December 2013, to refuse a combined application for  further  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and to  make
    removal directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The Secretary of State also concluded  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of eligibility  under  Appendix
    FM on the basis that the Appellant was not in a subsisting relationship
    with Mr Aberdeen, a British national, and the father  of  K  M  M  (the
    child).

2.   The Secretary of State considered  that  the  Appellant  did  not  come
    within the requirements of private life considerations under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules and also took the  view  that  the  return  of  the
    Appellant with her child to St Vincent and the Grenadines did not, with
    reference to Section 55 of the  BCIA  2009,  mean  that  the  Appellant
    should not be removed.

3.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Ruth (the judge) who, on 19 January 2014, accepted that  the  Appellant
    withdrew her appeal against the adverse decision under Tier  2  of  the
    PBS and dismissed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  There  was  no
    argument put before the judge on the basis of either her  private  life
    under the Immigration Rules or in relation to her role, which the judge
    found was as the sole/primary carer of her child.  The child's  father,
    Mr Aberdeen was not the primary carer nor did  he  share  care  of  the
    child but he had occasional visiting contact. The judge concluded  that
    there was no genuine and subsisting relationship between the  Appellant
    and Mr Aberdeen.

4.   It was not put to the judge that the Appellant's circumstances fell  to
    be considered under the requirements of limited leave to  remain  as  a
    'parent' under Appendix FM, nor that there was  any  valid  application
    made for limited or indefinite leave to remain as a partner.

5.   It was also clear that no point was raised  with  the  judge  upon  the
    issues in either Zambrano C-34/09 [2011] ECR 1-0000  or  Sanade  [2012]
    UKUT 48.  The judge acknowledged that the child was a British national,
    entitled to the rights and entitlements that come with citizenship  and
    the judge was unequivocal that the child was entirely dependent on  its
    mother for its care and wellbeing.  The  judge  was  not  addressed  on
    whether the Appellant might  have  Zambrano  style  derived  rights  of
    residence based on the position of her EEA national  child  or  whether
    the Appellant fell within derived rights of residence under  Regulation
    15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

6.   We did not find the judge made any error of law in failing to  consider
    the potential position that might arise in  an  application,  if  made,
    under paragraph R-LTRPT of Appendix FM or  eligibility  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as a parent.  Such considerations were dependent upon a
    valid   application   being   made   which   addressed   all   material
    considerations under Appendix FM: Which was not the enquiry  the  judge
    was invited to consider, nor was he addressed upon the matter, nor  did
    he address the issue of the financial  provision  or  security  of  the
    child.

7.   As such the judge did not in our view demonstrate  any  arguable  error
    of law in failing to consider those matters under Appendix FM.

8.   The absence of an application made under Regulation  15A  of  the  2006
    Regulations meant that the matter has  never  been  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State under the 2006 Regulations.  We did  not  think  the
    judge should have considered, for his part,  the  issues  arising  from
    Zambrano nor that it was a Robinson obvious  point.  Ultimately,  there
    being no application for such derivative rights, Article 8  should  not
    generally be used as a means to avoid either an application  under  the
    Rules, if appropriate, or under the 2006 Regulations.

9.   No evidence had  been  given  with  regard  to  the  derivative  rights
    guidance provided by the Home Office and it is difficult to see how  it
    would have been appropriate for the judge to proceed to  determine  the
    matter.

10.  Nevertheless whilst  it  would  have  been  better  if  the  judge  had
    addressed the matter of Zambrano and its potential implications  we  do
    not find it was a material error of law to decide  the  appeal  on  the
    arguments advanced.  Rather it seemed to us the judge had  done  enough
    to show there were considerations that could arise and be  material  to
    such issues. However, he should not have concluded that  the  Appellant
    as a British nationality could  be required to leave the United Kingdom
    for an indefinite period of time or in order to accompany the Appellant
     to make an out of country application for entry clearance on  whatever
    basis might be thought appropriate.

11.   Accordingly  we  do  not  think  that  the   judge's   assessment   of
    proportionality in consideration of an Article 8 claim outside  of  the
    Rules properly took into account relevant considerations.  However,  in
    this case,  because  no  application  had  been  made  under  the  2006
    Regulations or indeed under Appendix FM, we take the view that  Article
    8 should not be used as a means in effect to avoid the need to  make  a
    proper application for a derivative rights based residence  permit  nor
    under the Immigration Rules. Thus the judge's  decision  on  Article  8
    ECHR would not make  a  difference  because  it  did  not  fall  to  be
    considered.

12.  In our view the appropriate course would be for the Appellant  to  make
    the application to remain and to submit the relevant information either
    with reference to Appendix FM or in relation to the 2006 Regulations to
    show a proper basis to remain.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Anonymity

It did seem to us that the circumstances of the Appellant and child  justify
an anonymity order.

Fee Award

The appeal has failed and accordingly no fee award is appropriate.


Signed   Date 12 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
