
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: IA/02277/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field  House                                       Determination
                                             Promulgated
On 2 September 2014    On 19th January 2015

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                                 Laiba Khan
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Mannan  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Worldwide
                       Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Pears promulgated on 19 June 2014 dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated 20 December 2013 to refuse  to
      vary leave to remain in the UK and to remove her pursuant  to  section
      47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 1 December 1988.


   3. The Appellants evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  respect  of
      her early immigration history is summarised at paragraphs 12 and 13 of
      the determination.

"[A]lthough born in Pakistan, when she was  three,  in  1991,  she  and  her
      parents emigrated to Saudi Arabia where her father was working  as  an
      electrical engineer and she attended schools in Saudi Arabia  at  both
      the primary and secondary level, taking and passing  exams  equivalent
      to 'O' and 'A' levels. There are various certificates confirming this,
      in the Appellants bundle from page 67ff.
The Appellant first came to the UK in September 2007 and has been in the  UK
      continuously since then, apart from between 19th March and  27th  June
      2012. She has therefore been in the UK for nearly 7 years, albeit  not
      continuously and the vast part of her  life  has  been  lived  outside
      Pakistan."


   4. Whilst there are no express findings on  this  history,  it  does  not
      appear to have been in dispute. Nor is there any  dispute  as  to  the
      more recent immigration history, which  is  a  matter  of  record,  as
      summarised at paragraphs 2 and 3 of the determination:

"The Appellant was,  according  to  the  Respondent's  immigration  history,
      granted leave to enter the UK as a student on  30  January  2009  with
      that leave valid until 31st October 2011, with  the  implication  that
      she was not in the UK before that, but when according to the Appellant
      she entered the UK on 18 September 2007 in  possession  of  a  student
      visa, which was valid until October 2008.
However what is clear after her leave expired, there were  various  problems
      with subsequent applications which are set out in paragraph  10-11  of
      the letter accompanying this application (the  Respondent's  documents
      in relation to this are at page 57ff of the Appellant's  bundle),  she
      returned to Pakistan and was there between 19th March  2012  and  27th
      June 2012 and whilst there she was issued with a further student  visa
      valid until 13th November 2013."


   5. In this context it is to be noted that the circumstances that  led  to
      the Appellant quitting the UK in order to reapply for entry  clearance
      to return are summarised in the application letter  in  the  following
      terms (and also repeated in  similar  terms  at  paragraph  9  of  the
      Grounds of Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal):

"On, 30 January 2009, the Appellant was  granted  leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom and the same was valid until 31 October 2011.
Thereafter,  the  applicant  enrolled  with  Queen   Mary   University   for
      Electrical and Electronic Engineering. Unfortunately, she did not gain
      the necessary credits to complete the first year of the  undergraduate
      degree and progress onto the second year.
In October 2011, the applicant  made  fee  paid  application  for  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom. Regrettably, on  17  November  2011  her
      application was sent back to her being an invalid application  due  to
      the reason the bank rejected the payment.
Subsequently,  on  06  December  2011,  the  applicant  submitted  a   fresh
      application for leave to remain,  nevertheless,  her  application  was
      refused on 06 February 2012 with no right of appeal and the  applicant
      was left with no option but to travel to Pakistan to  obtain  a  fresh
      Tier 4 (General) student visa."


   6. On 12 November 2013 the Appellant made her  most  recent  application,
      seeking leave to remain on the basis  of  the  private  life  she  had
      established in the UK.


   7. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for reasons set out
      in a 'reasons for refusal letter' ('RFRL') dated 20 December 2013, and
      a Notice of Immigration Decision, which also communicated the  section
      47 removal decision, of the same date was served on 24 December 2013.


   8. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pears
      dismissed the appeal for reasons set out in his determination.


   9. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was granted on 9 July 2014 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Astle.  The
      basis  of  challenge,  which  was  considered  to  be  arguable,   was
      summarised by Judge Astle in the following terms:

"The grounds assert that the Judge's findings that  the  Appellant  had  not
      lost all ties to Pakistan was incorrect. Reference is made to Ogundimu
      [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC). It is argued that the  Judge  placed  weight  on
      ties help by family members and not by the Appellant  herself.  It  is
      submitted that the Judge failed to have regard to  the  relevant  case
      law."


  10. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 reply resisting the appeal dated 21
      July 2014


Error of Law

  11. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal under the  Immigration  Rules
      was that of 'ties' pursuant to  paragraph  276ADE(vi).  The  Appellant
      essentially relied on the fact that she  had  not  lived  in  Pakistan
      since the age of 3, and argued that the  three  months  spent  staying
      with a friend of her father's in 2012 pending resolution of her  entry
      clearance application to permit her to return to resume studies in the
      UK did  not  re-establish  personal  ties  to  Pakistan  and  was  not
      otherwise evidence of such ties.


  12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings on this issue are set out  at
      paragraph 24:

"I find that in relation to the Appellant's  connection  with  Pakistan  she
      attempted to minimise  connections  with  the  country  and  that  she
      misrepresented certain aspects of  her  visit  in  2012  so  that  her
      connection with Pakistan appears less than in reality it  is,  was  or
      could be. I find the Appellant's father has many friends in  Pakistan.
      I find that her family have continuing social, family or other reasons
      to visit Pakistan even if it is only  to  attend  social  events  like
      weddings. I find that the Appellant has a number of maternal relations
      living in Pakistan. I find that she  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who
      speaks Urdu as well as English. I find that she  was  in  Pakistan  as
      recently as 2012, for a period between March 2012 and June  2012,  and
      that she stayed with a family friend and  that  she  was  not  charged
      anything since I accept what her father  says,  and  it  seems  highly
      unlikely that a family friend  would,  in  the  context  of  Pakistani
      culture, charge his friend for accommodating that friend's daughter. I
      accept the evidence of  the  father  that  his  daughter  was  not  as
      sequestered as she claims but in fact went sightseeing in Islamabad. I
      find therefore that she has not shown on the balance of  probabilities
      that she has no ties with Pakistan. I therefore find that she does not
      meet the requirements of the immigration rules."


  13. I accept that there is substance to the Appellant's challenge that the
      Judge failed to have regard to or otherwise direct himself in a manner
      consistent with, the guidance in Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)
      Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC).


  14. In Ogundimu the Tribunal considered paragraph 399A of the Rules  where
      the same wording - "no ties (including  social,  cultural  or  family)
      with the country to which he would have to go" - appears. Paragraph  4
      of the headnote is in these terms:

"The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' in  paragraph  399A  of
      the Immigration Rules imports a concept involving something more  than
      merely remote or abstract links to the country of proposed deportation
      or removal. It involves there being  a  connection  to  life  in  that
      country. Consideration of whether a person has 'no  ties'  to  such  a
      country must involve a rounded  assessment  of  all  of  the  relevant
      circumstances and is not  to  be  limited  to  'social,  cultural  and
      family' circumstances".


  15. See further in this context paragraphs 119-25 of Ogundimu. The use  of
      the same wording  in  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules  is  expressly
      recognised in Ogundimu: see paragraph 122. I note  in  particular  the
      following passages from paragraphs 123 and 125:

"The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' imports,  we  think,  a
      concept involving something more than merely remote and abstract links
      to the country of proposed deportation or removal. It  involves  there
      being a continued connection to life in that country;  something  that
      ties a claimant to his or her country of origin. If this were not  the
      case then it would appear that a person's nationality of  the  country
      of proposed deportation could of itself lead to a failure to meet  the
      requirements of the rule. This would render  the  application  of  the
      rule,  given  the  context  within   which   it   operates,   entirely
      meaningless." And -

"Whilst each case turns on its own  facts,  circumstances  relevant  to  the
      assessment of whether a person has ties to the country to  which  they
      would have to go if they were required to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
      must include, but are not limited to: the length of time a person  has
      spent in the country to which he would have to go if he were  required
      to leave the United  Kingdom,  the  age  that  the  person  left  that
      country, the exposure that person has had to  the  cultural  norms  of
      that country, whether that person speaks the language of the  country,
      the extent of the family and friends that person has in the country to
      which he  is  being  deported  or  removed  and  the  quality  of  the
      relationships that person has with those friends and family members."


  16. Of the factors identified by the Judge at paragraph 24 as relevant  to
      his  assessment,  the  first  two  do  not  relate  to  the  Appellant
      personally. It is perhaps of no great surprise that her  parents  have
      friends in Pakistan and social, family and other reasons for visiting.
      The Appellant's parents did not move to Saudi Arabia until  they  were
      married adults with a young family; necessarily they had grown up  and
      reached maturity in Pakistan and so retain connections with their peer
      group. That is not the Appellant's experience: leaving Pakistan at the
      age of  3  she  has  no  such  peer  group  connection;  her  parents'
      connections to an historical social life and  cultural  experience  in
      Pakistan are not her connections or  experiences.  The  Judge  was  in
      error to accord such matters weight.


  17. Whilst the Appellant has Pakistan nationality, I note what is said  in
      Ogundimu in this regard: that nationality alone will not  suffice.  It
      seems to me that other  concepts  inherent  in  originating  from  the
      country of proposed return - such as language - are not inevitably  in
      themselves matters that continue a real  connection  to  life  in  the
      country of origin. In my judgement the fact that the Appellant has had
      exposure to a cultural heritage through her parents to an extent  that
      she is an Urdu speaker - which by its nature will always  be  part  of
      her experience - is not equivalent to her having  a  current  cultural
      tie. Indeed, in general terms. Further, whilst I accept that not being
      able to speak the language of a country is a powerful indicator of  an
      absence of ties, I do not accept that the  obverse  is  the  case:  an
      ability to speak the language is not a strong indicator of  ties.  For
      example, the fact that a Canadian citizen is able to speak English  is
      not a reliable  indicator  of  a  connection  with,  say,  the  United
      Kingdom; or of another Canadian citizen is fluent in French,  it  does
      not in itself indicate a tie with France.


  18. In my judgement, in the absence of  a  self-direction  in  respect  of
      Ogundimu, it appears that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  placed
      undue weight both on the fact of nationality, and on  the  Appellant's
      ability to speak Urdu.


  19. I consider these errors inevitably impact upon the way  in  which  the
      Judge has approached the issue of the Appellant's stay in Pakistan  in
      2012. In this context, in any event, I  am  unable  to  identify  what
      particularly  is  considered  to  be  material  in  respect   of   any
      distinction between  having  spent  such  a  period  'sequestered'  as
      opposed  to  undertaking  sightseeing.  Without   more,   time   spent
      sightseeing does  not  establish  a  relevant  tie  or  connection  in
      circumstances where there was no such pre-existing tie or connection.


  20. Be that as it may, even absent this latter factor, I am satisfied that
      the Judge's assessment involved material errors to an extent that  the
      decision in the appeal must be set aside.


Re-making the Decision

  21. Both representatives indicated that  in  the  event  that  I  were  to
      conclude that there had been an error of law, the submissions made  in
      respect of the error of law  issue  were  relevant  to  the  issue  of
      remaking the decision; that neither had  any  further  submissions  in
      this regard; and nor was it necessary to  consider  any  further  oral
      evidence. The parties were content for  the  Tribunal  to  remake  the
      decision on the basis of  the  available  evidence,  the  findings  of
      primary fact in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and in  light
      of the submissions already made in respect of paragraph 276ADE(vi).


  22. I have directed myself in accordance with the guidance in Ogundimu and
      the wording of paragraph 276ADE(vi) as it stood at  the  date  of  the
      Respondent's decision. I have reminded myself that the burden of proof
      is on the Appellant to demonstrate on a balance of probabilities  that
      she meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


  23.  For  the  reasons  already  identified  I  do  not  accept  that  the
      Appellant's parents' social connections with Pakistan are to be relied
      upon as indicating that the Appellant has a continuing connection with
      life in the country that she left at the  age  of  3,  over  20  years
      previously.


  24. The parents' family connections with Pakistan are to be considered  as
      distinct from social connections beyond family. The parents' relatives
      are also the Appellant's relatives - albeit one step further  removed.
      However, on the particular fats of this case I find that the  presence
      in Pakistan of the Appellant's mother's relatives does not  constitute
      relevant 'ties' under paragraph 276ADE(vi) because the  Appellant  has
      no recent contact with them. Indeed in her oral  evidence  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal she was uncertain whether her mother's sister  had
      children - stating no more than that  she  'probably'  did  (paragraph
      22). In a similar way, members of the extended family on her  father's
      side are not persons with whom she has any personal contact of  actual
      connection. In this context it is to be noted that when the  Appellant
      went to Pakistan in 2012 it was  not  with  family  members  that  she
      stayed but with a friend of her father: this underscores  the  absence
      of any particular personal family-based tie with Pakistan.


  25. Further, I am  satisfied  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
      Appellant's visit to Pakistan for a period  of  three  months  -  only
      arranged because of the expediency  of  regularising  her  immigration
      position in the United Kingdom by making an application from abroad  -
      is not indicative of having re-established a connection with  life  in
      Pakistan. The Appellant undertaking activities of sightseeing does not
      adequately demonstrate an establishment  of  relevant  ties.  In  this
      context it seems to me of significance that the Appellant  would  have
      perceived her visit to Pakistan  as  being  essentially  temporary  in
      nature, and so would not  have  been  seeking  to  establish  anything
      meaningful by way of social connection.


  26. I find that the Appellant has had no  meaningful  personal  connection
      with life in Pakistan since  her  departure  at  the  age  of  3.  Her
      consciousness of any such ties at that time is  likely  to  have  been
      minimal, and in any event to have been  eroded  with  the  passage  of
      time. The recent visit in 2012 - prompted by  expediency  rather  than
      desire, and intended as temporary - did  not,  I  find,  lead  to  the
      establishment of significant connections.


  27. Looking at the case on its own facts and having regard to all relevant
      circumstances (Ogundimu paragraph 25), I find that the Appellant  does
      not have any connection to life in Pakistan.


  28. In all such circumstances I am satisfied that the  Appellant  met  the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi), and in such circumstances should
      have been granted a period of leave pursuant to paragraph  276BE.  The
      Respondent's decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
      Rules.


Notice of Decision

  29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.



  30. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is allowed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     16 January 2014

