
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02653/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st March 2016                            |On 14th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          USMAN GBADEBOWALE AGBOOLA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Norman instructed by Messrs J M Wilson


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application of Mr Agboola for leave to remain had been  refused  by
    the Secretary of State as she was not satisfied that  the  relationship
    between Mr Agboola and his British partner was genuine and  subsisting,
    the refusal being made under Appendix FM E-LTRP1.7 of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. Mr Agboola's appeal against that decision was heard  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rose who in a decision promulgated  on  27th  July  2015
    allowed the appeal both under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8
    ECHR.   Judge  Rose  found  that  the  relationship  was  genuine   and
    subsisting, that Mr Agboola had a genuine  parental  relationship  with
    the children of the family and that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect them to go to Nigeria.  The judge found that  paragraph  EX.1(a)
    of Appendix FM related to Mr Agboola and that he met  the  requirements
    of paragraph R-LTRP1.1.  The consideration under Article 8 was  cursory
    as Mr Agboola met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal contending that
    the judge had misdirected himself in considering that EX.1,  which  was
    not free-standing, and also by failing to give adequate reasons  as  to
    why Mr Agboola should qualify under Article 8.  Permission was  granted
    on that basis.

 4. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Mills indicated that he  regarded
    the  grounds  as  having   been   drafted   in   error   based   on   a
    misunderstanding.  The only issue raised by the Secretary of State  had
    been the question of  the  relationship  between  Mr  Agboola  and  his
    British partner.  The judge had found that the relationship was genuine
    and subsisting.  He accepted that the other requirements of  the  Rules
    were met and he conceded that the decision to allow the  appeal  should
    therefore stand.  I had already reached my own preliminary view to  the
    same effect.  In the circumstances I did not need  to  call  upon  Miss
    Norman.

Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  a
material error on a point of  law  and  the  decision  that  the  appeal  be
allowed therefore stands.

There was no request for an anonymity order and none is made.

The judge in the First-tier Tribunal made no fee award and his  decision  in
that regard stands also.

Signed                              Date 7 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
