
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02941/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London           |                Decision and Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                            |
|On 12 March 2015                       |                On 26 March 2015       |
|                                       |                                       |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ELTON KABANZI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms B Asanovic, instructed by M&K Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. Whilst this is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
  Department  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties   in   the
  determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant,  a  national  of  Zimbabwe,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State  of  20  December
  2013 to refuse his application for a residence card as confirmation of  a
  right to reside in the UK under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
  Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations) as the extended family  member  of
  Gintare Bertulyte, a national of Lithuania.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
  Hanley allowed the appeal to the limited extent that it was referred back
  to  the  respondent  to  carry  out  an  extensive  examination  of   the
  appellant's personal circumstances under regulation 17  (5)  of  the  EEA
  Regulations.

3. The Reasons for  Refusal  letter  states  that  the  respondent  was  not
  satisfied that the appellant and  the  EEA  national  are  in  a  durable
  relationship  as  they  had  not  provided  sufficient  documentation  to
  evidence that relationship and the respondent  therefore  concluded  that
  the appellant had failed to demonstrate that he  is  an  extended  family
  member as defined in regulation 8 (5) of the EEA Regulations.

4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  his
  partner and three other witnesses  including  the  appellant's  partner's
  brother and found that the appellant and his partner 'clearly  know  each
  other and know a reasonable amount about each  other's  lives'  [25].  He
  found that the evidence of the appellant and his partner  was  consistent
  in a number of respects and very discrepant in  relation  other  matters,
  for example how they spent the previous Christmas and why  the  appellant
  is not named on the tenancy agreement. He found  that  there  was  little
  documentation in joint names but some addressed to them separately at the
  same address.

5. The Judge concluded;

   "35. To  my  mind  the  appellant  and  Ms  Bertulyte  have  raised  the
    possibility that  they  may  be  cohabiting  in  a  common-law  durable
    relationship.  There  is  a  reasonable  age  difference.  They   claim
    cohabitation began when she was only 17, having just arrived in the UK,
    which I find slightly improbable. But on the other hand, there  were  3
    witnesses prepared to come  to  Court  and  confirm  the  relationship,
    including Ms Bertulyte's own brother. The discrepancies  in  connection
    with Christmas may be more of a reflection of the number of Christmases
    they have spent together.

   ...

   36. On the evidence which I heard, weighing it all in the round, I  find
    that there is a possibility that the couple are in a common-law durable
    relationship, but I am not satisfied to the civil  standard  that  they
    are in such a relationship."

6.  The  Judge  concludes  that   the   respondent   only   considered   the
  documentation that had been submitted and has not interviewed the  couple
  and that there had not therefore been an  extensive  examination  of  the
  personal circumstances of the appellant as required by regulation  17(5).
  He referred the case back to the Secretary of State  and  said  that  the
  appellant  and  his  partner   'now   have   an   opportunity   to   more
  comprehensively document and explain their personal circumstances' [38].

7. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that  the  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge made a material misdirection of  law  in  that  regulation
  17(5) does not apply in circumstances such as those in  this  case  where
  the Secretary of State did not find the appellant  to  be  in  a  durable
  relationship. It is contended that, as the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did
  not find the appellant to be in a durable relationship either, the appeal
  should have been dismissed.

The Law

8. The relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations for the purposes  of  this
  appeal are as follows;

    ""Extended family member"

      8. (1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person
    who is not a family member of an EEA national under regulation 7(1)(a),
    (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4)
    or (5).
      ...
      (5) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
    is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner) and can
    prove to the decision maker that he is in a durable relationship with
    the EEA national.
      ...




    Issue of residence card

      17.
      ...
      (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an extended
    family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is not an EEA
    national on application if-
        (a)the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended family
        member is a qualified person or an EEA national with a permanent
        right of residence under regulation 15; and
        (b)in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State
        appropriate to issue the residence card.
      (5) Where the Secretary of State receives an application under
    paragraph (4) he shall undertake an extensive examination of the
    personal circumstances of the applicant and if he refuses the
    application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless this is
    contrary to the interests of national security. ..."

Submissions

9. At the hearing Mr Shilliday submitted that  the  only  issue  before  the
  Judge was that  determined  by  him  at  paragraph  37,  ie  whether  the
  appellant  and  his  partner  are  in  a  'durable  relationship'  within
  regulation 8(5). He submitted that this was the issue  addressed  by  the
  Secretary of State in the Reasons for Refusal letter. He  submitted  that
  the Secretary of State had conducted an extensive  examination  based  on
  the evidence produced. He submitted that the burden is on  the  appellant
  and that he has not discharged it. He submitted that  the  appellant  can
  make a new application if he has now evidence and that it is pointless to
  send it back to the Secretary of State.

10.  Ms  Asanovic  relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that
  regulation 17(5) clearly imposes a procedural duty on  the  Secretary  of
  State in relation to  the  decision-making  process  such  that  when  an
  application is received for a  residence  card  for  an  extended  family
  member there is a mandatory duty on the Secretary of State to  'undertake
  an extensive examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant'.
  She submitted that in this case only documentary evidence was  considered
  whereas the Secretary of State routinely uses home visits and  interviews
  whilst conducting an extensive examination. She  submitted  that  it  was
  within the powers of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to determine that  the
  decision was not in accordance with the law as he did here.

11. Mr  Shilliday  responded  by  submitting  that  it  was  the  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge's job in this case to decide if the  appellant  was  in  a
  durable relationship. He accepted that the Judge has power to decide that
  a decision is not in accordance with the law in an appeal under  the  EEA
  Regulations. However he submitted that the Secretary of State had carried
  out an extensive examination of the facts and that it  is  not  incumbent
  upon the Secretary of State to call every applicant in for  an  interview
  where she is not satisfied on the basis of the evidence provided.





Error of Law

12. I have carefully considered Ms Asanovic's  submissions.  She  says  that
  the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to allow  the  appeal  on  the
  basis that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  as  the
  respondent had failed to conduct an 'extensive examination'  as  required
  by regulation  17 (5). Mr Shilliday accepted that  it  was  open  to  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge to find that a decision was not  in  accordance
  with the law but in essence  he  submitted  that  this  decision  was  in
  accordance with the law.

13. In my view there are two aspects underpinning the  submissions  in  this
  appeal. The first is whether the  respondent  was  in  fact  required  to
  undertake an extensive examination under regulation 17(5)  in  this  case
  and the second is whether, if she was so required, she actually did so.

14. In relation to the first aspect it seems to me that  regulation  17  (5)
  must be read with regulation 17(4) to which it refers. I  note  that  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge  omitted  regulation  17(4)  from  his  section
  setting out the relevant law and in fact failed to  refer  to  regulation
  17(4) in the determination. Regulation 17(4) gives the Secretary of State
  discretion to issue a residence card to an extended family member who  is
  not an EEA national if the relevant EEA national is a qualified person or
  has  permanent  residence.   The  issues  the  Secretary  of  State  must
  therefore determine on receipt of such an  application  are  whether  the
  applicant is in fact an extended family member  under  regulation  8  and
  whether the relevant EEA national is a qualified person or has  permanent
  residence. If these questions are  answered  in  the  negative  then  the
  Secretary of State need not  go  on  to  exercise  her  discretion  under
  regulation 17(4) (b).

15. In my view a similar principle applies in relation to  regulation  17(5)
  in that the Secretary of State is required  to  carry  out  an  extensive
  examination where she receives an application from  an  'extended  family
  member'. Where the applicant has not  shown  that  s/he  is  an  extended
  family member then the Secretary of State has no  duty  to  undertake  an
  extensive examination of the  applicant's  personal  circumstances  under
  regulation 17 (5).

16. However in the event that I am wrong  in  the  analysis  above  and  the
  Secretary of State does have a duty to undertake an extensive examination
  of the personal circumstances of everyone who  applies  for  a  residence
  card under regulation 17 (4)  I am satisfied that the Secretary of  State
  did undertake such an examination in this case.

17. The appellant made an application on 12 July 2013 for a  residence  card
  as confirmation of his right to reside in the UK as  an  extended  family
  member of an EEA national. The appellant submitted a number of  documents
  and photographs in support of his application. These documents are listed
  in the Reasons for Refusal letter. In considering whether  the  appellant
  is in a  durable  relationship  the  respondent  considered  whether  the
  appellant had demonstrated that he had been living with the EEA  national
  for at least 2  years.  The  respondent  noted  that  the  appellant  had
  provided evidence to show that he was residing with the EEA national from
  August 2011 until February 2012 (this being the period  for  which  there
  was evidence relating to both parties at the same address) but  concluded
  that this was not sufficient evidence to show that he is currently  in  a
  durable relationship.

18. Ms Asanovic submitted that it was not enough for the Secretary of  State
  to consider the documentation submitted with the application and that she
  was also required, by regulation 17(5) to take further action by carrying
  out a home visit, conducting interviews or by questioning neighbours. She
  submitted that the failure of the Secretary of State to  undertake  these
  actions enabled the First-tier Tribunal Judge to find that the  Secretary
  of State  had  failed  to  undertake  the  procedural  duty  set  out  in
  regulation 17(5).

19. I do not accept  that  regulation  17(5)  places  such  a  duty  on  the
  Secretary of State.  When  conducting  an  extensive  examination  of  an
  appellant's personal circumstances the Secretary of State is  reliant  on
  the material submitted with the application. It is the appellant  who  is
  claiming to be an extended family member  and  he  bears  the  burden  of
  proving that. The Secretary of State undertook an  extensive  examination
  of the appellant's personal circumstances by  considering  the  documents
  submitted and by giving reasons justifying the refusal in the Reasons for
  Refusal letter. I do not accept that it is incumbent in the Secretary  of
  State to conduct home  visits  and/or  interviews  in  the  case  of  any
  extended family member who fails to provide sufficient evidence  to  show
  that they meet the Regulations.

20. I therefore find that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  a  material
  misdirection of law in concluding at paragraph 23  of  the  determination
  that the respondent had failed to undertake an extensive  examination  of
  the appellant's personal  circumstances  in  accordance  with  regulation
  17(5). Accordingly I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
  Judge. There has been no challenge to the findings of fact  made  by  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge. I therefore preserve those findings and  I  go
  on to remake the decision.

Remaking the decision

21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the findings of fact based on  the
  oral and documentary evidence before him. Having considered all  of  that
  evidence and made relevant findings he concluded at paragraph 37 that the
  appellant had not discharged the burden of proof upon him to establish on
  the balance of probabilities that he meets the requirements of regulation
  8(5) of the EEA Regulations.

22. On the basis of this finding I therefore substitute for  the  First-tier
  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  a  decision  that  the  appellant  has   not
  demonstrated that he is an extended family member under  regulation  8(5)
  and he is therefore not entitled to a  residence  card  under  regulation
  17(4) of the EEA Regulations.



Conclusion:
The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error on point of law.
I set aside that decision.
I remake the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  dismissing  it  under  the  EEA
Regulations.

Signed
                       Date: 25 March 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


