

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/02903/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 24th September 2014                             |On 9th October 2014     |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ALMA ESI HOLDBROOKE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr N Garrod, instructed by Justice and Law
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    I shall refer to the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
      Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 17th April  1961.  Her  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision refusing her  a  residence  card  as
      confirmation of a  right  of  residence  under  Regulation  7  of  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  was  allowed  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on 17th July 2014. The Secretary of State appealed.



2.    The Appellant entered the UK on 17th January 2005. She entered into  a
      Ghanaian customary marriage by proxy  to  Emmanuel  Adu-Amankwah,  the
      Sponsor, a Belgian national, on 25th September 2012. On 15th  December
      2012, the Appellant applied  for  a  residence  card.  The  Respondent
      refused the application on 17th December  2013  because  she  was  not
      satisfied that the Sponsor was  of  Ghanaian  descent,  the  statutory
      declaration  was  not  valid  and  there  was  insufficient   evidence
      confirming the registration of marriage. The issues before the  First-
      tier Tribunal were whether the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  validly
      married and whether they were in a durable relationship.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior found that  the  marriage  certificate
      was issued by a competent authority and was  sufficient  to  establish
      that the marriage was valid. The Appellant was therefore entitled to a
      residence card.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy
      on 11th August 2014 on the grounds that the Judge had  arguably  erred
      in law failing to refer to Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  Law)  [2014]
      UKUT 24 and therefore failed to  consider  whether  the  marriage  was
      lawful in Belgium.

5.    Mr Duffy submitted that the Judge had failed to apply  Kareem  and  TA
      and Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316  (IAC)  at
      paragraph 27 of the determination. This was an error of  law  and  the
      decision should be remade.

6.    Mr Garrod relied on  his  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  TA
      should not be followed. In McCabe v McCabe [1994] 1 FLR 410, the Court
      of  Appeal  held  that  a  Ghanaian  marriage  where  the  appropriate
      documents were available was valid under the law of England and Wales.
      Further, following Papajorgi (EEA spouse -  marriage  of  convenience)
      Greece [2012] UKUT 38, the burden was on the Respondent to  show  that
      the marriage was not valid. TA sought to preclude the  scenario  where
      the marriage was recognised in the UK, but not in  the  Member  state.
      There was no legal basis for this restriction. Mr Garrod  referred  to
      Micheletti (C-360/9) [1992] ECR I-4239 at paragraphs  10  and  14  and
      submitted that the head note in Kareem was correct.  CB  (Validity  of
      marriage: proxy  marriage)  Brazil  [2008]  UKAIT  00080  was  another
      authority accepting the legality of proxy  marriages  in  the  law  of
      England and Wales. The Upper  Tribunal  in  Kareem  did  not  seek  to
      overturn CB. McCabe should be followed in preference to TA.

7.    Mr Duffy submitted  that  TA  represented  the  current  position  and
      Kareem had been misread. The burden was on the Appellant to show  that
      she was a spouse. This was not a marriage of  convenience.  There  was
      not an onerous burden on the Appellant and the Tribunal guidance in TA
      should be followed.






Discussion and Conclusion

8.    I am not persuaded by Mr Garrod's submission that the burden  was  on
      the Respondent to show that the marriage was not valid. In  Papajorgi,
      the  Tribunal  held  that  there  was  an  evidential  burden  on  the
      Respondent to show  that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.  A
      marriage of convenience  was  a  marriage  entered  into  without  the
      intention of matrimonial co-habitation and for the purpose of securing
      admission to the country. The issue was  whether  there  had  been  an
      abuse of rights within EU not whether there was a  legal  marriage.  I
      find that the burden is on the Appellant to show that the marriage  is
      valid and she is the spouse of an EEA national.

9.    Nor am I persuaded that in normal  legal  precedent,  the  head  note
      takes  priority  over  the  legal  discussion   contained   within   a
      determination (paragraph 9 of the skeleton argument) or the submission
      that the head note in Kareem was correct. The Tribunal in Kareem found
      that Member States did not share a common  definition  of  spouse  and
      Member States could not use their own legislation to determine whether
      a person was a family member. Rights of  free  movement  stemmed  from
      Union citizenship which was within the competence  of  Member  States.
      Accordingly, in EU law, the question of whether  a  person  was  in  a
      marital relationship was governed by the law of the Member State  from
      which the Union citizen  obtained  nationality  and  from  which  that
      citizen derived free movement rights.

10.   The Tribunal in Kareem went on to find that, if it was for  the  host
      Member State to decide whether a person was married, different  Member
      States would be able to reach different  conclusions  and  this  would
      leave Union Citizens unclear as to whether their  spouses  could  move
      freely with them. Such principles would be contrary to fundamental  EU
      law principles.

11.   The Tribunal adopted this approach in order to determine the  appeal,
      but also acknowledged that it may not apply in  every  situation,  for
      example a Member State could not apply its own  competence  in  a  way
      that would restrict a person's right as a Union citizen even where  EU
      law  did  not  provide  a  harmonised  approach  that  was  applicable
      throughout the Union.

12.   In Micheletti the CJEC held that  it  was  not  permissible  for  the
      legislation of a Member State to restrict the effects of the grant  of
      nationally of another Member State because the consequence of allowing
      such a possibility would be that the class  of  persons  to  whom  the
      Community rules on freedom of establishment were  applied  might  vary
      from one Member State to another.







13.   Accordingly, I find that TA explains Kareem and  is  consistent  with
      it. There is not a two-stage approach as suggested by  Mr  Garrod.  In
      addition, Kareem is not inconsistent with McCabe. The issue of whether
      a marriage is valid depends  on  the  production  of  the  appropriate
      documents and therefore must be decided on a case by  case  basis.  It
      does not follow that just because in McCabe the Court of Appeal  found
      that a Ghanaian marriage was valid under the law of England and Wales,
      all Ghanaian marriages were valid.

14.   I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior erred in law  in  failing
      to properly apply Kareem and I set aside his finding, at paragraph 29,
      that the marriage was valid  and  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  a
      residence card.

15.   Mr Garrod relied on Micheletti in an  attempt  to  persuade  me  that
      since the law of a host Member State could not  be  used  to  restrict
      freedom of establishment, TA should not be followed because in  effect
      it  imposed  an  additional  condition  for  the  recognition  of  the
      marriage. This was contrary to the principles of EU  law.  In  CB  the
      Tribunal held that if proxy marriages were recognised in  the  country
      where they were celebrated, the marriage was valid under English  law.
      The Tribunal in Kareem had not sought to over turn CB.

16.   Whilst I find there  is  some  merit  in  this  argument,  I  am  not
      persuaded by it for the following reasons. Kareem and TA, require  the
      Appellant to show that the marriage was valid in the Member  State  of
      the Union Citizen's nationality. There is no requirement to show  that
      the marriage is also valid in the host  Member  State.  There  was  no
      additional condition to be satisfied.

17.   The Tribunal in Kareem, at paragraph 6, found that there was no legal
      basis for the assumption  which  was  presented  and  adopted  without
      discussion in CB. There was no need to over turn CB  because,  on  the
      facts of the case of Kareem, the appellant had failed to show that the
      marriage was valid in Nigeria.

18.   In re-making the decision under appeal, there was no evidence  before
      me of the validity of the marriage under Belgian law, and  the  burden
      of proving that the marriage was valid was on the  Appellant.  I  find
      that she has failed to show that she  was  a  family  member  for  the
      purposes of Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations 2006.

19.   The issue, therefore, is  whether  the  Appellant  is  in  a  durable
      relationship with an EEA national. The First-tier Tribunal  found  the
      Appellant and Sponsor to be credible witnesses. They Appellant married
      the Sponsor by proxy on 25th September 2012 and they have been  living
      together since that date. On the evidence before me, I find that  they
      are in a durable relationship for the purposes of Regulation  8(5)  of
      the EEA Regulations 2006. The Appellant  has  shown  that  she  is  an
      extended family member.

20.   Under Regulation 17(4), the Secretary of State has  a  discretion  to
      issue a residence card to an  extended  family  member.  I  allow  the
      appeal in so far as the decision to refuse to issue a  residence  card
      was not in accordance with the law.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
8th October 2014
