
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/02336/2015
                                                               IA/02338/2015
                                                               IA/02341/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 1st December 2016                |On: 12th December 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Moinuddin [C]
                                  Tania [H]
                                   [J H C]
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Waheed, Counsel instructed by Thamina Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are all nationals of Bangladesh. They are  respectively
    a father (dob 1st December 1978), mother (27th November 1977) and their
    minor child (2nd September 2009).  On the 28th June 2016 the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Herbert OBE) allowed  their  linked  appeals  on  human
    rights grounds.  The Secretary of State now has  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision[1].


 2. This was in essence, an appeal premised on the grounds that this family
    have established such ties to the United Kingdom that it would now be a
    disproportionate interference with their private lives to  expect  them
    to leave. As one would expect, particular emphasis was placed,  by  the
    parties and the Tribunal, on the children. I say children in the plural
    because the Third Respondent is not the only child of  the  family.  He
    has an older sister (date of birth 6th May 2006) who has lived  in  the
    United Kingdom since the 14th April 2008. For reasons best known to the
    Secretary of State, this older child's application and appeal were sent
    on a different track from that of her parents and brother.  There is no
    need to here go into any detail about that  unfortunate  administrative
    peculiarity since the parties before Judge Herbert, and  indeed  before
    me, were in agreement that by operation of  section  117B  (6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  the  impact  of  these
    decisions on that child was plainly relevant to the  outcome  of  these
    appeals.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal's findings can be summarised as follows:

                    i) Neither adult could  succeed  under  the  Immigration
                       Rules relating to Article 8;
                   ii) The only 'qualifying child', that is to say  a  child
                       who had spent seven continuous years  in  the  United
                       Kingdom, was the couple's daughter, who at  the  date
                       of the appeal had been in the United Kingdom for over
                       eight years;
                  iii) The younger child had been born here  and  had  lived
                       here for six and half years;
                   iv) There was "overwhelming" evidence  about  the  strong
                       ties that  both  children  enjoyed  with  the  United
                       Kingdom (the determination makes  reference  to,  for
                       instance, the children's excellent school reports);
                    v) Neither child speaks Bangla, both have English  as  a
                       first language;
                   vi) They have no immediate family in Bangladesh;
                  vii) A move would be extremely unsettling  and  disruptive
                       for the children;
                 viii) It would be  unduly  harsh  and  disproportionate  to
                       remove the children today.

 4. The Secretary of State appeals on the ground that the determination  is
    incomplete  and  the  proportionality  assessment  unsustainable.   The
    written grounds point out that the determination nowhere addresses  the
    fact that  there  are  no  health  concerns,  that  Bangladesh  is  the
    children's country of nationality, that they are young enough to adapt.
    Before me Mr Walker placed  emphasis  on  the  absence  of  the  public
    interest as a consideration in the determination.




    My Findings


 5. Before me the parties agreed that the legal framework for  this  appeal
    was Article 8 ECHR, and that the Tribunal was bound in  its  assessment
    of proportionality to have regard to the public  interest  factors  set
    out by parliament in s117B(1)-(6) of the 2002 Act.  Those  factors  are
    set out at paragraph 33 of the determination:


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases
         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

                 (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

                 (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

                 (a) a private life, or

                 (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.




         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

              (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
              relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
           leave the UK.



 6. What follows is a detailed analysis of sub-section (6). The  focus  for
    the Tribunal's enquiry is, for some 19 paragraphs,  the  children,  and
    the impact that removal would have upon them. At paragraphs 54  and  55
    the Tribunal briefly considers the reduced socio-economic circumstances
    that the family would face in Bangladesh, before returning to a further
    28 paragraphs about the children.  Although not cited, it would  appear
    that  Judge  Herbert  was  structuring  his  proportionality  balancing
    exercise in line with the view expressed by the President, McCloskey  J
    in Treebhawon and Ors (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC). In  that
    case the President held that there was no ambiguity about the way  that
    the section was drafted. The factors at (1)-(5) were all  matters  that
    should be taken into account but in cases involving qualifying children
    the public interest would not require the removal of a parent where  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to follow him  or  her.  He
    did not use the language of 'trump' but that was in effect how he found
    the section was drafted.


 7. Although much of that analysis has now been adopted  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 [at 14-20] their  Lordships
    have underlined that the factors at (1)-(5)  cannot  be  ignored.  With
    some reluctance, the court accepted the Secretary of State's view  that
    those factors had to be 'read in' to an analysis of whether removal  of
    a child would be 'reasonable'. To that extent, the First-tier  Tribunal
    has here erred in law in failing to deal with those matters set out  at
    (1)-(5).

 8. What the materiality of that might be is unclear  in  this  case.   The
    family have always had valid leave to remain, since the day  that  they
    arrived. Mother and Father were Tier 4 Migrants and the children Tier 4
    dependents. The applications that culminated in this appeal  were  made
    'in-time' so they continue to hold leave today, conferred by 3C of  the
    Immigration Act 1971. The whole family speaks excellent  English.  They
    are financially independent.  Although little weight could be  attached
    to the private lives established by each family member in the time that
    they have been in the United Kingdom, this consideration had to be read
    alongside the fact that the Third Respondent was a child, with  no  say
    at all on where his private life was established, or whether his status
    was precarious: see Miah (section 117B NIAA  2002  -  children)  [2016]
    UKUT 00131 (IAC).   The strongest argument for the Secretary of  State,
    and that matter that attracted the greatest weight, was the  fact  that
    none of the three appellants as they were before Judge Herbert  now had
    any entitlement to leave to remain under the immigration Rules. As such
    there was some public interest in removing them.  That was  the  factor
    that  had  to  be  balanced  against  the  factors  set  out   in   the
    determination in respect of the children.


 9. I am not satisfied that the decision in this case could have  been  any
    different had the Tribunal specifically  weighed  that  factor  in  the
    balance, nor indeed any regard to the matters mentioned in the grounds,
    such as the happy fact  that  neither  child  has  any  serious  health
    complaints.  As both the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Court  of  Appeal  have
    pointed out, the Secretary of State's own guidance indicates that  once
    a child has accrued seven years' long residence, "strong reasons"  will
    be  required  to  justify  denying  him  leave:  see  for  instance  MA
    (Pakistan) and PD and Ors (Article 8 -  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri
    Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC). 'Strong reasons' might for  instance  be
    criminality on the part  of  the  parents,  or  egregious  breaches  of
    immigration control, or perhaps very positive factors relating  to  the
    country of origin such as the  presence  of  other  siblings  or  close
    family members. As Mr Walker was  compelled  to  acknowledge,  no  such
    reasons have been identified in the grounds, nor  appear  obvious  from
    the evidence before the Tribunal.

10. It follows that any error in the determination in not  having  specific
    regard to s117B(1)-(5) is immaterial.  For the sake of  completeness  I
    should add that had I been required to remake the appeals today I would
    have had to take into account the fact that the Third Respondent is now
    also a 'qualifying child'. No countervailing factors have emerged since
    Judge Herbert took his decision.




    Decisions


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside.  The decision is upheld.


12. There is no direction for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             2nd December
                                    2016




                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth on the
21st October 2016


