
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/02763/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 4 September 2014                      |On 4 September 2014       |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr RICHARD JEREMIAS BUIGOS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Loughran, Counsel
      (instructed by Legal Rights Partnership)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pooler  on  21  July  2014
           against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Handley
           who had allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 2 July 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of the Philippines, born  23  April
           1967, who had sought further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom on the basis of  his  family  and  private  life,  i.e.,
           Article 8 ECHR.  That was refused by the Secretary of  State  on
           19 December  2013.   The  Respondent's  immigration  history  is
           important.  Perhaps because it  was  familiar  to  the  parties,
           Judge  Handley  merely  alluded  to   it   in   parts   of   his
           determination, without  setting  it  out  in  any  detail.   For
           present purposes it is sufficient to record that the  Respondent
           had  a  bad  immigration  history,  which  included   deception.
           Nevertheless, his appeal against removal made on Article 8  ECHR
           grounds had been  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  17
           December 2012, after which the Secretary of  State  had  granted
           the Respondent leave to enter for 6 months.  The  appeal  before
           Judge Handley was against refusal of further leave to remain  on
           the same basis.  That might usefully have  been  stated  in  the
           determination.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Pooler because he  considered  that  it  was
           arguable that the judge had approached  Article  8  ECHR  on  an
           incorrect  basis,  by  failing  to  conduct  his   analysis   in
           accordance with  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  rules  -  correct
           approach) [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC).   Judge  Pooler  saw  little
           merit in the challenge to the judge's credibility findings,  but
           did not  restrict  the  terms  of  the  grant.   The  Respondent
           indicated by a rule 24 notice that the appeal was opposed.




      Submissions - error of law


      4.    Mr Tufan for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal on which permission to  appeal  had  been  granted.   The
           judge had not started  with  the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraph
           276ADE and Appendix FM) when considering Article 8 ECHR.   There
           was no finding of exceptional circumstances  which  justified  a
           departure from the rules and a Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  analysis.
           Gulshan (above) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) had  not  been
           applied.  The judge's  credibility  findings  were  inadequately
           reasoned.   The  determination  should  be  set  aside  and  the
           original appeal remade and dismissed.  The Respondent could seek
           entry clearance from the Philippines in accordance with Appendix
           FM.


      5.    Ms Loughran for the Respondent relied  on  the  rule  24  notice
           which had been filed.  Although the judge had not  mentioned  it
           in his determination, Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-
           Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT  00702  applied  to
           the   First-tier   Tribunal's   earlier   determination.    That
           determination had  not  been  appealed:  on  the  contrary,  the
           Respondent had been granted leave to remain on  Article  8  ECHR
           grounds, albeit for 6 months.  The  brevity  of  the  leave  was
           because it been treated as a port case.  Although the judge  had
           not mentioned  Devaseelan  (above),  that  background  had  been
           mentioned  at  [17]  and,  more  importantly,  at  [25]  of  the
           determination, where the judge's  finding  had  been  that  "the
           Appellant's family life is stronger than  at  the  time  of  the
           previous hearing".  There was no material error of law  and  the
           determination should stand.




      No material error of law finding


      6.    The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
           found that the judge had not fallen into material error of  law.
           The tribunal reserved its determination which now follows.


      7.    As Judge Pooler indicated, the assertion in the grounds  seeking
           permission to appeal that the judge's assessment of the evidence
           was deficient had no substance.  It was plain that the judge had
           properly weighed and considered all of  the  evidence  produced,
           and had  given  sufficient  reasons  to  support  his  findings.
           Although  the  judge  did  not   say   so   expressly   in   his
           determination, [25] as cited by Ms Loughran indicates  that  the
           judge had used the First-tier Tribunal's  previous  findings  as
           his starting point, as indeed he was bound to do absent any good
           reason for doing otherwise.  The citation of Devaseelan  (above)
           although obvious and perhaps almost trite would have helped make
           that clear, and illuminated the judge's reasoning process.


      8.    Notwithstanding the First-tier Tribunal's previous  decision  in
           2012, the judge was obliged to take into account Gulshan (above)
           and Nagre (above), because they clarified  the  law  as  to  the
           correct approach to Article 8 ECHR under the post  9  July  2012
           Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State's decision had to  be
           examined on that basis and the judge failed to do so.  That  was
           an error of law.


      9.    The tribunal concludes, however, that the error of law  was  not
           in the end material. Given that the Respondent's previous appeal
           on family life Article 8 ECHR grounds had been  allowed  by  the
           First-tier Tribunal, and that there had  been  found  to  be  no
           change of circumstances, and that no new facts had  emerged,  it
           would have been a surprising conclusion to  have  dismissed  the
           appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  the
           Respondent  further  leave  to  remain  ignored  the  First-tier
           Tribunal's determination from 2012 and may be  characterised  as
           perverse. It would have  been  useful  for  the  judge  to  have
           mentioned that in his determination, because that was a critical
           issue.  The proportionality assessment had already been made  in
           the Respondent's favour and the Secretary of State had not shown
           any basis for  departing  from  it.   Thus  Gulshan  (above)  if
           applied as should have happened could have made  no  difference.
           Put  another  way,  exceptional   circumstances   justifying   a
           departure from Appendix FM had already been found.


      10.   The tribunal adds that had the judge spelt  out  the  underlying
           factual situation more clearly, the  Secretary  of  State  would
           have been unlikely to have been granted  permission  to  appeal.
           Applications made by the Secretary of State  are  frequently  if
           not invariably made without access to the appeal file and so are
           based on the content of the determination without  reference  to
           the wider context.


      11.   Thus the tribunal finds that there was no material error of  law
           in the determination and there is no basis for interfering  with
           the judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




