
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02871/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2014                          |On 23 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             ANULA PREMACHANDRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Yong, Counsel, instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a female citizen of Sri Lanka now aged  89  years,
    against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent refusing to vary  her  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. The decision complained of has not always
    been indentified  as  an  appealable  immigration  decision  but  I  am
    satisfied that the Tribunal does have jurisdiction to hear this appeal.

 2. The case has taken some interesting twists and turns but the  essential
    points are set out below.  The appellant has a history of coming to the
    United Kingdom to visit her son and daughter-in-law with permission and
    leaving in accordance with that permission.  On  the  occasion  of  the
    most recent visit she had permission to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    until November 2013.

 3. The appellant's health deteriorated. This is not at all surprising  for
    a woman of her age.  She had a fall. There is medical evidence that she
    suffered recurring nose bleeds. Attempts to  stop  the  bleeding  at  a
    minor injuries unit were unsuccessful  and  she  had  to  be  taken  to
    hospital.  Nobody is making too  much  of  this  episode.  It  was  not
    suggested that the appellant was gravely ill but medical attention  was
    necessary and she was diagnosed with  blood  pressure  problems  and  a
    shortage of iron.  The  National  Health  Service's  charges  for  this
    treatment have been met by the appellant's family.

 4. More significantly for the purposes of this appeal, it was the  opinion
    of the general medical  practitioner  dealing  with  the  appellant  in
    September 2013 that she was not fit to travel.

 5. The appellant's son  is  a  solicitor  and  her  daughter-in-law  is  a
    dentist.  They were concerned that the appellant would not  be  fit  to
    travel when her leave to be in  the  United  Kingdom  lapsed.  Possibly
    because they have the kind of education which can be expected of people
    in these professions,  they  applied  to  the  Home  Office,  with  the
    assistance of solicitors who are experienced in immigration matters, to
    extend the appellant's leave. In my  judgement  the  respondent  should
    have given a proper reply to that letter. The  respondent  should  have
    shown that she appreciated that the appellant was asking for  leave  to
    remain because she could not cope on her own and in particular that  at
    the time of writing she could not get to Sri Lanka because she was  not
    fit to travel. It may have been appropriate to clarify if the appellant
    expected to recover in  the  foreseeable  future  and  wanted  a  short
    extension of her leave or if it was her case that she was not  expected
    to recover so that she could live independently and she wanted  a  long
    period of leave. It is conceivable that the respondent  would  have  to
    say that the application was for a  purpose  not  contemplated  by  the
    rules.

 6. It seems to me that when the appellant was applying for  further  leave
    she was seeking permission to remain under paragraph 317 of HC 395 (the
    provision relating to dependent relatives) which (I think) was in force
    at the material time. Without making  any  findings  at  all  she  does
    appear to satisfy the requirements of that Rule  except  that  she  was
    within the United Kingdom. This is wholly consistent with her case that
    she is not fit to leave the United Kingdom to return to  Sri  Lanka  to
    make an application.

 7. However the respondent made a standard reply which said much about  the
    application of immigration rules relevant to people who had a long stay
    in the United Kingdom and the  reasons  that  this  appellant  did  not
    satisfy them. There was also a  disconcerting  throwaway  remark  about
    what the appellant needed to do if she feared persecution  in  Pakistan
    (the appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka) and a  passing  reference  to
    her blood pressure problems but, as far as I can see,  no  appreciation
    at all of the clear medical evidence that  at  the  material  time  the
    appellant was not fit to travel.  In other  words  the  refusal  letter
    wholly failed to deal with the point of the application.

 8.  By  the  time  the  case  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant's health had improved to some extent and  the  appellant  was
    able to give evidence when she made a good impression on the judge  but
    the judge dismissed the appeal. He clearly  misdirected  himself  about
    the evidence at one point because he said  that  the  medical  evidence
    about her condition predated the fall, when it plainly did  not.  There
    is a Rule 25 response from the  Presenting  Officer's  unit  suggesting
    that the judge's error lay in the way he expressed himself rather  than
    in  his  understanding  of  the  case  because  other  parts   of   the
    determination suggested  that  he  had  appreciated  that  the  medical
    evidence was about what  happened  to  the  appellant  when  she  fell.
    However, arguing that the decision is right on the basis the judge  did
    not say what he meant is never a particularly comfortable position  for
    a party to proceedings. I am really not sure what the judge meant.   If
    he decided that the appellant was fit to travel because  there  was  no
    fresh medical evidence  he  should  not  have  reached  that  decision.
    Frailty in elderly people is not, for example, similar to a common cold
    where experience of life suggests  that  a  complete  recovery  can  be
    expected soon. I find that the First-tier  Tribunal's  explanation  for
    its decision is too opaque to be lawful and I set it aside.

 9. This case could have been argued in a  very  legalistic  way  but  both
    representatives before me have tried to be constructive  and  pragmatic
    and Mr Tarlow, I know, has had an opportunity to consider the position.

10. I have decided that the proper course here is to say  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did err in law and that the proper decision was that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with  the  law
    because it  did  not  address  the  points  that  were  raised  by  the
    appellant's application.

11. The proper course now is for the Secretary of State to look at the case
    again and make a fresh decision on the available evidence.   If  it  is
    now the case in October 2014 that  the  appellant  is  still  unfit  to
    travel it would be in everybody's interests that the solicitors say  so
    and disclose supporting evidence as soon as possible to  the  Secretary
    of State.

12. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I substitute  a
    decision allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  extent  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and
    the application needs to be decided again.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 October 2014                |




