
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02164/2016
                                                               IA/02165/2016
                                                               IA/02166/2016
                                                               IA/02167/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 May 2018                        |On 10 May 2018                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 TAHMINA [H]
                                 MUJIBUR [R]
                                 SAFWAN [R]
                                    [T R]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M M Hossein, Counsel


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


   1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department and the respondents are Mrs [H], her husband and  children.
      However, it is more convenient to refer to the parties  as  they  were
      before the First-tier Tribunal and therefore I shall refer from now on
      to Mrs [H] as "the appellant" and to the Secretary of  State  as  "the
      respondent". Mrs [H]'s husband and  children  are  dependents  on  her
      appeal.


   2. The appellant had leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  from  October
      2010 until April 2012. She  made  two  unsuccessful  applications  for
      further leave as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant. On  1  October  2012  she
      applied for further leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  This
      application was also refused with a right of appeal. The  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer withdrew the decision  on  17  July  2013  and  the
      appellant's case was remitted for reconsideration. Eventually, after a
      pre-action protocol  letter  was  sent,  the  respondent  undertook  a
      reconsideration of the appellant's Tier 4  application.  The  decision
      was made on 4 May  2016.  The  notice  of  decision  stated  that  the
      respondent had considered whether the appellant was a genuine student,
      as required by  paragraph  245ZX(o)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
      appellant was interviewed on 18 April  2016  and  asked  a  series  of
      questions surrounding the TOEIC English test which  she  undertook  in
      February 2012 to obtain educational  sponsorship.  The  assessment  of
      this interview by the interviewer  was  that  the  appellant  was  not
      credible. It was considered she had been unable to give details as  to
      where the test was undertaken, and, she had been unable  to  give  any
      information regarding the separate elements of  the  tests,  including
      the writing element, the listening element or the reading element. The
      only information the appellant  could  offer  regarding  the  speaking
      element to the test was that she  had  to  speak  about  a  topic,  no
      further elaboration being provided.


   3. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C  H  Bennett
      at the Taylor House hearing centre on 6 October 2017.  In  a  thorough
      and detailed decision, the judge came to the conclusion that, although
      he did not consider the appellant's evidence relating to  the  English
      language test satisfactory, he was satisfied she took  the  tests  and
      that she was a genuine student. He therefore allowed the appeal.


   4. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the judge had failed
      to give adequate reasons for accepting the appellant's  evidence  that
      she was a genuine student notwithstanding  his  concerns.  The  ground
      submitted that the judge's conclusion was  "extraordinary"  given  the
      appellant clearly had a history of relying on the work  of  others  in
      order to  achieve  her  aims,  be  those  academic  qualifications  or
      obtaining leave to remain. By committing plagiarism, which  the  judge
      had found  she  had,  the  appellant  demonstrated  a  propensity  for
      laziness and disregard for academic standards, which  did  nothing  to
      add to her credibility in respect of the TOIEC certificate.  The  rest
      of the grounds argued the judge had  failed  to  correctly  apply  the
      burden of proof in line with the case of SM and Qadir (ETS -  Evidence
      - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC).


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal because it
      was considered arguable the judge had failed to apply the correct test
      when considering deception in relation to an English test.


   6. The appellant did not file a rule 24 response opposing the  appeal.  I
      pause to note that this  might  be  considered  surprising  given  the
      decision under appeal in this case did not contain any  allegation  of
      deception such that the approach explained in SM and Qadir  needed  to
      be applied.

   7. Mr Bramble acknowledged there was no material  error  in  the  judge's
      decision. The judge had  considered  all  the  arguments  and  made  a
      finding  which  was  not  perverse.  ETS  had  not   invalidated   the
      appellant's test result and the issue of deception had not been raised
      against the appellant. There was no error in his failing to  apply  SM
      and Qadir.


   8.  The appeal is dismissed and Judge  Bennett's  decision  allowing  the
      appeals shall stand.


NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and his decision allowing the appeals shall stand.

     An anonymity direction has not been made.



                               Signed                 Date 8 May 2018


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Froom
