
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Numbers:
IA/02200/2015

                                 and IA/02475/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2016                |On 7 March 2016                 |
|                                   |                                |


                                   Before

                             The Hon Lord BURNS
                 (Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   (1) SL
                                   (2) OA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Akther, Counsel
      (instructed by Lighthouse Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS











      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes on 30 November  2015
           against the decision and reasons of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Sweet who had allowed the Respondents'  linked  appeals  against
           the Secretary of State's decision  dated  22  December  2014  to
           refuse to grant the Respondents leave to remain  under  Appendix
           FM and/or under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and/or
           under Article 8 ECHR and to remove them from the United Kingdom.
           The decision and reasons was promulgated on 6 August 2015.


      2.    The Respondents, daughter and mother, are nationals of  Nigeria,
           respectively born in the United Kingdom on  [see  file]  and  in
           Nigeria on [see file].  The Second Appellant entered the  United
           Kingdom on her 6 month visit visa  on  28  September  2004,  and
           became an overstayer.  She formed a relationship with  a  fellow
           Nigerian (whom she believed had  died  in  Nigeria  in  February
           2011), resulting in the  birth  of  the  First  Appellant.   The
           Second Appellant's parents had disapproved of  the  relationship
           but both were now deceased.  Judge Sweet noted  that  the  First
           Appellant would be eligible to apply for British Citizenship  in
           September 2015 (s.1(4), British Nationality Act 1981).  He found
           that the First Appellant had never been to Nigeria and was fully
           integrated  into  English  (sic)  society.   She  would   suffer
           distress if she had to leave.  The judge found that it would not
           be reasonable to expect the First Appellant to leave the  United
           Kingdom and allowed her appeal under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of
           the Immigration Rules.  He further found  that  there  would  be
           very  significant  obstacles  for  the  First  Appellant  to  be
           reintegrated into Nigeria because of the difficulties  with  her
           family  there,  and   allowed   her   appeal   under   paragraph
           276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted by Judge Heynes because he considered that
           it was arguable that the judge had erred in law  by  failing  to
           consider section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
           Act 2002, had wrongly believed one appellant to be eligible  for
           British Citizenship and had failed to take account that  English
           is the official language of Nigeria.


      4.    Standard directions were made by the Upper Tribunal,  indicating
           that the appeal would be reheard and remade immediately  in  the
           event that a material error of law were found.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Wilding for the Secretary of State  following   a  brief  and
           helpful dialogue with the tribunal conceded that the  judge  had
           not fallen into material error of law on the British Citizenship
           issue, and withdrew that ground  of  appeal.   Nevertheless,  it
           remained  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  the   judge's
           assessment had been unbalanced.  Conditions in Nigeria  had  not
           been  considered,  e.g.,  the  official  languages.   The   best
           interests  issue  arising  under  section  55  of  the  Borders,
           Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 had been met  by  the  fact
           that the child would be removed with her  mother.   Again,  that
           had  not  been  adequately  factored  by  the  judge  into   his
           evaluation.  The decision and reasons should be  set  aside  and
           the decision(s) remade.


      6.    Ms Akther for the Respondents submitted that there had not  been
           much which the judge had been required to  say.   He  was  right
           about the child's British Citizenship entitlement.   It  was  an
           overwhelming case, as the determination showed.  Clear  findings
           on the reasonableness issue had been reached.  It was  not  easy
           to see how section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002 was even relevant, as the appeal  had  succeeded
           under the Immigration Rules  and  there  had  been  no  need  to
           consider the Article 8 ECHR claim which had been raised  in  the
           alternative or as a "fall back"  position:  see  Treebhawon  and
           others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC).  There was  no
           basis for setting aside the decision.




      The error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal reserved  its  determination,  which  now  follows.
           (For improved clarity in this  part  of  the  determination  the
           tribunal  will  refer   to   the   parties   by   the   original
           designations.)  The application for permission to appeal was  an
           unfortunate one, and the doubly mistaken  propositions  advanced
           in ground three as to British Citizenship  ought  to  have  been
           detected at the  stage  when  the  application  was  considered.
           Nevertheless, it remained properly arguable that the  judge  had
           erred in his assessment of  the  situation  in  Nigeria,  as  to
           language, the possibility of education for the  First  Appellant
           and as to the family situation faced on  return  by  the  Second
           Appellant.


      8.    In the tribunal's judgment the judge failed to provide a logical
           explanation for his finding that the Second  Appellant  had  any
           continuing family difficulties in Nigeria.  He had accepted that
           the Second Appellant's parents disapproved of her pregnancy  out
           of wedlock, but he had also accepted (and by implication, found)
           that both of the Second Appellant's parents were dead, as  sadly
           was the First Appellant's  father.   The  Second  Appellant  had
           lived in Nigeria all  her  life  before  coming  to  the  United
           Kingdom for the declared purpose of a short visit.   The  Second
           Appellant was an active member of a church  whose  members  were
           supporting her financially, and there  was  no  suggestion  that
           such support could not  be  transferred  to  Nigeria  while  the
           Second Appellant re-established  herself  there.  There  was  no
           properly reasoned basis for the judge's finding that there  were
           very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Second  Appellants'   re-
           integration in Nigeria.


      9.    Perhaps because the judge allowed the Second Appellant's  appeal
           under  Immigration  Rules,  he  did  not  examine   the   Second
           Appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim and so did not consider section
           117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   In
           the tribunal's view, support for that approach may be drawn from
           Treebhawon and others (above), and also from AM  (S117B)  Malawi
           [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC): "When the question posed by s117B(6)  is
           the same question posed in relation  to  children  by  paragraph
           276ADE(1)(iv) it must  be  posed  and  answered  in  the  proper
           context of whether it was reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
           follow its parents to their country of origin; EV (Philippines).
           It is not however a question that needs to be posed and answered
           in relation to each child more than once."


      10.   Hence while there was no error in failing  to  consider  section
           117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  since
           the closely similar provisions in the relevant Immigration Rules
           had already been considered, in  the  tribunal's  judgment,  the
           judge's  decision  in  favour  of  the  Second  Appellant  under
           paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the   Immigration   Rules   was
           insufficiently reasoned and cannot stand.


      11.   In contrast, the tribunal  considers  that  the  judge  provided
           sufficient reasons for allowing  the  First  Appellant's  appeal
           under paragraph 276(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  It was not
           simply a question of the First Appellant's imminent  entitlement
           to  British  Citizenship  under  section  1(4)  of  the  British
           Nationality Act 1981, as noted above.  That situation had arisen
           in part from the Secretary of  State's  failure  to  remove  the
           Appellants, of whose unlawful existence she had become aware  at
           latest on 16 October 2013 when leave to remain had been  sought.
             While of course the Second Appellant should have ensured  that
           she and her daughter left  the  United  Kingdom  long  ago,  the
           Secretary of State was on notice that enforcement was  required.
           The blameless First Appellant had by 16 October 2013 reached the
           age of seven and so had already  become  entitled  to  have  her
           situation considered on the basis  of  seven  years'  continuous
           residence, a policy concerning children  which  has  existed  in
           various forms for many years.  The  judge  correctly  identified
           the current version of  the  relevant  policy  at  [17]  of  his
           decision.  He  might  also  usefully  have  cited  the  guidance
           provided  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others   (decisions   affecting
           children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT00197 (IAC), but  that  was
           not essential as he showed that  he  had  grasped  the  relevant
           principles.


      12.   The judge's findings of fact concerning  the  First  Appellant's
           degree of integration in the United Kingdom were not challenged.
            Indeed, there was some independent evidence  worthy  of  weight
           which the  judge  identified  at  [15]  of  his  decision.   The
           tribunal  finds  that  the  judge's  decision  under   paragraph
           276ADE(1)(iv)  of   the   Immigration   Rules   concerning   the
           reasonableness of the  First  Appellant's  removal  reflected  a
           proper assessment  of  the  First  Appellant's  best  interests,
           including her imminent entitlement to British  Citizenship,  the
           impact on her of removal, her own growing independence  and  the
           fact that she had played  no  conscious  part  in  her  mother's
           overstay.    The fact that  another  judge  might  have  reached
           another conclusion and found her appeal less  than  overwhelming
           is immaterial.  The judge's erroneous assessment of  the  Second
           Appellant's position was reached separately and did  not  affect
           his reasoning concerning the First Appellant.
      13.   It follows that the tribunal dismisses the Secretary of  State's
           appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision in  the  First
           Appellant's favour, but allows the appeal against the First-tier
           Tribunal's decision in favour  of  the  Second  Appellant.   The
           decision in favour of the Second Appellant must now be remade.


      14.   The tribunal considered that no further submissions were  needed
           in order to remake the decision concerning the Second Appellant,
           as the central issues had all been identified,  and  in  reality
           only one outcome was possible in the light of  the  decision  in
           favour of the First  Appellant.   In  the  reasons  for  refusal
           letter dated 22 December 2014, it was accepted at [9]  that  the
           Second Appellant met the Suitability requirements of Appendix FM
           (notwithstanding her long overstay) and also  accepted  at  [14]
           that she met the Eligibility requirements of Appendix FM as  the
           parent of the First Appellant.  The application had been refused
           because the Secretary  of  State  had  considered  that  it  was
           reasonable for the First Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom,
           hence paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix FM was inapplicable.


      15.   The effect of upholding Judge Sweet's decision finding  that  it
           would not be reasonable for the First  Appellant  to  leave  the
           United Kingdom means that the Secretary of State's  decision  as
           conveyed in the reasons for refusal  letter  dated  22  December
           2014 is wrong: the Second Appellant is entitled to  the  benefit
           of paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.
           The tribunal finds that the Second Appellant has a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a child who has  lived  in
           the United Kingdom continuously for at  least  the  seven  years
           immediately preceding the date of the application and  it  would
           not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom.  The Second Appellant's appeal succeeds under paragraph
           EX.1(a) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


      16.   So far as it may necessary to do so, the tribunal dismisses  the
           Second  Appellant's  private   life   appeal   under   paragraph
           276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  It is not necessary  to
           consider her private and family claim under Article 8  ECHR  she
           has satisfied the Immigration Rules.   AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]
           UKUT 0260 (IAC) indicates  that  no  separate  consideration  of
           section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
           is needed in such circumstances.
      DECISION


      The appeal of the Appellant (the Secretary of  State)  is  allowed  in
respect of  the  appeal  of  the  Second  Respondent.   The  making  of  the
previous    decision involved the making of a material error  of  law.   The
decision in      respect  of  the  Second  Respondent  (i.e.,  the  original
Second Appellant) is   remade as follows:

      The appeal is allowed under paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix  FM  of  the
Immigration Rules

      The appeal of the Appellant (the Secretary of State) is  dismissed  in
respect     of the appeal of the First Respondent.   The  original  decision
of the First-    tier Tribunal in favour of  the  original  First  Appellant
stands unchanged.

      (There were no fee awards)

      Signed                                 Dated



      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




