
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 October 2016                         |On 28 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                  FANNY [V]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L. Appiah, Counsel, instructed by M.J. Solomon
& Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie, promulgated on 18  March  2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant further leave to remain.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "At paragraph 11 of  the  decision  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
         Appellant had established private life in the  United  Kingdom  and
         that her removal would interfere with that life.  The Judge has not
         set out the criteria in Razgar.  The Judge has not applied  Section
         117.  The Judge has dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.


         It is arguable that the Judge should have applied these criteria in
         reaching his conclusion in this respect.  It is  arguable  that  an
         insufficient analysis has been  set  forward  in  relation  to  the
         proportionality exercise.  It is arguable that the matter  referred
         to in paragraph 1 of the permission application  should  have  been
         taken into account in  any  such  exercise  in  addition  to  other
         relevant factors."


 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions

 4. Miss Appiah relied on the grounds of appeal, and submitted that grounds
    1 and 2 should be taken together.  She referred me to  paragraph  3  of
    the Appellant's statement before the First-tier Tribunal  (pages  1  to
    3), which referred to the 2010 application, and paragraphs 5 to 7 which
    related to the Appellant's ties in the United Kingdom.   She  submitted
    that she was not sure whether  the  ancestry  right  should  have  been
    considered separately but that, in any event, whether  the  Appellant's
    grandfather had been a British national was relevant to the question of
    her ties to the United Kingdom.


 5. In response Mr. Kotas referred to the Rule 24 response.   He  submitted
    that there was little merit in the grounds.  The issue  of  legacy  had
    been dealt with at length by the judge.  In relation  to  ancestry,  it
    was the quality of any  relationship  that  mattered  and  it  was  not
    material that no finding had been made as to the Appellant's  ancestry.
    He submitted that the relationship did not go beyond  normal  emotional
    ties.


 6. In response Miss Appiah submitted that there was a clear material error
    of law.  I was referred to the evidence from page  36  onwards  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.


Error of law


 7. The issue of the legacy is dealt with from paragraphs 4  to  9  of  the
    decision, although much of this consists of setting out the case  of  H
    (Iran) [2014] EWCA Civ 1469.  The judge finds in paragraph 9  that  the
    issue of legacy takes the Appellant's case no  further.   The  decision
    states:


    "In  the  final  analysis  the  position  in  this  case  is  that  the
    appellant's claim to be entitled to leave  to  remain  has  been  fully
    considered by the respondent and found to  be  lacking  in  merit.   It
    seems plain to me therefore that the argument  in  relation  to  Legacy
    Claims that has been raised in this case is without merit."


 8. The judge then goes on to consider the Appellant's Article 8 claim  and
    does so in three paragraphs, 10, 11 and a second paragraph  11.   There
    is a reference to the fact that no evidence has been provided  to  show
    that the Appellant's grandfather was born in the  United  Kingdom,  but
    this is where the consideration of her grandfather ends.   There  is  a
    reference to her British ancestry having been  raised  in  her  witness
    statement in paragraph 3(i), but there is no further analysis  of  this
    point.  I find that the relevance of this is limited given that  it  is
    the quality of any relationship which is important, however I find that
    there is insufficient analysis of the  Appellant's  relationships  with
    any relatives in the United Kingdom in the judge's analysis of  Article
    8.


 9. In the first paragraph 11 the judge states that he does not accept that
    the Appellant's relationships with her adult relatives and  godchildren
    engage Article 8 in relation to family life.   He refers  to  the  fact
    that the relationships are close, but there is  no  analysis  of  these
    relationships, or of the bonds which do exist.  There is  no  reference
    to the degree of relationship, whether they are e.g.  siblings,  aunts,
    uncles or cousins.  There is a reference to the  evidence  not  showing
    that her "family ties in the UK go  beyond  normal  family  ties",  but
    there is no reference to what this evidence is,  nor  are  any  reasons
    given for this finding.  Given the extent of the evidence submitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, page 36 of the bundle onwards, I find that the
    judge has failed to give reasons for why he has rejected this evidence.




10. Further, even if these bonds were not sufficient to engage Article 8 in
    relation to family life, the extent to which the Appellant  has  formed
    any ties is relevant to the issue of her private life, and there is  no
    reference to the extent to which these close relationships form part of
    her private life.


11. Further, in relation to consideration of the Appellant's case under the
    immigration rules, there is just a statement in paragraph 10 that it is
    clear that she does not meet the requirements of leave to remain  under
    the immigration rules.  There are no reasons given, and no reference to
    the relevant rule, either Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE(1).   The
    extent to which an appellant meets the requirements of the  immigration
    rules is relevant to any consideration of Article 8 outside the  rules.
    The only consideration of her ties  to  Ghana,  and  the  circumstances
    there, is one sentence in the second paragraph 11.  I find that this is
    insufficient.


12. I find that the Article 8 analysis set out in paragraphs 10, 11 and  11
    is inadequate.  I find  that  the  failure  properly  to  consider  the
    Appellant's case under the immigration rules, given  the  relevance  of
    this to an assessment of proportionality outside the immigration rules,
    together with the failure to make clear and reasoned findings regarding
    the Appellant's relationships in the United Kingdom, and the failure to
    consider section 117B at all in the proportionality assessment, amounts
    to a material error of law.


13. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


14. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    the decision aside.


15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


16. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 27 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



