
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02609/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2017                           |On 13 December 2017           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                        Mr chintan pramodchandra shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Hiren Patel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 2 August  2017  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Powell which refused  the  appellant's  application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.





Background

 2. The background to this matter is as follows.  The appellant was born in
    India on 24 September 1991.  He came to the UK on 10 December 2009 with
    leave as a Tier 4 Student.  His leave was valid until 6 May 2011.

 3. On 24 April 2011 he was granted further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    Student until 12 July 2014.

 4. On 7 July 2011 the college at which he was studying was taken  off  the
    register and the appellant's leave to remain curtailed to expire on  27
    May 2012.

 5. On 10 August 2012 the appellant was granted further leave to remain  as
    a Tier 4 Student until 29 September 2014.

 6. On 5 October 2012 the college at which the appellant was  studying  was
    again taken off the  register  and  the  appellant's  leave  to  remain
    curtailed to expire on 9 February 2013.

 7. On 22 March 2013 the  appellant's  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain was refused.  The appellant appealed and was successful in  that
    appeal.  This resulted in a grant on  18  September  2013  for  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student until 6 July 2015.

 8. On 30 October 2013, the appellant's college was  again  taken  off  the
    register and his leave to remain curtailed to  expire  on  16  February
    2014.

 9. On 29 January 2014 the appellant applied for further leave to remain as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student.  At that time, he applied with a  CAS  from
    Williams College.  His application was refused on 29 March 2015.

10. He appealed again but before the  hearing  took  place  the  respondent
    withdrew her decision on 18 January 2016.

11. The respondent reconsidered the appellant's application of  29  January
    2014.  She refused it again in a decision dated 2 December 2016.  It is
    against that decision that the appellant lodged the appeal that led  to
    the proceedings here.

The Respondent's Decision of 2 December 2016

12. The application came to be refused for a second time on 2 December 2016
    for the following reasons.  As above, the appellant made an application
    on 29 January 2014 and included a CAS issued by Williams College.

13. On 3 July 2014 the respondent revoked the Tier 4  sponsor  licence  for
    Williams College. On 5 January 2015 the respondent gave  the  appellant
    60 days to obtain a new sponsor. He did not do so and  the  application
    was refused on 30 March 2015.

14. The appellant appealed the refusal on 29  March  2015.  The  respondent
    then withdrew the decision, informing  the  appellant  of  this  on  18
    January 2016.

15. On 20 September 2016 the respondent gave the appellant  another  period
    of 60 days' leave to submit documentary evidence confirming that he had
    been accepted onto a course of study with a  different  college.   This
    gave the appellant until 19 November 2016 to obtain a new CAS.

16. By this time, in order to obtain a valid CAS, the appellant also had to
    undertake a fresh English language test because the test  provider  who
    had issued him with the relevant test certificate had been removed from
    the Home Office list of approved English language test providers.

17. The appellant was unable to find  an  approved  English  language  test
    provider who was prepared to register him for an English language test.
     This was because the documents provided to him by the respondent  with
    the 60 day letter were not  acceptable  to  the  colleges  approved  to
    administer the  English  language  test.  They  required  his  original
    passport.  The Home Office had  provided  the  appellant  only  with  a
    certified copy of that passport. As he could not take the language test
    he could not find a  sponsor  to  issue  him  with  a  CAS.  Thus,  the
    respondent again refused the application on 2 December 2016.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

18. The appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Powell on the papers on 2 August  2017.   The  appellant  accepts
    that the judge was correct at [32] in finding that, whatever the reason
    for being unable to provide a valid CAS by 19  November  2016  in  line
    with the 60 day letter, he did not do so and that this meant  that  the
    Immigration Rules could not be met.

19. The appellant objects, however, to the judge's finding on the situation
    that he faced in being unable to register for a test with  an  approved
    English language test provider.

20. The relevant sections of the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Powell are as follows:

         "34. The appellant points to a gap in Home Office policy because he
             could not satisfy the relevant English language test providers
             as to his identity because they were unwilling to  accept  the
             evidence he had to confirm his identity, namely the  certified
             copy of his passport, still held by the Home Office.

         35.  The appellant may be correct in his assertion that there is  a
             gap in the guidance that  governs  the  arrangements  for  the
             taking  of  English  language  tests  but  I  have  not  heard
             sufficient argument to begin  to  say  that  the  difficulties
             faced by the appellant were so great and therefore unfair that
             the respondent's  decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules  is
             demonstrably unfair and therefore not in accordance  with  the
             general rules of procedural fairness.  Nor has it  been  shown
             that the respondent ought to have exercised  discretion  under
             the Rules differently.  In this, I remind myself that  the  60
             day  period  allowed  by  the  respondent  is  in  line   with
             established case law and represents an allowance that  accords
             with the rules of procedural fairness.

         36.  As far as the decision under challenge, I  am  satisfied  that
             the respondent's decision was in accordance with the law.

         37.  This is a  significant  finding  because  the  fact  that  the
             requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  not  met  is  a
             relevant factor in my assessment of the proportionality of the
             respondent's decision under Article 8."

21. The judge went on at [38] to [47] to find  that  the  difficulties  the
    appellant faced in registering with an approved English  language  test
    provider  were  not  sufficient  to  show   that   the   decision   was
    disproportionate.

The Grounds

22. Put simply, therefore, the appellant's challenge is that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred  in  law  in  not  finding  the  decision  of  the
    respondent not in accordance with the law or, alternatively,  that  the
    decision was disproportionate where he  faced  an  impossible  task  in
    registering with an approved English language test provider.

23. An important aspect of this matter is, of course,  the  fact  that  the
    application for leave to remain was made on 29 January 2014,  before  6
    April 2015 when the  changes  to  the  Appellate  regime  made  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 came  into  force.   The  appellant  is  therefore
    entitled to the not in accordance with the  law  jurisdiction  provided
    for under the old Section 86(3) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 which reads:

         "(3) The Tribunal must allow the appeal insofar as it thinks that -



             (a)  the decision against which the appeal is  brought  or  is
                  treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with  the
                  law (including Immigration Rules)."

Discussion and Reasons

24. There is no dispute here that  the  respondent's  guidance  on  how  to
    register with an approved English language test provider  requires  the
    provider to accept  only  an  original  passport  (or  other  specified
    document). The appellant includes this guidance at [56] - [57]  of  his
    bundle  of  materials.   The  respondent  does  not  dispute  that  the
    appellant was unable to  satisfy  the  guidance  where  the  respondent
    returned only a certified copy of the appellant's passport.   Mr  Kotas
    submitted for the respondent that even where that was  so,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge acted lawfully in concluding at [35] that there was
    still insufficient evidence or argument before him on  the  point.   It
    was also suggested that the appellant's action lay against the  English
    language test providers rather than against the respondent.

25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had before him the documents at [25]-[31]
    comprising the 60 day decision and related documents. At [31], a letter
    to the appellant dated 20 September 2016 informed him that he needed to
    take a new English language test. The letter states:

         "You can use the endorsed copy of your passport enclosed with  this
         letter to prove your identity when taking the test."

26. As above, the respondent does not dispute here that this advice is  not
    consistent with her published guidance on  the  need  for  an  original
    document, set out at [56] - [57] of the appellant's bundle.

27. The First-tier Tribunal also  had  before  it  a  number  of  documents
    obtained by the appellant indicating  that  approved  English  language
    test providers would not accept a certified copy of his  passport.   At
    [42] there is an email from the British Council which states:

         "Because of the nature of IELTS, which is a  high  stakes  test  of
         English proficiency,  other  means  of  identification  such  as  a
         driving licence, certified passport copy or student card  will  not
         be accepted."

28. At [45] he provided an email from International House, London  dated  3
    October 2016 which stated:

         "According  to  IELTS  Regulations  we  can  only  accept  Original
         Passport, European ID or BRC (residence permit)."

29. At [49] the appellant provided an email dated 27  September  2016  from
    the IELTS team at Kings Education stating:

         "No IELTS test centre can accept a Home Office letter as ID for the
         test.

         Please do not apply for an IELTS  test  because  you  will  not  be
         accepted."

30. At [51] the appellant provided an email dated 26  September  2016  from
    IELTS Venues which states:

         "On the day of the IELTS test you  must  present  an  original  and
         current passport.  We cannot accept photocopies, even if  they  are
         certified copies from a Solicitor or letters from the Home  Office.
         You will not be able to sit your exam without a valid passport."

31. At [54] the appellant provided an email dated 26  September  2016  from
    Trinity College London which stated:

         "Unfortunately we are unable to accept the document you  have  sent
         in a (sic) your identification."

    The email goes on to  state  that  only  original  documents  could  be
    accepted.

32. In his witness statement at [23] of his bundle, the appellant stated as
    follows, as written:

         "(c) During my conversation with the test providers over the  phone
             they were referring me to guidance for Secure English Language
             Testing Identification requirements of the Home  Office  (page
             56 - 57) and unfortunately that guidance is very clear that  I
             need to have original ID to book exam.

             There is clear gap  between  the  Home  Office  policy;  their
             instruction to approve test provider and  the  caseworker  who
             gave me 60 day letter and there is no solution as  to  how  to
             book exam by me.  The simple answer would have been to release
             my original passport but  Home  Office  unfortunately  do  not
             release my passport and I know it is practise not  to  release
             passport.  I still do not know a way out of this situation.

             I believe there is need to amend the Home Office guidance  and
             guidance for Secure English  Language  Testing  Identification
             requirements of the Home Office should  clearly  provide  that
             approved English test provider should accept the documents the
             one issued to me dated 20 September 2016 be accepted by  them,
             but until policy is changed I do not see any way out."

33. The appellant maintains that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  at
    [35]. The error was in finding that there not "sufficient argument"  on
    the difficulties faced by the appellant such as to show unfairness that
    could lead to conclusion that the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

34. On the basis of the materials set out above, I find that the First-tier
    Tribunal did err in finding that the appellant had  not  made  out  his
    case that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.
    The appellant's witness statement and materials made his  case  crystal
    clear.  He  provided  the  documentation  he  had  been  given  by  the
    respondent showing he had only been  given  a  certified  copy  of  his
    passport. He provided the respondent's guidance that showed the copy of
    the passport would not be acceptable. He provided  evidence  from  four
    organisations who stated specifically that the certified  copy  of  his
    passport provided to him by the respondent was not sufficient  for  him
    to be able to register to take an English language  test.  It  was  not
    rational or reasonable to conclude that there was insufficient material
    to make out the appellant's case.

35. The error of law is material as without it the outcome  of  the  appeal
    could have been different. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

36. I can remake the appeal quite simply by indicating that in my  judgment
    the materials the appellant has provided are sufficient to show that he
    was unable, despite significant efforts, to  register  for  an  English
    language test and so obtain a new CAS.  That situation arose  from  the
    clear conflict between the respondent's SELT guidance and the certified
    copy of the passport she provided with the 60 day letter.

37. In those circumstances, it is my view that the decision of  2  December
    2016 was not in accordance with the law and the appeal  is  allowed  to
    that extent.

38. It is not my view that the Article 8 claim can be set aside and allowed
    on the same basis where interference  with  studies  is  not  shown  to
    engage Article 8 sufficiently; Patel & Ors v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  72  at
    [57] applied.





Notice of Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside on the limited basis set out above.

40. The appeal is remade as not in accordance with the law.




Signed        [pic]                          Date: 29 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
