

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02536/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at  Field House               |                     Decision and Reasons|
|                                    |Promulgated                              |
|On 14 October 2015                  |                     On 18 November 2015 |
|                                    |                                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                       MISS TASHMI ASHIKA T WITHANAGE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on  17  November  1986.  She
   appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of   the
   respondent to refuse her further leave to remain in the United Kingdom on
   the basis of her private life in the United Kingdom.


2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton in a determination dated  22  May  2015
   dismissed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.  Permission
   to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen dated 5  August
   2015 saying that it is arguable that the  documents  that  the  appellant
   stated that she submitted her supporting documents on 2 May and documents
   may have gone astray and therefore there are arguably grounds of appeal.


3. Thus the appeal came before me


4. The appellant did not attend the hearing on 14 October 2015. The  hearing
   notice was served on her on 18 September 2015. The appellant was given 60
   days in which to produce documents as to her new sponsor and she did  not
   do so. She  did  not  attend  her  appeal  and  therefore  could  not  be
   questioned as to how she submitted her  documents  and  whether  she  had
   duplicates.


5. The Judge in his determination noted that on 12 March 2015 the  appellant
   had submitted a letter with a medical certificate seeking an  adjournment
   of her paper hearing. The medical certificate dated 9 March  2015  stated
   that the appellant had "flulike illness and backache". It stated that the
   condition would mean she would not be fit for work for two weeks. In  her
   letter the appellant said that she was not well enough  to  send  in  her
   documents by 18 March 2015 and she sought an adjournment of hearing.  She
   did not say in the letter that it was a paper hearing. She did  not  seek
   an oral hearing.


6. The Judge noted that the hearing date was  18  May  2015  which  was  two
   calendar months after the date given by the appellant in her letter of 12
   March  2015.  The  appellant  therefore  has  not  produced  any  further
   documents and has not clarified anything about her appeal, which seems to
   relate to having been given an extra 60 days  in  which  to  find  a  new
   sponsor. She has not produced new evidence about any new sponsor. In  all
   the circumstances the judge said he can only conclude that she  has  been
   unable to find  a  suitable  sponsor  and  therefore  her  appeal  cannot
   succeed. The Judge further noted that  the  appellant  has  not  produced
   evidence of a private life in the United Kingdom and  that  he  does  not
   know anything about her at all.


7. The grounds granting  permission  is  only  in  respect  of  whether  the
   documents went astray. The Judge has given credible reasons  for  finding
   why the appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
   or Article 8. The appellant by not appearing at the  hearing  or  sending
   documents has demonstrated that she has nothing further  to  add  to  her
   appeal.


8. I therefore uphold the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge as  not
   being materially erroneous in law.



DECISION

The appellant's appeal is dismissed


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge                                       15th  day
of November 2015

