
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02752/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 22nd January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    Ragab Abdelsalam Ragab Mohamed Hafida
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr M Hoshi of Sabeers Stone Greene Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge  Herlihy  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 24th July 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Egyptian citizen born 24th  April  1988  who  on
    25th June 2013 applied for a Residence Card as confirmation of a  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.

 4. The application was made on the basis that  the  Claimant  had  married
    Izabela Kwiatek, a Polish citizen  (the  Sponsor).   It  was  therefore
    contended that the Claimant is the family member of an EEA national and
    entitled  to  a  Residence  Card  pursuant  to  regulation  7  of   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    regulations).

 5. The application was refused on 6th January 2015, the Secretary of State
    issuing a Notice of Immigration Decision refusing the application  with
    reference to regulations 7 and  8(5)  of  the  2006  regulations.   The
    Secretary of State's reasons for refusal  are  contained  in  a  letter
    dated 6th January 2015 which may be summarised as follows.

 6. The application was refused with reference to regulation 7, because  it
    was not accepted that the Claimant was  married  to  his  EEA  national
    spouse because he had not provided a valid  marriage  certificate.   An
    Islamic marriage certificate was not legally recognised.

 7. The Secretary of  State  went  on  to  consider  the  application  with
    reference to regulation 8(5) of the 2006 regulations which for ease  of
    reference I set out below;

         'A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the  person
         is a partner of an EEA national (other than a  civil  partner)  and
         can  prove  to  the  decision  maker  that  he  is  in  a   durable
         relationship with the EEA national.'

 8. The Secretary of State did not accept that the  Claimant  had  provided
    sufficient documentation to prove that he is in a durable relationship.
     The Secretary of State explained that on 30th September 2014  a  visit
    was undertaken  at  the  Claimant's  home  address  and  evidence  from
    individuals living there, indicated that the  Claimant  was  not  in  a
    durable relationship with the Sponsor.

 9. The Claimant appealed and the appeal was heard by the FtT on 29th  June
    2015.  The FtT heard evidence from the Claimant and Sponsor.   The  FtT
    found that the Claimant had not proved that  he  and  the  Sponsor  had
    entered into a valid marriage.

10. The FtT went on however to find that the Claimant and Sponsor are in  a
    durable relationship and therefore satisfied  regulation  8(5)  of  the
    2006 regulations.  On that basis the FtT allowed the appeal.

11. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal and relied upon
    Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).   In  summary
    it was contended that because the FtT had found the Claimant to  be  an
    extended family member under regulation 8(5), this meant that the issue
    of a Residence Card to an  extended  family  member  was  a  matter  of
    discretion, pursuant to  regulation  17(4)  of  the  2006  regulations.
    Because the Secretary of State had not yet exercised  that  discretion,
    the FtT should have allowed the appeal to the extent that the Secretary
    of State's decision was not in accordance with the law, and  thereafter
    the Secretary of State would have to consider whether discretion should
    be exercised.

12. Permission to appeal was granted on 4th November 2015.   Following  the
    grant of permission the Claimant did not submit a response pursuant  to
    rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

13. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.

Submissions

14. At the hearing on 15th January 2016 Mr Bramble relied upon the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal.

15. Mr Hoshi relied upon a skeleton argument dated 13th  January  2016  and
    argued that the decision of the  FtT  did  not  prevent  the  FtT  from
    exercising discretion.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. The FtT erred in law as contended  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    appeal was allowed on the  basis  that  regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006
    regulations was satisfied.  The FtT did not accept  that  the  Claimant
    and Sponsor had undergone a valid marriage ceremony.  Therefore the FtT
    found that the Claimant is an extended family member of the Sponsor.

17. The error made by the FtT was to allow the appeal outright, and to fail
    to take into account the guidance given in Ihemedu, and I set out below
    the third paragraph to the head note of that decision;

         "(iii)   Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a Residence Card to an
             OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion.  Where  the
             Secretary of State has not yet exercised that  discretion  the
             most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is  to  allow  the
             appeal as being not in accordance with  the  law  leaving  the
             matter  of  whether  to  exercise  this  discretion   in   the
             Appellant's favour or not to the Secretary of State."

18. In this case the Secretary  of  State  had  not  exercised  discretion,
    therefore the FtT  should  have  allowed  the  appeal  insofar  as  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the  law,
    leaving the Secretary of State to  consider  the  issue  of  discretion
    pursuant to regulation 17(4) of the 2006 regulations.

19. I therefore set aside the decision of the FtT but preserve the  finding
    that the Claimant and Sponsor are in a durable relationship and satisfy
    regulation 8(5) of the 2006 regulations.

20. I re-make the decision allowing the appeal to the limited  extent  that
    the Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance with the law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT contained an error of law  and  was  set  aside.   I
substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is allowed to the limited extent that the decision  of
the Secretary of State to refuse  to  issue  a  Residence  Card  is  not  in
accordance with the law.  It is now a matter for the Secretary of  State  to
consider exercising discretion in accordance with regulation  17(4)  of  the
2006 regulations.

Anonymity

No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been  no
request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity  order  is
made.


Signed   Date 15th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the  Secretary  of  State  has  been  found  to  be  not  in
accordance with the law.  This caused the Claimant to appeal  and  incur  an
appeal fee.  Although the Claimant's appeal  has  only  been  allowed  to  a
limited extent, I find that it is appropriate to make a whole fee  award  of
any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed   Date 15th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

