
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03776/2013


Promulgated on: 4th September 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MS ZULEIKHA VALLAINI
                                                                  Respondent


                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT


 1. I shall refer to Ms Vallaini, who was the appellant before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, as the claimant.

 2. The claimant was born 5 April 1927. She entered the United Kingdom as a
    visitor on  16  September  2011  and  on  16  March  2012  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain as the dependent parent of her  sponsor  and
    son, Mr Hakam Valliani, a British  Citizen.  On  23  January  2013  the
    Secretary of State refused to vary the claimant's  leave  and,  at  the
    same time, issued a decision to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 3. The claimant appealed these decisions to the First-tier Tribunal. First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hubball allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR) in a determination promulgated on the  15  July  2013.
    The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by way of a decision dated 29 July 2013.

 4. By way of a letter from Marks and Marks Solicitors dated 31  July  2013
    the Upper Tribunal were, most regrettably, notified that  the  claimant
    passed away on 12 July 2013.

 5. As a consequence of the terms of this letter, and  its  attachments,  I
    sent directions to the parties on the 15 August 2013 in  the  following
    terms:

        [1] The Upper Tribunal has been provided with a  death  certificate
        relating to Ms Vallaini indicating that regrettably she passed away
        on the 12 July 2013.

        [2] In these circumstances unless, within fourteen days of the date
        of the sending out  of  these  directions,  either  party  provides
        notice to the Upper Tribunal in writing, with  supporting  reasons,
        that they wish to pursue these proceedings, the Upper Tribunal will
        (i) treat the Secretary of  State  as  having  withdrawn  its  case
        before  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  (ii)   treat   the   appellant's
        representatives as having  no  objection  to  the  tribunal  giving
        consent to such withdrawal.

 6. Neither party responded to these directions.

 7. Having considered the facts of this case as a whole, and noted the lack
    of response to the directions, I shall do exactly that which I stated I
    would do in paragraph 2 of the directions.

 8. I treat the Secretary of State, with the tribunal's consent, as  having
    withdrawn her case before the Upper  Tribunal.   Accordingly,  with  my
    consent and pursuant to rule 17(5) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, this appeal is recorded as  "Withdrawn  with  the
    consent of the Upper Tribunal". This is a Notice pursuant to rule 17(5)
    to inform the parties that the Secretary of State's case is withdrawn.

 9. The effect of the Secretary of State withdrawing her  case  before  the
    Upper Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal are at
    an end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 2 September 2013
