
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/03404/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 17 August 2016                            |On 23 August 2016              |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MARCEL [C]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Lane, Counsel instructed by Cartwright King,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Romania, born on [ ] 1975. He is  married
    and he and his wife have three children, born on [ ] 2005,  [  ]  2012,
    and [ ] 2014.  On 13 January  2015  a  decision  was  made  to  make  a
    deportation order against him pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations).  His  appeal
    against that decision came before a panel of the FtT whereby the appeal
    was allowed under the EEA Regulations. The FtT's decision does  not  in
    fact make it clear that the panel consisted of a  First-tier  judge  as
    well as a non-legal member, with only the judge's name appearing on the
    decision.

 3. The decision to make the deportation  order  followed  the  appellant's
    conviction on 10 October 2014 for an  offence  of  going  equipped  for
    theft at the Lincoln Magistrates Court for which he received a fine  of
    �130.

 4. Part of the background to the making of the deportation  order  is  the
    appellant's convictions in Romania. These were for offences of rape and
    robbery on 22 November 1994 for which he received a sentence of 7 years
    imprisonment, and an offence  of  burglary  for  which  he  received  a
    sentence of just over 3 years and 8 months imprisonment.

 5. The FtT, to summarise, considered the offences for which the  appellant
    had been convicted and concluded that the appellant did not represent a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. It concluded that the  appellant  did
    not represent such a threat in terms of the convictions  for  rape  and
    burglary, given how long ago  the  offences  were  committed,  and  the
    offence of going equipped for  theft  did  not  indicate  such  a  risk
    either.

 6. I have endeavoured to summarise the FtT's findings on the  question  of
    genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  as  neutrally  as
    possible because the central  argument  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge to the FtT's decision was in terms of what is  said  to  have
    been an improper 'compartmentalisation' of the appellant's offending.

 7. The FtT found that there were gaps in the evidence in relation  to  the
    length of time that he had been in the UK, and referred to the need for
    better evidence of his having worked in any capacity.  It  declined  to
    make a finding in terms of whether the appellant had been in the UK for
    more than five years as  he  claimed.  The  appellant  claims  to  have
    arrived in the UK in 2007.

 8. The grounds of appeal upon which permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted are two-fold. So  far  as  the  second  ground  is
    concerned, it is headed "Area of discretion" and contends, in  summary,
    that there is an area of discretion reserved to the Secretary of  State
    in terms of the assessment of whether a person  represents  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.

 9. However, it must be said  that  that  ground  is  somewhat  imperfectly
    articulated in the written grounds and it was not relied on by Mr Mills
    on behalf of the respondent. Nothing more needs to be said  about  that
    ground therefore.

10. The first ground contends that the FtT was wrong to state that the only
    offence of  relevance  to  its  assessment  of  whether  the  appellant
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat was  the
    offence of going equipped for  theft,  and  that  it  had  artificially
    separated the offences  and  not  taken  a  holistic  approach  to  the
    appellant's offending. The grounds also make the point that the offence
    of rape would not be spent under the Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act
    1974 (although in fact the FtT did not refer to the offence of rape  in
    that context but the offence of burglary).

    Submissions

11. In submissions on behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Mills,  as  previously
    indicated, relied only on the first ground  of  appeal,  as  summarised
    above. It was submitted that  the  FtT  had  concluded  that  only  the
    appellant's last offence, the going equipped, was  relevant,  expressly
    stating so at [11].  The previous offences are not irrelevant,  it  was
    argued.

12.  It  was  furthermore  submitted  that  the  FtT  had  disregarded  the
    connection between the offence of going equipped and  the  burglary  in
    1999. Although the FtT had made the point that there was no  suggestion
    of further sexual offending, the  appellant  is  registered  as  a  sex
    offender for life.

13. Emphasis was placed by Mr Mills on grounds (i)(g) and (h), and  it  was
    submitted that the fact that  the  appellant  had  committed  the  most
    recent offence was evidence that he had not  rehabilitated,  which  was
    relevant to the risk that he poses.

14. Mr  Lane  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument,  which  itself  reflects
    arguments set out  in  the  appellant's  'rule  24'  response.  It  was
    submitted that the respondent's complaint seemed to relate to the FtT's
    'approach' to the issues to be determined, in terms of looking at  each
    of  the  appellant's  offences  separately  (before   coming   to   its
    conclusions). However, that is precisely what the decision letter does.

15. The FtT was entitled to consider the historic nature of the convictions
    and the differences between them. The respondent  would  have  to  show
    more than just a disagreement with the FtT's approach,  but  that  this
    approach  was  irrational.  At  [6]-[7]  the  FtT  had  summarised  the
    appellant's offending, and referred to the burglary again  at  [9].  It
    was entitled to make the  comment  it  did  about  the  burglary  being
    'spent' in English law.

16. It had described the offence of going  equipped  as  a  'one-off'  when
    considered against the historic nature of the other offences.  The  FtT
    did consider the matter holistically, it was submitted.

17. All that aside, the FtT had said that "in any event" the decision would
    have to be proportionate, and it concluded that it would not be. It had
    considered proportionality at [12]-[14], in that the appellant had  his
    wife and children here and  he  and  his  wife  are  exercising  Treaty
    rights, his past record and the most recent conviction.

    Conclusions

18. Pursuant to reg 21(5)(c) of the EEA Regulations, the FtT  was  required
    to assess whether the personal conduct of the appellant  represented  a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society. This, and the  other  factors  to  be
    considered under reg 21, were  the  subject  of  an  appropriate  self-
    direction by the FtT at [4] of its decision.

19. The FtT was plainly aware of the fact that  considerations  of  general
    prevention do not justify the decision, and nor does the  fact  of  the
    appellant's previous convictions alone.

20. Setting out in more detail the FtT's conclusions, it said at  [6]  that
    the appellant's previous convictions  are  "unpleasant"  but  that  the
    conviction for rape was not an offence  that  had  been  repeated  "and
    there is no evidence to show that he remains a risk to  the  public  by
    reason of something that he did now more than 20 years ago". As regards
    the burglary, it said in the same paragraph that the  burglary  was  an
    offence of dishonesty and so of a very different nature from the  rape.
    It said that "there is no evidence to show that he is  a  risk  to  the
    public arising from that offence", stating that it is the only  offence
    of its type on his record and that it was over 15 years ago.

21. At [7] the FtT said that the going equipped offence committed in the UK
    was an offence of dishonesty but was clearly at the lower  end  of  the
    scale, was dealt with in the Magistrates Court and attracted the modest
    penalty of a relatively small fine.

22. In the next paragraph it said that it is now more than 20  years  since
    the appellant's first conviction and it is difficult to  see  how  that
    can be said to represent a genuine, present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society.  Although
    he is required to register as a sex offender, that is not evidence that
    he is a threat and the respondent had provided no  reports  that  would
    suggest that that offence "has any relevance to  his  position  today",
    noting that  previous  convictions  do  not  of  themselves  justify  a
    decision to deport. It concluded that  the  offence  of  rape,  on  the
    evidence before it, fell into that category.

23. Again referring to the burglary, it was said at [9]  that  the  offence
    being over 15 years old would not of itself  justify  his  removal  and
    there was no evidence to show that he is to be regarded as a danger  to
    the public arising from that offence. The FtT then added that:

         "Whatever it was in his past that led to his offending  then  there
         is no evidence to show that he is in such a situation now  or  that
         his offences in Romania have any relevance to the assessment of his
         risk to the UK public today."

24. Referring to the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 it concluded that
    given that the offence of burglary would be spent under English law  it
    would have expected to see "some compelling evidence to show that it is
    in some way relevant to the deportation decision".

25. Finally, for the purposes of this summary of its conclusions,  the  FtT
    said at [11] that "[t]he only offence which is of  any  relevance"  was
    that of going equipped, and that given the very  lengthy  time  between
    the burglary "effectively spent" and the going equipped, the latter was
    "effectively a one-off". it concluded that:

         "We do not see how this offence with the relatively light  sentence
         that it attracted could begin to engage the sanction of deportation
         in the light of the considerations under regulation 21".

26. Having reflected on those various passages of the  FtT's  decision  and
    considered the decision overall, I conclude that there is merit in  the
    respondent's complaint about the  FtT's  assessment  of  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant represents a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat. There  is  nothing  objectionable  in  the  FtT  having
    considered each of the appellant's convictions on an individual  basis,
    indeed in this case that was a necessary feature of the FtT's analysis.
    However, it was also necessary to consider the appellant's offending on
    a global basis, or as part of a coherent overall  analysis.  I  do  not
    consider that the FtT did assess  the  appellant's  offending  on  that
    basis.

27. On more than one occasion the FtT stated that it did not consider  that
    either the burglary or the rape were of any relevance to the assessment
    of risk presently. However, the fact that the appellant has in the past
    committed serious offences is plainly relevant in the  context  of  his
    having again been convicted of an offence, and  one  which  involves  a
    clear element of premeditation. In my judgment the FtT fell into  error
    in detaching the previous offences from the assessment of present  risk
    on the basis of the antiquity of the previous offences.

28. It is true that it stated that the respondent had provided no "reports"
    indicating a risk with reference to the offence of rape, and said  that
    there is no evidence to show that he is now a risk  by  reason  of  the
    conviction for burglary some years  ago.  However,  those  observations
    reinforce the conclusion that the FtT had marginalised the relevance of
    the previous offences. Indeed, it said that his  previous  offences  in
    each case were of no relevance to the assessment of present risk,  when
    they plainly must be relevant.

29. Again, the impression of an artificial separation between the  previous
    offending and the present offence is reinforced by the  FtT  describing
    the present offence as a "one-off". Contrary to the submission made  on
    behalf of  the  appellant  before  me,  that  conclusion  supports  the
    respondent's arguments rather than undermines them.

30. The personal conduct of the appellant evident in the  circumstances  of
    the offence of going equipped for theft, in so far as revealed  in  the
    sentence imposed,  could  not  alone  have  justified  the  deportation
    decision. However, there is a context to the offence which the FtT  did
    not give any weight at all to, namely the fact that the  appellant  has
    been convicted of serious offences in the past. So far as  the  offence
    of rape is concerned, the FtT stated that the appellant may be required
    to register as a sex offender (and the decision letter at  [19]  states
    that he does  have  to).  The  notification  requirements  relating  to
    registration as a sex offender relate to provision  of  information  to
    the police about residence, absences from the UK (for example,  foreign
    holidays) and  other  information  to  be  provided.  The  requirements
    represent an ongoing obligation on the part of the person concerned. It
    follows that if the appellant is  subject  to  registration  as  a  sex
    offender he will have committed the offence of  going  equipped  whilst
    aware of the continued effect (even if only on him) of the  offence  of
    rape that he committed, albeit many years ago, and reoffended  when  he
    was required to have continued contact with the police as part  of  the
    registration.

31. Further, the fact that  the  appellant  committed  another  offence  of
    dishonesty does have relevance when seen in the context of  his  having
    received a significant term of imprisonment for the offence of burglary
    in 1999.

32. Although not featuring in the respondent's grounds of appeal or in  the
    decision of the FtT, it is not in fact the case that  the  burglary  is
    the only other offence of dishonesty that the appellant has  committed,
    as the FtT suggested. The decision letter and the PNC  printout  reveal
    that on the same occasion that the appellant was convicted of rape,  he
    was also convicted of an offence of robbery, for which he  received  no
    separate penalty.

33. I am satisfied that the FtT erred in  law  in  its  assessment  of  the
    question of whether the appellant represents  a  genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society, in the light of the matters set out above.

34. It was submitted that the FtT made an alternative finding in  terms  of
    proportionality, in that it was said at [12]  that  in  any  event  the
    decision would have to be proportionate. I accept that this was by  way
    of an alternative finding, i.e. even if  it  could  be  said  that  the
    appellant represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat, the decision would still need to be proportionate.

35. However, the paragraphs relied on in support of this contention,  [12]-
    [14], say very little about proportionality. The FtT said at [12]  that
    the appellant lives in the UK with his wife and children, that  he  and
    his wife are EEA nationals and are exercising Treaty  rights.  However,
    those facts are nothing more than a reflection of the  architecture  or
    framework of the EEA Regulations.

36. At [13] it was concluded that the appellant may have been in the UK for
    "some years" but the FtT said that it declined to  make  a  finding  on
    whether the appellant had been in the UK for more than five years as he
    claimed. Nothing, or nothing much, in that paragraph could be  said  to
    inform the proportionality assessment.

37. At [14] the FtT reiterated  that  the  appellant  is  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights, referred to  his  "past  record"  and  recent
    conviction and what it said was the "complete absence" of any  evidence
    to suggest that he is a danger to the public. But all this is merely to
    repeat previous findings and refer again to the matters  identified  in
    [12].

38. Although at [12] the FtT  stated  that  the  appellant's  children  are
    attending school, there is in  reality  no  identification  of  factors
    relevant to proportionality sufficient for  a  sustainable  alternative
    proportionality assessment. In  any  event  it  is  difficult,  if  not
    impossible, to see how a proportionality assessment could  properly  be
    made in the absence of sustainable conclusions in relation to risk.

39. I am satisfied that the FtT erred in law in terms of the assessment  of
    whether the appellant represents a genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    That error of law is such as to require the decision to be set aside.

40. I canvassed with  the  parties  the  question  of  what  would  be  the
    appropriate course in the event that I found that the FtT  did  err  in
    law such as to require the decision to be set aside. The parties agreed
    that in those circumstances it would be appropriate for the  appeal  to
    be remitted to the FtT for the appeal to be re-heard de  novo  with  no
    findings  of  fact  preserved.  I  also  consider  that  that  is   the
    appropriate course, and bearing in mind the Senior President's Practice
    Statement at paragraph 7.2.

41. At the fresh hearing, it seems to me that it will be necessary for  the
    FtT to be provided with more information about the  offence  for  which
    the appellant was convicted in  the  UK  (going  equipped).  Presently,
    there is a lack of detail both from the appellant and the respondent as
    to what item or items the appellant had with him in  relation  to  that
    offence and the further circumstances.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    differently constituted Tribunal, with no findings of fact preserved.

    Anonymity

    Although the FtT made an anonymity order, I do not consider that it  is
    necessary for that order to  continue,  at  least  in  the  proceedings
    before the Upper Tribunal, having regard to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. The question of whether to  make
    such an order afresh in the proceedings before the FtT will be a matter
    for the judge or judges seized of the appeal.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  23/08/16

