
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03764 2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd January 2014                            |On 23rd January 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                          MR MAXWELL SELORM GIDGLO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Represented
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Boyes) wherein it dismissed  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to revoke his EEA Residence card.

 2. The background to this case is that the Appellant was  issued  with  an
    EEA Residence card on 16th December 2010 valid until 16th December 2015
    as the family member of an EEA national (his  wife)  exercising  Treaty
    Rights in the UK.

 3. On 5th October 2012 the Secretary of State issued a decision purporting
    to revoke that Residence card on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    ceased to be the family member of a qualifying EEA national as  he  and
    his wife were divorced. His appeal against that  decision  having  been
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant  sought  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal on  7th
    October 2013 on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  notwithstanding
    that they were no longer married the  Appellant  and  his  EEA  partner
    nevertheless continued to live together.

 5. The matter came before me on 26th November 2013 to  decide  whether  or
    not  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  an  error  of  law  in   its
    determination and if so whether and to what  extent  the  determination
    should be set aside.  The  Appellant's  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was decided on the papers. He was not then represented. Before
    me in November he was represented by a "direct  access"  barrister,  Ms
    Gore.

 6. On the face of the papers the Appellant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    seemed without merit.  However, Ms Gore referred me to the  papers  and
    in particular to the fact that the  decision  appealed  against  was  a
    decision to revoke a Residence card issued  on  3rd  August  2009.  The
    letter referred to a Residence card issued  in  October  2010  and  the
    Appellant's passport showed that the Residence card had  in  fact  been
    issued in December 2010. On that basis it appeared that  the  Secretary
    of State's decision, the decision appealed against, was flawed.

 7. At the then Home Office Presenting Officer's request  I  adjourned  the
    matter so that that he could make enquiries as to the situation.

 8. When the matter came back before me in January 2014 Ms Martin indicated
    that she had the original vignette which clearly showed  the  Residence
    card had been issued in December 2010 and on that basis the letter and,
    more importantly the decision to revoke were  incorrect.  The  decision
    sought to revoke something which did not exist. Ms Martin indicated the
    Secretary of State had in fact made a fresh decision but that  had  not
    as yet been served upon the Appellant. That fresh decision will carry a
    right of appeal. So far as the current decision  is  concerned,  it  is
    unlawful as it purports to revoke something which does  not  exist.  Ms
    Martin agreed that the appropriate way forward was  to  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision on the basis  that  a  Robinson  obvious
    point had been missed, namely that the decision  appealed  against  was
    both unlawful and  ineffective;  it  did  not  revoke  the  Appellant's
    Residence card. On the basis that the  decision  appealed  against  was
    unlawful the Appellant is entitled to succeed outright. This is  not  a
    case where an unlawful decision means  that  there  is  an  outstanding
    application before the Secretary of State because this decision was not
    the result of an application; rather it was a  decision  instigated  by
    the Secretary of State herself. The current situation therefore is that
    until the Secretary of State makes a lawful decision to revoke it,  the
    Appellant has a Residence card.

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.






Signed                              Date 22nd January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
