
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03210/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st August  2014                             |On 05th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR SHIVRAJ RAGHAV
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Mobbs (instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant with regard to a determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Verity) promulgated on 30th May 2014.

 2. The Appellant in this case sought a residence card as  a  spouse  under
    the EEA Regulations. His application was rejected on the basis that the
    marriage was a marriage of convenience. The Secretary of State had come
    to this conclusion partly following a visit by enforcement officers  to
    the couple's address and partly following an interview.

 3. In readiness for the hearing the Appellant's representatives had lodges
    a bundle comprising 234 pages of statements  and  evidence.  They  then
    filed supplemental bundle containing further  evidence,  in  particular
    text messages. At the hearing the Appellant and his wife gave  evidence
    before the judge.

 4. The judge, in her determination, found that the marriage was  indeed  a
    marriage of convenience and that the Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  not
    credible witnesses and dismissed the appeal.

 5. Taking the determination in isolation the conclusions  that  the  judge
    reached based on the discrepant evidence were decisions  that  she  was
    entitled, indeed would be expected to make.  However,  what  the  judge
    does not do anywhere in her findings is make any  reference  whatsoever
    to the large amount of evidence filed on  the  Appellant's  behalf.  In
    particular there were a vast number of text messages  included  in  the
    evidence as well as bills and documents addressed to their home.  There
    are submissions on the point referred to but no findings. I  accept  Mr
    Mobbs'  submission  that  these  could  have  influenced  the   judge's
    decision, notwithstanding  the  adverse  findings  based  on  the  oral
    evidence.

 6. Mr Deller did not seek  to  persuade  me  otherwise  and  accepted  the
    determination contained a material error of law and  could  not  stand.
    Accordingly, I set aside the determination in its entirety, although as
    I pointed out to Mr Mobbs, he should make clear to  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor that the oral evidence and discrepancies in that  determination
    are there to be taken into account in future.

 7. With the consent of both parties and in  view  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has not had a proper assessment of his case in the First-tier
    Tribunal  I remit the matter to that Tribunal  to be  heard  afresh  on
    all issues.

 8. The Appellant's representatives are directed to file and serve  on  the
    Home Office a composite bundle containing all the evidence  upon  which
    they rely no later than 14 days before  the  hearing.  The  Appellant's
    representatives should not assume that the evidence that was before the
    First-tier Tribunal remains in the court file.

 9. The matter is listed to be heard in the First-tier Tribunal  at  Hatton
    Cross hearing centre on 27th February 2015, a date Mr  Mobbs  confirmed
    as suitable.




Signed                              Date 5th August 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
