
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA039032013
      IA039092013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th May 2016                           |On 25th May 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               miss Sweta Dutt
                           mr Imran Mohammed Khan
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Vaughan, instructed by Sky Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal, with permission granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb,  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that   is
    Designated Judge Campbell and First-Tier Tribunal Judge Bird to dismiss
    their appeals on human rights grounds, specifically Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

 2. The permission was granted on the following basis:

         "The grounds raise an arguable error of law in the  FtT's  approach
         to the public interest under Article 8 in the  light  of  the  fact
         that the first appellant believed (wrongly as it turned  out)  that
         she was engaged in bona fide study at her  educational  institution
         (Kensington College of Business)."

 3. The essential facts of the appellant's case is that on 4th  April  2012
    the first appellant made a combined application for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  under  the
    points-based system.  She had previously been granted  leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom on a visa valid  from  13th  July  2007  until  30th
    September 2009 and on 2nd December 2009 she was granted leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant until 4th December 2011.  Her application
    for leave to remain was refused on 14th January  2013  under  paragraph
    322(1A) and paragraphs  245FD(a)  and  245FD(c)  and  245FD(d)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The second appellant applied as the first appellant's dependent and his
    application was refused, on 14th January 2013, as a consequence of  the
    decision in relation to the first appellant.

 5. A decision was also made under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006 to remove the  appellant.   It  is  from  this
    decision that the rights of appeal flow.

 6. The reasons for  refusal  letter  identified  that  the  appellant  had
    provided a letter purporting to be from Kensington College of  Business
    dated 27th January 2012  in  support  of  her  application.   Following
    enquiries with an official employee at Kensington College  of  Business
    it was established that the document in question was not genuine.  Thus
    the Secretary of State was not satisfied she had provided the specified
    documents required under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  In  view
    of the fact that  she  failed  to  obtain  the  relevant  points  under
    Appendix A and she was also awarded no points in relation to Appendices
    B and C.

 7. The background history is that the appellant had  enrolled  on  an  MBA
    top-up course at the London Graduate School (LGS) and states  that  she
    was told that the enrolment was on the basis that the  course  was  run
    via the Kensington College of Business (KCB) leading to an MBA  awarded
    by the University of Wales.  Upon successful completion of  the  course
    KCB gave the appellant a certificate  and  other  documents  ostensibly
    confirming this, but it was found as a result of 'administrative chaos'
    at the college that the appellant was not properly registered  at  LGS,
    KCB or with the University of Wales and therefore did  not  obtain  the
    MBA  qualification  and  could  not  satisfy   the   Immigration   Rule
    requirements.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal in  its  decision  set  out  the  following  at
    paragraphs 30, 31 and 32:

         "30.     We heard submissions from Mr Vaughan on the administrative
             arrangements at LGS and  KCB  which  were  accepted  as  being
             chaotic.  This was supported by the evidence we heard from  Dr
             Bakht and Professor Howard.  Mr Vaughan submitted that it  was
             far more likely that  neither  the  appellant  nor  any  other
             individual produced false documents or made false  statements.
             Instead the documents produced  were  in  good  faith,  albeit
             chaotically, and  they  could  not  be  matched  with  records
             maintained at KCB or  LGS  because  no  reliable  or  accurate
             records were maintained to enable a comparison to be made.

         31.      From the evidence that  we  have  heard  and  seen  it  is
             apparent that the appellant was  never  properly  or  formally
             enrolled at LGS or at KCB or the  University  of  Wales.   Her
             dealings were entirely with LGS.  She attended  classes  there
             and paid her fees and submitted assignments and a dissertation
             there.  The appellant was however aware from information given
             to her by Dr Bakht that were was an agreement between KCB  and
             LGS whereby students from LGS  would  be  able  to  study  the
             programme at LGS but would be awarded a formal certificate  of
             qualification by KCB which was affiliated with the  University
             of Wales.

         32.      It is accepted that the appellant was  unable  to  produce
             any evidence of receipts issued to her  following  payment  of
             fees.  We have heard evidence in similar appeals of a  similar
             lack of receipts being issued on  payment  of  fees.   We  are
             prepared to accept that the lack of proper administration, the
             number of students who  attended  the  course  and  the  short
             duration of the course led  to  students  not  being  properly
             registered.  Dr Bakht in his  evidence  accepted  that  things
             could have been better managed."

 9. In conclusion the Tribunal found that  weighing  up  all  the  evidence
    before it, dishonesty or deception had not been  shown  and  there  was
    nothing to displace the rival theory that the documents  relied  on  by
    the appellant were the product of maladministration at  LGS  and/or  at
    KCB.  The  First-Tier  Tribunal  found  the  ground  of  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Rules had not been made out in this case.

10. The First-tier Tribunal, however, regarding the appeal under the  Rules
    went on to say as follows:

         "37.     So far as the second issue  is  concerned,  the  appellant
             received documents generated by or produced by KCB  purporting
             to record academic achievements, but  there  was  no  reliable
             evidence of completed enrolment at KCB, University of Wales or
             at LGS and no evidence - notwithstanding the passage of time -
             from the University of Wales or any other body confirming that
             the appellant was entitled to the  MBA  Degree.   Indeed,  the
             only evidence from the University  of  Wales  shows  that  the
             appellant was never  enrolled  there  and  therefore  was  not
             entitled to the Diploma  Supplement  from  the  University  of
             Wales.

         38.      The documents that the appellant has  submitted  therefore
             fall far short of showing that she was entitled to the  points
             claimed in the attributes category.  Even without regard to Mr
             Stagg's e-mail upon which the respondent relies, the  evidence
             does not show that the appellant has  ever  been  awarded  the
             qualification she required to succeed in  the  Tier  1  (Post-
             Study Work) application.  The Secretary of State's decision to
             refuse the appellant under paragraph 245FD must stand."

11. The Tribunal then turned to Article 8 and it is here  that  Mr  Vaughan
    submits that the Tribunal proceeded to make the  legal  errors  and  in
    particular failed to apply the relevant considerations in  relation  to
    the proportionality test of Article 8 and erred in its approach to  the
    weight given to the public interest.  He  submitted  that  the  panel's
    reasoning was that the appellant was prevented from being  awarded  the
    MBA degree by the  University  of  Wales  essentially  because  of  the
    failure  by  the  administration  at  KCB  to  register  her  with  the
    university.  The panel's factual findings summarised that she  was  not
    awarded the MBA for reasons wholly extraneous to the appellant.  It was
    submitted this was a highly relevant factor to the question of  whether
    grant of leave to remain on the basis of Article 8 would undermine  the
    state's interest in maintaining effective immigration control and  this
    did not feature at all in the panel's analysis.  But for the negligence
    of LGS/KCB the appellant would have succeeded under the Rules but Patel
    and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC  72
    according to Mr Vaughan tells us  nothing  about  how  negligence/fraud
    factor operates under Article 8(2).

12. At the hearing before me Mr Vaughan developed his argument further than
    that in the permission to appeal and put the case on the  grounds  that
    the First-tier Tribunal panel  had  failed  for  the  purposes  of  the
    proportionality balancing exercise in quantifying the legitimate aim of
    maintaining effective immigration control and (i) to take into  account
    or give reasons for rejecting the fact that it was the college's  fault
    the appellant had not registered  with  the  University  of  Wales  and
    therefore the college's fault they failed to secure  the  qualification
    and  (ii)  to  make  the  necessary  findings  as  to  the  degree   of
    responsibility on the part of the Home Office  for  the  administrative
    chaos at KCB in late 2011 which lay at  the  root  of  the  appellant's
    unsuccessful applications.  A further point was made as to whether  the
    submissions were precluded by the 'near-miss' line of authority.

13. Mr Vaughan referred to the decision by Upper  Tribunal  Judges  Rintoul
    and Frances but as he confirmed this is not a reported decision  and  I
    am not bound by it. The Upper Tribunal in that  appeal  held  that  his
    arguments before them in relation to the case of Ali were predicated on
    an assumption that the Secretary of State had a duty of care but  there
    was no such duty of care and there was not sufficient evidence for  the
    Tribunal to find for the First-tier Tribunal to enable them to conclude
    that the respondent was at fault in failing to regulate  KCB.   The  UT
    Tribunal pointed out, in that case that  suspension  of  the  college's
    licence would have prevented the MBA being awarded and they would be in
    the same place and the appellants were not in the same position  as  OA
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 82.

14. Mr Vaughan stated that he had not submitted that there was any duty  of
    care and no such duty was necessary  to  found  an  argument  that  the
    respondent's behaviour was plainly relevant  to  the  extent  to  which
    public interest required removal.

15. The issue for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  there  was  any
    wrongdoing on  the  part  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  It was submitted that it was not whether  there  was  such
    wrongdoing but to decide whether the issue was analysed properly by the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  submitted  that  there   was   serious
    negligence and possibly fraud  by  a  Home  Office  accredited  Tier  4
    sponsor, that being KCB, and Dr Bakht who was the course tutor  at  KCB
    and who was subject to police bail following his arrest on suspicion of
    fraud and the outcome of those police investigations  were  not  known.
    Nor was it known whether there were any prosecutions resulting from the
    problems with the MBA top-up course.

16. Secondly the  state  of  affairs  arose  notwithstanding  that  at  all
    material times the Home Office continued to maintain KCB as  a  Tier  4
    accredited sponsor.  That college remained on the Home  Office  sponsor
    list despite being referred to as having "administrative chaos" at  KCB
    and LGS.  There was an unannounced inspection on 6th December  2012  in
    relation to KCB at which it was observed that the sponsor had not  kept
    sufficient records.  Dr Bakht was questioned on 5th February 2013 about
    the MBA top-up course.  In conclusion it was submitted  that  the  Home
    Office had failed to regulate KCB properly.

17. In sum it was submitted that the appellants did not qualify  under  the
    relevant private life Rule 276ADE but a full Article 8  assessment  was
    required on the basis of the structured approach set out  in  Razgar  v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 .  The key factor not considered  was  the  college
    and the Home Office failures and as such non-compliance with  the  Rule
    was not determinative of the Article 8 issue  and  was  not  a  weighty
    factor, Izuazu.  This was not a "near miss" and should  have  not  been
    rejected in accordance with Patel.  First, Patel did not deal with  the
    impact of wrongdoing by the college and secondly the authorities in the
    present context dealing with wrongdoing by third  parties  support  the
    relevance that a factor for the proportionality assessment OA (Nigeria)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA  Civ  82.   In
    that case the wrongdoing in the form of fraud by a legal representative
    was relevant and that the Tribunal was entitled to find that removal of
    OA partway through her course would be disproportionate.   Thirdly  the
    extent to which the panel referred to the absence of fault on the  part
    of the Home Office was clearly insufficient to dispose of  the  central
    dispute.  Fourth, as stated in SS Congo v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 317   by
    Richards LJ, if an applicant can show there are individual interests at
    stake covered by Article 8 which give  rise  to  a  strong  claim  that
    compelling circumstances may exist, the fact that their case is a  near
    miss may be a relevant  consideration  which  tips  the  balance  under
    Article 8 in their favour and:

         "In such a case  the  applicant  will  be  able  to  say  that  the
         detrimental impact on the  public  interest  in  issue  if  LTE  is
         granted in their favour will be somewhat less than in a case  where
         the gap between the applicant's position and  the  requirements  of
         the Rules is great."

18. At the hearing before me Mr Vaughan  took  me  through  the  transcript
    which is attached to the First-tier Tribunal decision referring to  the
    evidence taken from the witnesses in  relation  to  KCB  and  LGS.   He
    submitted from the evidence the Home Office must  have  been  aware  of
    serious issues and yet had allowed KCB to remain on  the  register  and
    indeed it remained on the register as at June 2015.  He also  confirmed
    that the appellant enrolled at LGS and believed that she  was  enrolled
    at KCB.  The respondent  was  at  fault  in  failure  to  regulate  the
    colleges and the First-tier Tribunal should have made findings in  that
    regard which would have been relevant to proportionality.  He confirmed
    that LGS were never on the Home Office register but KCB never  had  any
    proper system.  The appellant's two witnesses had shown  serious  flaws
    in the administration of the college but this had not been addressed in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision.

19.  Mr  Vaughan  acknowledged  that  the  Home  Office  was  not  directly
    responsible for the appellant not being awarded the  degree,  but  that
    there was a failure to regulate KCB, particularly when they could  have
    anticipated an avalanche of applications as  the  Tier  1  (Post-Study)
    Migrant avenue to a visa was being closed.  There  was  a  broad  issue
    here of the way the college was being administered and he  referred  to
    OA whereupon the Home Office had failed to identify a stamp.

20. I  was  also  referred  to  EK  (Ivory  Coast)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1517
    particularly paragraphs 38, 40, 53, 55 and 56.

21.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  properly  looked   at   all   the
    circumstances and had not adopted an appropriate approach.

22. In response Mr Parkinson pointed  out  that  the  relationship  of  the
    appellant was with LGS and not with KCB.  It was clear that there  were
    issues with the administration but nothing to suggest those issues were
    brought to the attention of the Secretary of State and she was  not  in
    the situation to carry out intensive ongoing monitoring.  Much  of  the
    power in that respect had been devolved to colleges and  it  was  noted
    from the evidence that there was no formal  written  agreement  between
    KCB and LGS and  they  attempted  to  accommodate  a  large  number  of
    students.  The fact that KCB was a highly trusted sponsor did not  mean
    that it was not capable to fail to meet administrative requirements and
    much of Mr Vaughan's arguments relied on hindsight and  although  there
    was now evidence of what was going wrong, at  the  time  that  was  not
    necessarily the case.

23. He pointed out that when the Immigration Rules were not  complied  with
    there must be some compelling aspect of the appellant's case such as it
    to be considered outside the Rules.  There was nothing  here  that  was
    compelling.  The appellant already had a postgraduate diploma.  She may
    have lost the opportunity to work but she could re-establish herself on
    return to her home country.  She may be disappointed but  that  is  not
    the purpose of Article 8.  It was not the remit  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to address the administrative issues of the colleges.

24. In conclusion the thrust of Mr Vaughan's application was an  inadequate
    assessment by the First-tier Tribunal in  relation  to  proportionality
    and specifically a failure  to  take  into  account  that  it  was  the
    college's fault for failing to register properly  the  appellant  as  a
    result   of   administrative   shambles   and   also   indirectly   the
    responsibility of the Secretary of State  for  failing  to  monitor  or
    regulate a college in these circumstances.  The Secretary of State  did
    not accept that there had been an error of approach by  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal.

    Conclusions

25. It is quite clear that the appellant could  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules in this case and it was not a question of near  miss.  Patel  and
    Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  72
    confirmed that Article 8 was not a general dispensing  Rule  [paragraph
    57] and that in effect the  opportunity  for  a  promising  student  to
    complete the course  in  this  country  however  desirable  was  not  a
    protected right under Article 8. That is  the  background  context.   I
    would draw an analogy with the right to work. In  Ms  Dutt's  case  the
    First-tier Tribunal, however, accepted that there was some private life
    albeit there was "little evidence of private life ties" [40].  In other
    words this case has gone  beyond  the  point  of  whether  there  is  a
    protected right established or not, and as per paragraph  55  of  Patel
    the balance drawn by the Rules may be relevant to the consideration  of
    proportionality.

26. At the outset, I note that at paragraph 36 the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    fact made clear that weighing all the evidence before it  the  Tribunal
    came to the conclusion that dishonesty or deception had not been  shown
    and there was 'nothing to displace the rival theory' that the documents
    relied on by the appellant were the product of maladministration at LGS
    and/or at KCB.  In this way  the  ground  of  refusal  under  paragraph
    322(1A) of the Rules had not been made out [36].

27. The Tribunal was quite clear that there was

         "No reliable evidence of completed enrolment at KCB, University  of
         Wales or at LGS and no evidence - notwithstanding  the  passage  of
         time - from the University of Wales or any  other  body  confirming
         that the appellant was entitled to the MBA degree."

    The Tribunal found at paragraph 38:

         "38.     The documents that the appellant has  submitted  therefore
             fall far short of showing that she was entitled to the  points
             claimed in the attributes category.  Even without regard to Mr
             Stagg's e-mail upon which the respondent relies, the  evidence
             does not show that the appellant has  ever  been  awarded  the
             qualification she required to succeed in  the  Tier  1  (Post-
             Study Work) application.  The Secretary of State's decision to
             refuse the appellant under paragraph 245FD must stand."

28. The fact is that although the appellant was  not  found  to  have  been
    dishonest she had not produced evidence that she had obtained a  degree
    as required by the Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) requirements.  As  recorded
    at paragraph 31 of the First-Tier Tribunal decision:

         "Her dealings were entirely with LGS.  She attended  classes  there
         and paid her fees and  submitted  assignments  and  a  dissertation
         there.  The appellant was however aware from information  given  to
         her by Dr Bakht that there was an agreement  between  KCB  and  LGS
         whereby students from LGS would be able to study the  programme  at
         LGS but would be awarded a formal certificate of  qualification  by
         KCB which was affiliated with the University of Wales."

29. I was referred by Mr Vaughan to EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA  Civ  1517
    which considers the  position  as  with  regard  the  general  duty  of
    fairness required. That decision was also in relation to a points-based
    system and has some bearing  in  relation  to  proportionality  and  of
    Article 8 and the approach to be  taken  specifically  with  regard  to
    administrative errors. Sales LJ held in EK at [32] that it would  be  a
    serious  intrusion  upon  the  intended  straightforward  and  relative
    automatic operation of decision-making by the Secretary of State  under
    the PBS if in every case of withdrawal of a CAS letter she had to  make
    inquiries and delay making a decision.

30. The thrust of the case of EK (Ivory Coast) was  that  the  points-based
    system places the onus of ensuring that an application is supported  by
    evidence to meet the relevant test for  grant  of  leave  to  enter  or
    remain squarely upon the  applicant  and  the  Immigration  Rules  give
    applicants fair  notice  of  this.   A  particular  point  is  that  at
    paragraph 33 it was stated

    "it is inherent in the scheme that  an  applicant  takes  the  risk  of
    administrative error on the part of a college".

    Lord Justice Sales continued at paragraph 35 to identify that it is the
    applicant who deals directly with the college in  relation  to  sorting
    out acceptance onto the course and the certification of that  fact  and
    so has the opportunity to check the contract made with the  college  so
    far as concerns the risk of withdrawal of the CAS letter:

         "If a college withdraws a CAS letter,  the  applicant  may  have  a
         contractual right of recourse against the college.  The  fact  that
         there  is  scope  for  applicants  to   seek   protection   against
         administrative errors by choosing a college with a good  reputation
         and  checking  the  contractual  position  [my   emphasis]   before
         enrolling is of some relevance to the fair  balance  to  be  struck
         between the public interest in the due operation of the PBS  regime
         and the interest of an individual who is detrimentally affected  by
         it."

    And indeed as stated at paragraph 35:

         "In my view, the circumstances in which the  PBS  applies  are  not
         such that it would be fair,  as  between  the  Secretary  of  State
         (representing, for these purposes, the general public interest) and
         the applicant, to expect the Secretary of State to have to  distort
         the ordinary operation of the PBS regime to  protect  an  applicant
         against the speculative possibility that  a  college  has  made  an
         administrative error in  withdrawing  a  CAS  letter,  rather  than
         withdrawing it for reasons which do indeed indicate that  no  leave
         to  enter  or  remain  ought  to  be  granted.   The  interests  of
         applicants such as the Appellant are not so pressing  and  of  such
         weight that a duty of delay and inquiry as  contended  for  by  the
         Appellant can be spelled out of the obligation to act fairly."

31. Lord Justice Sales particularly stated that he did  not  think  it  was
    appropriate to draw an analogy  with  the  operation  of  the  duty  of
    fairness in cases in which the imposition of a  penalty  was  in  issue
    such as in a criminal or professional disciplinary context  so  far  as
    the  appellant  is  concerned.   He  drew  a  distinction  between  the
    importance of what was at stake such as liberty,  livelihood  and  good
    name.  Those are not issues which are at stake here.  I can accept that
    the appellant wished to have the opportunity to work in the UK but  she
    was not being deprived of her liberty or her livelihood.  She  was  not
    having her right to privacy invaded.

32. As can be seen from EK  (Ivory  Coast)  the  maladministration  of  the
    college may not be the responsibility of the  appellant  but  there  is
    public interest in appellants registering and contracting with  a  bona
    fide college.  The appellant on her own evidence accepts that  she  was
    never registered with KCB  which  still  remains  on  the  Home  Office
    sponsor's list.  The evidence which I was taken to also identifies that
    at paragraph 50 of the Appendix transcript of evidence  "Dr  Bakht  had
    said it was correct there was no official  agreement  between  LGS  and
    KCB".  Any check by the student could have established this.

33. The First-Tier Tribunal established that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    shown, on the balance of probabilities, the appellant  was  not  acting
    with deception.  It was recorded that it was not the appellant's  fault
    but the Secretary of State did not take any action such as  to  deprive
    the appellant of a degree.  The college at which she attended and  with
    which she had dealings with LGS and this college  never  did  have  any
    form of registration.

34. Although  there  was  a  representation  that  the  college  was  being
    investigated for fraud and there  were  ongoing  investigations  it  is
    clear that KCB is still on the sponsor register and there was no  clear
    information that personnel in connection with LGS were being prosecuted
    for fraud.  Indeed, the finding by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    that there was maladministration. The First-tier Tribunal found at [30]
    as recorded above that it heard evidence from Dr  Bakht  and  Professor
    Howard and it was submitted that documents were produced in good  faith
    and that neither the appellant nor any other individual produced  false
    documents or  made  false  statements.   This  appeared  to  have  been
    accepted by the Tribunal [35].

35. That she was  not  at  fault  for  deception  does  not  discharge  all
    responsibility by the appellant.   There remains a responsibility  with
    the appellant to ensure that she was enrolled with a registered college
    and not just rely on verbal assurance of a tutor which is what she did.
     It is not difficult to check whether a college is registered and it is
    clear that LGS, the college the appellant  believed  she  was  enrolled
    with was never a registered college.  KCB remains a registered  college
    but no formal agreement was ever made between KCB and LGS. A check with
    the University of Wales could have established no registration.

36. In the light of the reasoning above I am not persuaded that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in its  assessment  of  proportionality  with
    regard public interest and the weight to be accorded to the position of
    the Secretary of State in this context.  It  is  the  Immigration  Rule
    which set out the position of the Secretary of State.

37. Turning to the claimed negligence of the Secretary of State for failing
    to monitor such a college, if there was no formal written  agreement  I
    am not clear how it could be said that the Secretary of  State  was  to
    know that LGS was, at the time operating as it was.  The  Secretary  of
    State cannot remove a college which is not registered  from  a  Sponsor
    list.  The purpose of the sponsor lists  is  that  students  can  check
    them.  Consideration was given in EK (Ivory  Coast)  to  the  decisions
    such as Patel (Revocation of sponsor licence - fairness)  India  [2011]
    UKUT 0021 and Thakur (PBS decision - common  law  fairness)  Bangladesh
    [2011] UKUT 00151 where it was held that the  secretary  had  withdrawn
    authorisation from a college to issue CAS letters and fairness required
    that she should  give  foreign  students  enrolled  at  the  college  a
    reasonable opportunity to find a  substitute  college  before  removing
    them.  It was specifically stated that the students were not themselves
    at fault in any way but had been caught out  by  action  taken  by  the
    Secretary of State in relation to which  they  had  no  opportunity  to
    protect themselves.  That is not the case in this instance;  indeed  it
    is alleged that it is because  the  Secretary  of  State  did  nothing,
    rather than act which is the cause for added weight to be given to  the
    appellant's case in an assessment of Article 8.

38. I was also referred to the FNU compliance report form  suggesting  that
    the Home Office had not properly regulated the  college  and  this  was
    evidenced from their own compliance report but I  note  that  this  was
    dated 14th January  2013  which  post  dated  the  application  of  the
    appellant by nine months.   I  do  not  accept  that  it  must  be  the
    responsibility of the Home Office to give the appellant notice prior to
    her registering with the college of something that the Home Office  had
    no knowledge of.  Certainly there can be  no  evidence  that  the  Home
    Office had knowledge at that point.  I can appreciate that the  Article
    8 determination was in relation to the hearing date  but  the  Tribunal
    was being asked to consider matters which had taken place by April 2012
    and  there  was  no  evidence  before  it  at  that   date   that   the
    administration systems were in the chaos  that  they  were.   It  would
    appear that the respondent conducted an unannounced inspection  at  KCB
    in December 2012 but at that point LGS ceased operating.

39. I was also referred to the case of OA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ
    82 which demonstrates that failure by the Secretary  of  State  can  be
    relevant in an Article 8 assessment. That may be the case but I do  not
    accept it assists these appellants as the  facts  are  very  different.
    The OA case involved an overseas student who came to the UK as a  minor
    to study in the United Kingdom and who engaged a  right  to  a  private
    life when resisting removal and the case decided whether  that  removal
    was proportionate.  Her appeal was allowed on the basis that it was one
    of those "very rare cases" and on the basis that she had acted with all
    due expedition once she became aware that a solicitor who had acted for
    her had produced  a  false  visa  stamp.   The  judge  found  that  the
    consequences for the appellant were that she  would  have  her  studies
    interrupted.  What was critical in this case was that it was  the  Home
    Office who failed to confirm when asked  repeatedly  whether  the  visa
    stamp was genuine and it did not do so.  That case  not  only  involved
    fraud on the part of the solicitor and repeated  failure  by  the  Home
    Office but also was predicated on a wholly different factual basis.

40. In this instance there would not appear to be fault on the part of  the
    respondent.  The First-tier Tribunal cannot be criticised  for  failing
    to take into account fault on the part  of  the  respondent  when  that
    fault is not made out.

41. Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025  provides  insight  into
    the approach to be taken with regards Article 8 and points based system
    cases, whereby it adopted a view that the essential elements of private
    life relied on will normally  be  transposable  in  that  they  can  be
    replicated in their country of origin following a person returning home
    and it is noted that Nasim cited MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8;  private  life)
    Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 0037 paragraph 3:

         "When determining the issue of proportionality ... it  will  always
         be important to evaluate the extent of the individual's social ties
         and relationships in the UK.  However a student here on a temporary
         basis has no expectation of a right to remain in order  to  further
         these ties and relationships if the criteria  of  the  points-based
         system are not met.  Also, the character of an individual's private
         life relied upon is ordinarily by its very nature of a  type  which
         can be formed elsewhere,  albeit  through  different  social  ties,
         after the individual is removed from the UK."

42. Further at paragraphs 18 and 19:



      "18.  In R (on the application of the Countryside Alliance) v  AG  and
      others [2007] UKHL 52, Lord Bingham, having described the  concept  of
      private life in Article 8 as "elusive", said that:


      "... the purpose of the article is in my view clear.  It is to protect
      the individual against intrusion by agents of the  state,  unless  for
      good reason, into the private sphere within which  individuals  expect
      to be left alone to conduct their  personal  affairs  and  live  their
      personal lives as they choose" [10].


      19.         It is important to bear in mind that  the  "good  reason",
      which the state must invoke is not a  fixity.   British  citizens  may
      enjoy friendships, employment and studies that are  in  all  essential
      respects the same as those enjoyed by persons here who are subject  to
      such controls.   The  fact  that  the  government  cannot  arbitrarily
      interfere  with  a  British  citizen's  enjoyment  of  those   things,
      replicable though they may be, and that, in practice, interference  is
      likely to be justified only by strong reasons,  such  as  imprisonment
      for a criminal offence, cannot be used to  restrict  the  government's
      ability to rely on the enforcement of immigration controls as a reason
      for interfering with friendships, employment and studies enjoyed by  a
      person who is subject to immigration controls."

43. I would note that the First-tier Tribunal identified that the threshold
    to engage article 8(1) is not particularly high (see VW (Uganda) v SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 5) and thus the strength  of  the  integration  limited
    when considering the balancing exercise in Article 8 [40].  Indeed when
    students apply for visas to come to the UK they are  aware  that  their
    visas are temporary, their status is precarious and they  are  expected
    to return to their home country.  The  panel  identified  the  relevant
    factors noted that any ties formed in the UK had been so formed  whilst
    the first appellant was a student  with  limited  leave  and  that  her
    husband was at all times dependent on her [40].

44. Contrary to the submissions by counsel,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    aware of the circumstances in which the appellants failed to have their
    leave extended and noted that it was not through  fault  of  the  first
    appellant.  This was  taken  into  account.   At  [41]  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  noted  that  the  appellant  had  lost  a   work   experience
    opportunity but identified it would be only for  a  limited  period  of
    time and that the  appellants  would  have  little  difficulty  in  re-
    establishing themselves on return to their own country where they  have
    family and other contacts.  They could maintain  contact  with  friends
    here and it was noted the first appellant had  obtained  qualifications
    which would be of benefit. The appeal was not treated merely as a 'near
    miss' and merely and the First-tier Tribunal did not just follow Patel,
    as  alleged,  but  considered  proportionality  having  regard  to  the
    relevant factors.

45. Although not part of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal it  should
    be pointed out that the appellants  made  their  applications  on  11th
    April 2012 for leave to remain outside the period of validity of  their
    visas. The appellants did not have valid immigration status at the date
    of their applications which would indeed increase the  weight  afforded
    to the Secretary of State's position. That was a point not taken by the
    First-tier Tribunal which in fact is to the advantage of the appellant.
    When the appellants established their private life it was not  unlawful
    but by date of the application it was.

46. Applying Section 117 B



      (4)   Little weight should be given to-
      (a) a private life, or
      (b)  a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that   is
      established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the  United
      Kingdom unlawfully.

47. In Deelah and others (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC) the
    UT, consisting of a Presidential panel, confirmed that (iii) A  private
    life "established", in the  wording  and  in  the  context  of  section
    117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act, is not to be construed as confined  to
    the initiation, or creation,  of  the  private  life  in  question  but
    extends to its continuation or development.

48. Although I have expanded upon the thinking behind the reasoning of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal, the First-Tier Tribunal Judges took  into  account
    the relevant  factors  and  approached  the  public  interest  question
    correctly giving appropriate weight to the relevant factors. I  am  not
    persuaded in this instance that the First-Tier Tribunal  erred  in  the
    weight given to the public interest when assessing proportionality  for
    the reasons given above.

49. I am not persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal made a  material  error
    of law and the First-Tier Tribunal decision shall stand.



No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                             Date 24th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

