

                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03846/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd October 2014                         |On 14th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                         SYED MOHAMMAD HUSSAIN SHAH
                        (NO anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harding - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Syed Mohammad Hussain Shah, a citizen of  Pakistan
    born  16th March  1978.   He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made on 23rd December 2013 to refuse leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle and the reasons  for  that  decision
    set out in a written decision issued on 9th June 2014.   The  Secretary
    of State sought permission to appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Doyle and on 20th August 2014, having heard submissions, I  found  that
    there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I set that decision aside with no  preserved  findings  of
    fact.

 3. I now proceed to re-make the decision.

 4. The facts of this case can be  summarised  as  follows.  The  Appellant
    arrived in the UK  on  1st  January  1999  and  claimed  asylum.   This
    application was refused in January 2000 and the Appellant became appeal
    rights exhausted on 16th October  2000.   The  Appellant  submitted  an
    application for leave to  remain  under  Article  8.   He  was  granted
    permission to marry and given discretionary leave to remain  which  was
    valid until 6th October 2011.  He underwent an  Islamic  marriage  with
    Ms Arshad in August 2005 and the marriage was dissolved on 19th  April
    2011. Ms Arshad has two children from a previous marriage born in 1991
    and 1998.  The  Appellant's  family  disapproved  of  his  marriage  to
    Ms Arshad and refused to accept her as a member of the family. This led
    to their divorce and to the current situation where they see each other
    but maintain separate homes.  The Appellant has been step-father to the
    Appellant's children  and  says  that  his  15  year  old  step-son  is
    dependent upon him. The Appellant did  indeed  claim  at  the  previous
    hearing   that he should be viewed as the  parent  of  that  child  but
    Judge Doyle rejected the submission that the Appellant is the  15  year
    old's "parent" in terms of the Immigration Rules  and  this  submission
    was not renewed before me.

 5. Statements from the Appellant and from Ms Arshad were provided.

 6.  The Appellant  states  the  following.   He  relates  his  immigration
    history as set out above.  He was encountered by  Immigration  Officers
    and detained for around eleven days prior to  being  released  on  25th
    September  2006.   He  then  married  Ms Arshad.   He   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK valid for  three  years.   This
    was on the basis of his relationship with Ms Arshad and her  children.
    As his asylum claim was still outstanding he sought to  submit  further
    representations and attended  the  Further  Submissions  Unit  on  11th
    October 2013 but was refused leave on 23rd December.  His permission to
    work was revoked and he has been unable to work.   He  has  been  doing
    jobs for friends, decorating and gardening etc. to get some money.

 7. With regard to his relationship with Ms Arshad they met  around  March
    1999.  The marriage was  not  welcomed  by  their  families.   She  was
    divorced which was very much  frowned  upon.   His  family  refused  to
    accept her.  Her family were also strict and as she had been previously
    married and divorced she chose not  to  tell  her  family  about  their
    relationship.  The disapproval of his family placed a great  amount  of
    stress on them.  This led  to  their  divorce  in  2011.   Despite  the
    marriage breaking down they continued their relationship in hiding from
    his parents.  They had no option but to do this  because  his  extended
    family had made threats towards him, Ms Arshad and her children as they
    deemed their relationship to have brought shame on  the  family.   They
    decided it would be better to live in separate accommodation.   He  has
    family in the UK although his parents lived  in  Pakistan  and  the  UK
    family would have told them about him.  Ms Arshad's children have  not
    had a father in their lives for a long time.  He was there  as  a  role
    model and a father figure for them.  They spend considerable time as  a
    family  undertaking  activities,  going  on  city  breaks,  day  trips,
    shopping, to the cinema and socialising.  He treats her children as  if
    they were his own.  Ms Arshad works nightshifts and has done for about
    thirteen years.  He stays the night at her  house  looking  after  them
    whilst she is at work.   They  continue  as  a  family  unit.   He  has
    returned to Pakistan twice, in March 2009 and December  2010  when  his
    parents died.  He has close friends in the UK who he has now known  for
    fifteen years.  He has spent a lot of time at the Mosque  assisting  in
    general duties and has done charity work.  He does not want  to  return
    to Pakistan.  He would struggle to find employment  there  and  has  no
    further  education  or  qualifications.   He  has  integrated  into  UK
    society.  He believes that his case has not  been  properly  considered
    under the Legacy Programme and he has been the victim of delays at  the
    hands of UK Border Agency and of inadequate and inconsistent treatment.
     This delay has led him to build many friendships  in  the  UK.   These
    friends along with his family members have supported him  and  assisted
    him in his times of need. He  has  recently  been  separated  from  his
    family in Pakistan, has lost contact with them and feels  very  lonely.
    He  is  well-known  in  the  local  community  with   strong   societal
    connections in the UK.

 8. In her statement Ms Arshad states the following.  She left Pakistan in
    1992 and has lived in the UK for 22 years.   She  has  two  sons.   She
    works as an aircraft groomer at Heathrow Airport and has been there for
    thirteen years.  She describes how she  met  the  Appellant,  how  they
    married and had to divorce due to external pressures from  his  family.
    They had married without the consent of their families which had caused
    many arguments.  She wants things  to  improve  so  that  they  can  be
    together again but there continue to be family disagreements  and  much
    disapproval which caused them to decide to live  apart.   She  and  the
    Appellant remain in contact and continue to see each other on  a  daily
    basis.  He has greatly assisted her during the marriage and  after  it.
    She describes him as a kind, generous, hardworking, trustworthy  person
    who is always willing to help people less fortunate than he is.  He has
    been like a father to her children.  He has given her  much  assistance
    as a single mother and without him it would have  been  very  difficult
    for her to survive.  It would be impossible for her  and  her  sons  to
    return to Pakistan and resume family life there with the Appellant.

 9. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant who adopted his statement.  In
    cross-examination Mr Melvin asked him how long he  and  Ms  Arshad  had
    lived apart and he responded that they had never lived apart.  They had
    always been together.  He left her due to family pressure.  He  had  to
    say he was leaving her because of family pressure but he did not  leave
    her.   He does not receive correspondence at Ms Arshad's house and does
    not pay council tax there.  He has a separate  address.   I  asked  him
    from what family members the pressure was coming and he said it was his
    family in Pakistan and acquaintances here.  When I asked him to be more
    specific  he  said  it  was  his  brother.   There   was   considerable
    questioning at this point from Mr Melvin about the Appellant's fears of
    harm.  He said that his family threatened to tell  Ms  Arshad's  family
    that they were married and because she was married before this  is  not
    acceptable.  He would like to marry again but they  are  still  waiting
    for the pressure to be reduced.  It was put to him that  he  was  being
    very vague about where the pressure was coming from  and  he  responded
    that people threaten that they will  tell  Ms Arshad's  family.   When
    asked for  specification  he  said  that  by  "people"  he  meant  many
    acquaintances.  He did not want to reveal their names.  He was  adamant
    that what he was saying was true and that the  problems  were  genuine,
    this in the face of a suggestion from Mr  Melvin  that  he  was  simply
    making it up in an effort to  circumvent  the  Immigration  Rules.   Mr
    Melvin then asked him if what he was saying was that  he  is  living  a
    secret life with Ms Arshad.  He responded that that is so.  He said no-
    one knows about it.  He was then  asked  how  it  can  be  secret  when
    according to his statement, he enjoys a full social  and  outdoor  life
    with Ms Arshad's children.  He responded that they live  as  a  family.
    The secret is that they have told people that  they  are  divorced  and
    their internal relationship is unknown.  I  at  that  point  asked  him
    whether it is the case that he goes out and about with  Ms Arshad  and
    the children.  He said he does but  people  understand  that  they  are
    divorced.  They are waiting for the right moment to  get  married.   He
    was asked whether if he was required to leave the UK he would  make  an
    application to return as Ms Arshad's partner.  He said that he did not
    understand that question and asked "why would I leave".  He  was  asked
    what basis he thinks he has for remaining in the UK and  said  that  he
    and Ms Arshad are living together and he has to marry her.  Even  when
    they got divorced the intention  was  that  they  would  remarry.   His
    wife's family consist of a brother and sister and they are in Pakistan.



10. In re-examination Mr Harding attempted to clarify some of the  evidence
    that had been given in cross-examination.  He asked  the  Appellant  to
    give the names of the people who were pressurising him.  The  Appellant
    responded that it was people from Pakistan.  Mr Harding pressed him on
    this point and eventually he said it was his  brother  and  sister  who
    threatened to go to Ms Arshad's house and tell her  sister.   He  then
    said it was acquaintances and 'all the people around'.  It  was  people
    they saw here.  Mr Harding at this point put it to his client that  he
    was not making any sense.  The response was that  in  the  past  "they"
    have put a lot of pressure on him.  I asked him if it was the case that
    Ms Arshad's brother and sister were unaware that she had divorced  her
    previous husband.  He seemed unable to answer that question saying that
    it was pressure from  his  family  not  hers.   Mr  Harding  asked  the
    Appellant to give examples of the sort of pressure to which  they  were
    subjected asking for example if it was abuse in the street, phone calls
    etc.  The Appellant responded "yes - like that".  He said  that  people
    would stop Ms Arshad in the street and insult her.  Nothing  like  that
    had happened to him.  He was  asked  if  anyone  in  the  UK  had  said
    anything rude to him because of the relationship and he said  that  no-
    one had.  When Mr Harding asked him if  it  was  only  his  brother  in
    Pakistan who was putting pressure on them he responded that he does not
    speak to him now.  They have no contact.  When he used to speak to  him
    his brother would ask why he married Ms Arshad and he would tell   him
    that her children are his children.  His brother  and  sister  said  he
    should leave her.  He said he has now stopped contact  -  a  long  time
    ago.  He then said he has reduced the frequency of the contact and then
    that he last spoke to his brother last month.

11. In oral evidence Ms Arshad adopted her statement.  She said she and the
    Appellant divorced because of family pressure.  The  pressure  was  not
    from her family because they did not  know.   It  was  the  Appellant's
    brother.  In their culture it is not possible to divorce  and  remarry.
    I put it to her that she had been divorced from her first  husband  and
    the Appellant's family probably knew that.  She said they did but  they
    had problems with her family.  Her mother and family did not  want  her
    to get divorced from her first husband.   She confirmed  that  she  was
    the one who had initiated the divorce.   She said that she has  visited
    Pakistan a couple of times in the past.  Her  son  is  attending  sixth
    form college and she is settled here.

12. In cross-examination she said that she was aware that the Appellant had
    no leave at the time she married him but he  had  an  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds pending.  She denied that she had married him to enhance
    his claim and said that if she had done that there is no reason why she
    would have got divorced.  She was asked why it took six years  for  the
    pressure from the family to build up to the point where they had to get
    divorced and she said they were hoping it would  calm  down  throughout
    this six year period.  When I asked her who was exerting  pressure  she
    said it was the Appellant's family  who  were  always  asking  them  to
    separate and making threats.  They would call him and do  this  two  or
    three times a day or two or three times a week.  Mr  Melvin  asked  her
    why they are living in separate houses.  She said they  do  not.   They
    live together.  The two addresses are only for people  who  disapprove.
    Mr Melvin asked her what would happen if they both lived openly in  the
    same house as husband and wife and she said that would  be  a  sin  and
    they would have to  face  "all  these  hardships".   It  would  be  the
    Appellant's family who would  cause  trouble.    They  would  tell  her
    family.  She last saw her family when her mother died and  before  that
    she would see them perhaps once a year.  They were aware that she was a
    single mother.  They would stop contact with  her  if  they  found  out
    about the relationship  with  the  Appellant.   She  said  that  family
    relationships are equally important to her as her relationship with the
    Appellant.

13. I asked her if it is the case that her first divorce  did  not  destroy
    her relationship with her siblings.  She said for a few years they  did
    not speak to her.  They found out because people here have contacts  in
    Pakistan.  Mr Melvin asked her if what she was saying was that she  and
    the Appellant are living in secret and she said that is so.   He  asked
    her where they go when they go out as a family and she said they do not
    go out locally.  They go further away.  I suggested that the  Appellant
    must be going in and out of her house all the time and she said that is
    true but she does not speak to the neighbours.  I asked  about  friends
    and she said she has only one and she knows about it.

14. In his submissions Mr Melvin said that there is no  real  relationship.
    They are living in separate houses.  He asked  me  not  to  accept  the
    account  given  by  the  Appellant.   There  is  no  reason   why   the
    relationship should not be a normal one.  There has been  a  deliberate
    attempt to shroud the relationship in Pakistani cultural mores that are
      highly unlikely to apply to their circumstances.  He reminded me that
    I have to take into account  the  Appellant's  immigration  history  in
    terms of paragraph 117A and B of the 2002 Act.  There is no reason  why
    Ms Arshad cannot go to Pakistan to live with the Appellant.

15. In his submissions Mr Harding  questioned  why  the  couple  would  get
    divorced  if  Ms Arshad  had  married  the  Appellant  to  assist  his
    immigration claim.  He questioned whether there had been any dishonesty
    and submitted that the core of the account is true.  They are partners.
     There are no grounds on which the Secretary of  State  can  reasonably
    suggest that this is not a genuine  relationship.   He  submitted  that
    they would succeed under paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM  and  that  the
    appeal should be allowed on that basis.

Findings and Decision

16. I have given very careful consideration to all the evidence put  before
    me in this case.

17. I have grave  concerns  about  the  evidence  that  I  heard  from  the
    Appellant.  He was finding it very difficult to give a straight  answer
    to a simple question.  He was unable to give any details of the kind of
    pressure to which he and Ms Arshad had been  submitted.   He  was  not
    consistent as to where the pressure was coming from.  He  said  he  had
    ceased contact with his brother then said he spoke to him  last  month.
    The account that the Appellant gave in his statement about how  he  has
    integrated into society, the activities he engages in,  the  number  of
    friends he has, the loyalty and support he has enjoyed from friends  is
    inconsistent with his claim that no one knows that he and Ms Arshad are
    living together as they both claim,  or  with  his  claim  that  it  is
    acquaintances in this country who are the root of his fear of family in
    Pakistan finding out about him and Ms Arshad. It is  also  inconsistent
    with the comment of Ms Arshad that she has only one friend  who  knows
    about the relationship but she does not speak to the neighbours and  it
    is people in this country that  she  fears  will  tell  her  family  in
    Pakistan that she and the Appellant are living together.  It  seems  to
    me that they either go out  as  a  family,  mix  with  people  and  get
    involved in the community including the Mosque  or  they  do  not.  The
    evidence looked at in the round does not support the contention of both
    the Appellant and Ms Arshad that they are living together in secrecy.

18. Further, they were both unable to  give  any  credible,  consistent  or
    coherent account of the pressure they say they have been subjected  to,
    despite the efforts of even Mr Harding to  elicit  this.  There  is  no
    coherent or reasonable explanation for their  claim  not  to  be  fully
    sharing one house as man and wife but to be maintaining two properties.
     The Appellant claims to sleep at Ms Arshad's  house  every  night,  to
    provide care for the children while she does a night shift and to  have
    a full family and social life with her  and  her  children.  How  could
    people not know they are living together?  Mr  Harding  questioned  why
    they would have divorced  if,  as  was  suggested  by  Mr  Melvin,  the
    marriage was undertaken solely to enable the Appellant to remain in the
    UK. The reason given for the divorce was outside pressure. I note  that
    although the  Appellant's  parents  were  according  to  his  statement
    opposed to the marriage and exerting pressure on him it was  not  until
    many months after their deaths that the divorce happened.  I  note  too
    that at the date of divorce the Appellant still had leave to remain  in
    the UK. I find it odd that despite having divorced and despite claiming
    that the pressure is ongoing the Appellant   said over and  over  again
    that they would be getting  married  again  as  soon  as  the  pressure
    stopped and I think it is significant that Ms Arshad made no mention of
    this.

19. Having considered all the evidence I do not  accept  that  Ms  Arshad's
    family are unaware that she is divorced from her first husband or  that
    she is living with the Appellant. I do not accept  that  the  Appellant
    has lost touch with his brother or that the fact that his brother would
    have a problem with him marrying a divorced woman  would  lead  to  the
    current  claimed  situation.  I  find  that  the  Appellant   has   not
    established that he and Ms Arshad are in a durable relationship.  Their
    account  is  not  only  rife  with  inconsistencies  but   is   utterly
    implausible. I do not  accept  that  they  are  living  together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage. I find that the requirements of Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules are not met.

20. Mr Harding submitted that  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of the Immigration Rules because he has  no  ties
    to Pakistan. At the time the decision was made by the  Respondent  this
    provision required an applicant to show 'that he or she  has  no  ties,
    including social cultural or family' with the country to which he would
    have to go if required to leave the UK.

21. Paragraph 276ADE was  amended with effect from 10th July 2014  and  the
    amendment  replaces the words in parenthesis   in  paragraph  18  above
    with,

          'there would be very  significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
    integration into'.

22. According to Statement of Changes HC532 this change came into effect on
    28th July 2014 and applies  to  all  applications  to  which  paragraph
    275ADE and Appendix FM apply and to any other ECHR   Article  8  claims
    and which are decided on or after that date. The  application  in  this
    case was decided on 23rd December 2013 so I assume  that  the  original
    version of 276ADE applies. It  does  not  in  any  event  matter  which
    version is applied because the Appellant does in my  view,  looking  at
    all the circumstances,  still  have  meaningful  social,  cultural  and
    emotional ties to Pakistan. He  still  has  family  there  as  does  Ms
    Arshad. He has been in the UK since 1999 but lived all his life  before
    that in Pakistan. He has  visited  Pakistan  since  he  came  here  and
    maintained ties with that country.

23. I turn now to consideration of the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

24. In Gulshan  (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640
    (IAC) the Tribunal said,(

         b)    after applying the requirements of the Rules, only  if  there
         may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
         them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider
         whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances   not   sufficiently
         recognised under them: R (on the application of) Nagre v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);

        In MM & Ors, R (On the Application Of) v Secretary of State for the
        Home Department (Rev 1) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 the view was taken that
        it is  necessary to apply a "proportionality test" with  regard  to
        the "exceptional circumstances" guidance in order to be  compatible
        with the (human rights) Convention and in compliance with Huang   &
        Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
        105.

        In Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Secretary of State for  the
        Home Department [2004] UKHL 27 (17 June 2004) the court  said  that
        there are 5  questions  that  must  be  asked  in  considering  the
        question of a breach of Article 8,

         (1)  Is there an interference with the right to respect for private
         life (which includes the right to respect for  physical  and  moral
         integrity) and family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8

         (3)  Is that interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  Does that interference have a legitimate aim?

         (5)  Is the interference proportionate in a democratic  society  to
         the legitimate aim to be achieved.

25. I find that the Appellant has not established that he has a family life
    in the UK interference with which would be sufficiently serious  as  to
    engage Article 8. I find that he has   established a private life here.



26. Recent amendments to the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
    require a decision maker considering Article 8  ECHR  to  consider  the
    public interest and set out relevant factors to be taken into  account.


    117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
    (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.
    (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
    because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
    (3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
    because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.
    (4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.
    (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
    (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
    United Kingdom.

27. I have taken these factors into account. I accept  that  the  Appellant
    has formed a relationship with Ms Arshad's children but I do not accept
    that this is a parental relationship.  I  do  have  a  letter  from  Ms
    Arshad's elder son, who is an  adult,  asking  that  the  Appellant  be
    allowed to remain here and saying that his younger  brother  needs  him
    here but in all the circumstances and  bearing  in  mind  the  lack  of
    evidence of a genuine and subsisting relationship between the Appellant
    and Ms Arshad I am not satisfied that it would be in the  child's  best
    interests  for  the  Appellant  to  remain  in  the  UK.  Although  the
    Appellant's relationship with Ms Arshad could be reasonably be said  to
    be part of the Appellant's private life I am not satisfied that it is a
    genuine relationship. If I am wrong about that I consider that it would
    not be unreasonable for the Appellant to return to Pakistan and make an
    application to enter the UK under Appendix FM  as  the  partner  of  Ms
    Arshad whom he was adamant that he wants to marry as soon as possible.

28. There was some reliance by the Appellant on delay by the Respondent  in
    dealing with his application but I do not consider this  to  have  been
    significant enough to affect the development of  a  family  or  private
    life in the UK.

29. I find that the interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights that
    would result from his removal from the UK would not be disproportionate
    to the need for effective immigration control in the UK.



NOTICE OF DECISION

The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  having  been  set  aside  is
replaced with this decision.

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 10th November 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird





