
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03829/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th January 2016                 |On 19th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          MRS HILLARY JOY CAMBRIDGE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Wass (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Gandhi, promulgated on 23rd July 2015, following a  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross "on the papers" on 2nd July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the  appeal  of  Hillary  Joy  Cambridge,  whereupon  the
    Secretary of State applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, who was born  on  25th  November
    1963, and she appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated  7th
    January 2015, to refuse to grant permanent residence to her  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, as  confirmation
    of her right of residence under European Community  law,  as  a  family
    member, of her spouse, who is an EEA national.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she is married to Sevriano  Fernandes,  a
    Portuguese national, who  has  been  exercising  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years in the United Kingdom.   She  submitted
    three pay slips in the Sponsor's  name  dated  January  2009,  February
    2010, and March 2011.  The pay slips gave her Sponsor's  address  as  [
    ... Lane, London ... ].  The  Respondent  has  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's spouse was  exercising  treaty  rights  for  the  requisite
    period of time.  The  Respondent  has  therefore  refused  to  issue  a
    permanent residence card as confirmation of the  Appellant's  right  to
    reside with reference to Regulation 15(1)(b) of the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge Gandhi, the Appellant's spouse was  not  in
    attendance, but the  Appellant  gave  evidence  to  say  that  she  had
    reconciled with her husband, who has lived in the UK for twelve  years,
    and has a family and private life here.  The  judge  had  regard  to  a
    letter of 27th March 2015, from the HMRC, which sets out the  Sponsor's
    employment history.  It shows that  from  11th  February  2008  to  6th
    October 2011, he was working.  He then claimed a jobseeker's  allowance
    (JSA) in the 2012 and 2013 tax years.  For the 2013 to 2014  tax  year,
    there was no record of any taxable income as an employed person.  There
    were no records of him ever having been self-employed and paying tax as
    a self-employed person (see paragraph 6).

 5. The judge considered the issues before him to be that, given that there
    was evidence that the Appellant claimed JSA (as confirmed by the letter
    of 27th March 2015 from HMRC), the issue was whether  he  was  employed
    for one year or more before becoming unemployed.  The judge  held  that
    the Appellant's  husband  had  been  employed  since  2008  and  became
    unemployed in 2011 (see paragraph 17).  The judge went on  to  consider
    whether the Appellant could then show evidence  that  the  husband  was
    actively seeking employment, but given that he was  registered  at  the
    Jobcentre, this provision was satisfied (see paragraph 19).

 6. The more difficult question was in relation to  the  missing  evidence.
    The judge went on to explain this matter as follows:

         "He was working from 11th February 2008 until 6th October 2011.  He
         was then on  JSA  presumably  from  this  time  although  the  only
         information I have is that it was in the  2011-2012  tax  year  and
         again in the 2012-2013 tax year that he was on JSA" (see  paragraph
         20).

 7. The judge allowed the appeal on this basis.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law in respect
    of Regulation 6(2)(b) because the judge had found that the Sponsor  had
    claimed  JSA  and  thereby  satisfied  the  provision.    However,   no
    consideration was given to why the Sponsor was no  longer  working  and
    that he had been made involuntarily unemployed.   There  was  a  letter
    from HMRC which confirmed that  the  Sponsor  was  claiming  JSA  until
    sometime in 2013.  However, after this there is no employment  recorded
    for him at all.  The Respondent therefore submitted that,  "...  it  is
    therefore difficult to see how he has shown he had a genuine chance  of
    being engaged, when it appears he did not gain employment, nor in  view
    of the fact that his JSA ceased, did he appear to continue looking  for
    it".  Furthermore the grounds continue  to  say  that,  "...  the  HMRC
    letter does not confirm that the Sponsor was a qualified person  for  a
    continuous period".

 9. On 2nd November 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

10. At the hearing before me on 20th January 2016, Mr Tufan,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that  the  issue
    here was whether the Sponsor was qualified for the relevant  period  of
    five years from the date of the marriage.  Mr  Tufan  relied  upon  the
    grounds of application.  He submitted  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under Regulation 6(7) because the Appellant's husband could not
    show that he had been looking for  work  for  six  months.   The  judge
    wrongly concluded that the six month period did not apply  here.   This
    was simply wrong.

11. Secondly, the fact was that the judge simply had no evidence about  the
    Appellant's position during the relevant period that was missing.  What
    the judge said (see paragraph 20) was that, "... he  was  then  on  JSA
    presumably from this time although the only information I have is  that
    ...".  The judge did not have the information here.  It was not  enough
    to simply assume a state of affairs.  The onus was on the Appellant  to
    show that he was actually actively looking for work.   The  Appellant's
    husband had not provided that evidence.

12. For her part, Ms Wass submitted that the judge had given an explanation
    at paragraph 12 specifically in relation to  this  provision.   He  had
    explained that prior to 1st January 2014 all that the judge had  to  be
    satisfied about was that under Regulation 6(2),

         "... a person who is no  longer  working  shall  not  cease  to  be
         treated as a worker for the purpose of paragraph 1(b) if -

         (b)  he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment  after  having
             been employed in the United Kingdom ...".

    The judge had given due regard to the relevant  legal  provision.   The
    reference to the  HMRC  letter  confirmed  that  the  position  was  as
    maintained by the Appellant.  At paragraph 19 of the determination  the
    judge actually noted that  a  condition  of  being  registered  at  the
    Jobcentre was that one was actively seeking employment.  That being so,
    he had to be satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the Appellant
    was seeking employment.  As for the  judge's  observations  that,  "the
    only information I have is that it was in the 2011-2012 tax year", this
    observation comes after  the  Appellant's  husband  has  fulfilled  the
    qualifying period.  Therefore, there  could  be  no  error.   The  HMRC
    letter actually  confirms  that  the  Appellant  was  working  for  the
    relevant period.

13. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that the  Sponsor  has  to  be  exercising
    treaty rights for a full five year period continuously.  This  evidence
    was not available.   The  evidence  that  was  provided  was  that  the
    Appellant was working from 11th February 2008 until 6th  October  2011.
    The judge expressly said that,

         "I have another letter under covering letter of  14th  April  2015.
         This is a letter from the HMRC dated 27th March 2015 which sets out
         the Sponsor's employment history.  In summary it  shows  that  from
         11th February 2008  to  6th  October  2011  he  was  working"  (see
         paragraph 6).

    This was simply a period of three years.  The  Appellant  had  to  show
    that he was actually exercising treaty rights for five years.   As  the
    judge himself went on to explain,  "...  he  then  claimed  jobseeker's
    allowance (JSA) in the 2012 and 2013 tax years.  For the 2013-2014  tax
    year there is no record of any taxable income as  an  employed  person,
    there are no records of him ever having been self-employed ...".

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, the  established  law  is
    tolerably clear.  The Upper Tribunal has confirmed in Begum  (Pakistan)
    [2011] UKUT 00275 that,

         "When considering whether an EEA national is a  jobseeker  for  the
         purposes of EU law, regard  must  be  had  to  whether  the  person
         entered the United Kingdom to seek employment and, if  so,  whether
         that person can provide evidence that they have a genuine chance of
         being engaged.  If a person does not  or  cannot  provide  relevant
         evidence, then an appeal is bound to fail on this ground".

15. In the instant case the Appellant has to show under Regulation  6(2)(b)
    that, "... he is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having
    been employed in the United Kingdom".  There is no explanation provided
    by the Appellant's husband as to why  he  was  no  longer  working  and
    whether he had been made involuntarily unemployed (see paragraph 16).

16. The same provision also goes on to say that the person  concerned  must
    be able to provide evidence "that  he  is  seeking  employment  in  the
    United Kingdom and  has  a  genuine  chance  of  being  engaged".   The
    Appellant's husband provided no evidence to show that  he  "...  has  a
    genuine chance of being  engaged",  assuming  that  he  is  "...seeking
    employment in the United Kingdom".

17. Ms Wass has submitted that the Appellant succeeds in any event  because
    the five year continuous exercise of  treaty  rights  period  has  been
    demonstrated in any event.  This is not so.  The Appellant was claiming
    JSA until  sometime  in  2013,  but  after  this  period  there  is  no
    employment recorded for him at all, and he is not able  to  demonstrate
    compliance   with   Regulation   6(2).    These   are   all   important
    considerations because as the decision in AG and  Others  [2007]  UKAIT
    00075 has made clear, European Community law  has  confirmed  that  the
    concept of a "worker" includes a person who is a genuine jobseeker: see
    Case C-292/89 Antonissen [1991] ECR I-745.   Accordingly  there  is  an
    error of law.

Remaking the Decision

18. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am dismissing this appeal precisely for the  reasons  that  I
    have given above.  The onus  is  upon  the  Appellant  to  provide  the
    necessary evidence to comply with the relevant Regulations.  The appeal
    before the judge was a "paper" appeal.  The sponsoring husband was  not
    in attendance.  He has not been in attendance today before  me  either.
    He has not been cross-examined on the evidence provided.   Indeed,  the
    evidence provided has been  deficient  in  the  respects  that  I  have
    outlined above.  Accordingly, the Appellant has failed to discharge the
    burden of proof that is upon her.  The appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    dismissed.

20. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016

