
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03855/2015
                                                               IA/03860/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th February 2016                 |On 18th February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                         MR ADETOKUNBO DADA ONI ONI
                        MRS OLUNBUNFUMI OLUFUNKE ONI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Bazini (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M.J. Gillespie promulgated on the 4th  August  2015,  in
    which she dismissed the Appellants' appeals  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant them Residence Cards under the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 2. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued on behalf of the  Appellants,
    inter alia, that the decision which was before the First-tier  Tribunal
    was whether or not there was a requirement for the Appellants  to  have
    lived in another member state with the  sponsor  and  that  within  the
    original refusal the Secretary of State had not raised the questions as
    to whether or not the sponsor had transferred her  centre  of  life  to
    Belgium pursuant to Regulation 9 (2) (C) and it is  argued  that  point
    had already been accepted when an EEA Residence Card had been issued to
    her husband. It is  argued  that  had  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    decided to raise it  at  the  hearing,  he  should  have  afforded  the
    Appellants an opportunity of adducing evidence of the matter  and  that
    the Judge having raised the issue then also failed  to  acknowledge  or
    take into consideration that the  test  must  have  been  satisfied  in
    relation to the Appellants' son  Tobi,  as  through  the  same  sponsor
    Olubunmi, daughter-in-law of the Appellants, Tobi had  been  granted  a
    Residence Card in June 2014.

 3. It is further argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings  at
    [21] in respect of dependence failed to take account of what is said to
    be substantial evidence of dependence submitted within the  Appellants'
    bundle and the consistent testimony in respect thereof. It  is  further
    argued that the Immigration Judge's findings on credibility at [19] was
    based on unsupported assumptions that someone  who  has  qualifications
    suitable for responsible managerial position in banking would then seek
    to establish herself as a self-employed English Teacher. It  is  argued
    that dependence can be of choice rather than necessity and the evidence
    did show that the Appellants' were dependent upon the sponsor, in  that
    the Appellants lived with the sponsor's husband at an address which she
    also used and that the Appellants  relied  upon  the  sponsor  and  her
    husband in order to  meet  the  mortgage  payments  and  all  of  their
    outgoings as evidenced by the witness statements produced, the  sponsor
    and  her  husband's  bank  statements  and  receipts  produced  by  the
    Appellants. It is also argued that the  centre  of  life  test  is  not
    mentioned in the EEA Directive 2004/38/EC and is incompatible  with  EU
    laws.

 4. Within the Rule 24 response, it is argued that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge directed himself appropriately and that Regulation 9 rights  only
    arise by analogy with the Directive and that the Centre of Life test is
    in line with European Jurisprudence in respect of those rights in light
    of cases such as the ECJ case of O  and  B  C-456/12.  It  was  further
    argued that the issue of a Residence Card is a recognition of  a  right
    rather than the grant  of  a  right  and  that  there  is  no  residual
    discretion to assess the rights under the Directive,  if  Regulation  9
    has not been met. It was further argued that the Judge was entitled  to
    take account of the factors at [17] of the decision and added addresses
    whether there was evidence of the  existence  of  [18].  It  is  argued
    further, the complaint in respect of Regulation 7 simply amounts to  no
    more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings.

 5. Permission to appeal has been  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McDade on the 10th December 2015 on the grounds that  "the  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal assert, inter alia, that the Judge
    erred in law by questioning whether the  sponsor  had  transferred  her
    Centre of Life to Belgium where it is said the  Appellant  was  already
    settled and the Respondent did not raise the matter in the reasons  for
    refusal  letter.  The  grounds  also  asserted  that  the  Judge   made
    unsupported assumptions regarding  credibility  for  example  that  the
    judge found it lacking in credibility that a person with  a  managerial
    position in banking would choose  to  become  a  self-employed  English
    Teacher. These points are arguable and there is an  arguable  error  of
    law."

 6. In his oral submissions, Mr Bazini  argued  that  the  attempt  by  the
    Respondent to bringing fresh grounds  for  refusal,  in  terms  of  the
    question as to whether or not the sponsor's Centre  of  Life  had  been
    transferred to Belgium and the questions of dependency, had  only  been
    raised after oral evidence had been given, in the closing  submissions.
    He argued that if the  Respondent  sought  to  change  the  grounds  of
    refusal, this should been done at the start of the appeal, and that the
    Appellant  should  have  been  given  the  opportunity  of  having   an
    adjournment, if so desired, in order to consider whether fresh evidence
    was needed in order to meet the altered grounds for refusal. He  argued
    that a matter of fairness, new grounds could not simply be relied  upon
    during closing submissions, or by the Judge at the final stage  of  the
    case, when they had not been identified either by the Judge or  by  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer as being factors within the case at  the
    start of the case and that if the evidence did come out that there  was
    to be a change of grounds, the Appellant should  have  been  given  the
    opportunity to deal with this and the procedure adopted was unfair.  He
    further sought to argue that in any event the Judge had failed to  take
    account of the fact that Tobi had been granted a Residence Card on  the
    basis of the sponsorship of the same sponsor, so that it must have been
    accepted previously by the Respondent that the sponsor's Centre of Life
    had been transferred to Belgium, and that this  factor  was  not  taken
    account by the Judge. He argued further, given  that  her  husband  had
    also been granted a Residence Card, there  was  an  acceptance  of  the
    Centre of Life question there as well, and that her husband  would  not
    have been granted a Residence Card,  had  the  sponsor  not  previously
    established that her Centre of Life had been in Belgium.

 7. Mr Bazini further sought to argue  that  dependency  had  not  been  in
    dispute within the original Refusal Notice and that was  why  therefore
    full evidence had not been submitted within the Appellant's  bundle  in
    respect thereof, that there was in any event sufficient evidence within
    the bundle in respect of dependency, in terms of  the  statements  that
    had been submitted, together with the  household  bills  and  that  the
    evidence within the statements was that Michael  used  to  support  the
    Appellant, but following the death of his  wife  and  child,  had  been
    unable to do so. He argued that the Judge had failed to take account of
    this evidence in reaching his conclusions.  He  argued  that  the  bank
    statements clearly  again  showed  that  payments  in  respect  of  the
    parents' mortgage were made in January, February, April and  June  2015
    and that the record bank statement entry on the 25th January 2015,  for
    example,  referred  specifically  to  a  �650  payment   for   "parents
    mortgage". It was argued that this had not been taken into  account  by
    the Judge and that the Judge had thereby failed  to  consider  relevant
    evidence.

 8. It was further argued by Mr Bazini, although  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge properly quoted the correct Regulations, the errors in this  case
    stemmed from the fact that within  the  original  Refusal  Letter,  the
    wrong Regulations had been quoted, such that he asked me to  find  that
    if there was a material error of law, the decision  should  be  remade,
    setting out that the original decision was not in accordance  with  the
    Law, and remitting the case back to the Secretary of State  for  a  new
    decision to be made. Alternatively,  he  sought  to  argue  that  there
    should be a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. In her submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Miss Fijiwala sought to
    argue that there was no material error of law and that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to consider the questions of transfer of the  Centre  of  Life
    and dependency based upon the evidence  that  had  been  given  by  the
    Appellant, Mr Oni. She argued that the suggestion that  Tobi  paid  the
    mortgage based upon what is said in the documents was not what was said
    by Mr Oni when giving oral evidence  and  that  the  Judge  found  that
    "Michael especially" had paid the mortgage since 2009. She argued  that
    the case had  been  dealt  with  fairly  by  the  Judge  and  that  the
    Appellants  representatives  could  have  sought  to   apply   for   an
    adjournment but had not. She conceded that there is no evidence to show
    that the Judge had in fact  considered  the  bank  statements,  written
    statements regarding Centre of Life or dependency, but  the  Judge  she
    argued was entitled to base his findings upon the oral  evidence  given
    and she therefore  argued  that  any  error  in  that  regard  was  not
    material.

10. Miss Fijiwala conceded that the wrong Regulations had  originally  been
    considered within the Respondents refusal notice, but argued  that  the
    Judge had set out the correct Regulation. She sought to rely  upon  the
    case of Osoro (Surinder Singh) [2015] UKUT 593 (IAC) in respect of  how
    the case should be considered if the  Regulations  were  not  met.  She
    argued there was no material error of law.

11. I reserve my decision on the question of error of law and materiality.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

12. Within the reasons for Refusal Letter produced by the Respondent  dated
    the 10th January 2015, which decision was the subject of the appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, the only ground for refusal set out  was  that
    "the Secretary of State has been unable to determine that you  and  the
    British citizen  were  residing  together  in  an  EEA  country  before
    returning to the United Kingdom. It was therefore  concluded  that  you
    have not provided evidence you Mr  Adetokunbo  Dada  Oni  Oni  and  Mrs
    Olunbunfumi Olufunke Oni resided in Belgium with  the  British  Citizen
    while she was exercising her Treaty Rights in another EEA state. It  is
    also apparent  that  you  both  have  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom
    previously due to your immigration histories, this would indicate  that
    neither of you had resided in Belgium with the British citizen".

13. The only issue raised in the Refusal Letter was  therefore  whether  or
    not the Appellants had resided with their sponsor,  their  daughter-in-
    law Olubunmi, in Belgium. Questions regarding the sponsor's "Centre  of
    Life" and questions of "dependency" were not raised within the original
    Refusal Notice.

14. Having effectively found in the Appellant's favour in  respect  of  the
    question as to whether or not the Appellants' needed to live with their
    sponsor in Belgium between [14] and [16] of  the  decision,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gillespie then went on to make  findings  regarding  the
    sponsor's "Centre of Life" between [17] and [19] and also  "dependency"
    between [20] and  [21].  However,  it  is  clear  from  the  record  of
    proceedings, that although questions were asked in this  regard  during
    cross-examination, no application was made by the Respondent to  change
    the reasons for refusal set out  within  the  Refusal  Notice,  at  any
    stage, whether at the start of the appeal or after the evidence or even
    during closing submissions. Submissions were made in respect  of  these
    issues during closing submissions, but without seeking  to  change  the
    reasons for Refusal Notice.

15. Clearly, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  entitled  to  consider  any
    evidence presented before him which does tend to  indicate  that  other
    criteria not referred to within the Refusal Notice has not in fact been
    met, and further, it is also clear  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    entitled to seek to change the grounds for reasons given  for  refusal.
    However, if this is to be done, it has to be done fairly.

16. Clearly, Appellants  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  will  only  submit
    evidence to the Tribunal in respect of the issues said to be in dispute
    within the Reasons for Refusal notice. If other  criteria  exist  under
    the Regulations, but are not referred to within the Refusal Notice as a
    reason for refusal,  the  Appellants  cannot  be  expected  to  produce
    evidence in respect of every single criteria, when the  other  criteria
    have not been challenged within the Refusal Notice. The Refusal  Notice
    is there to set out the grounds on which the Respondent says  that  the
    requisite requirements of the Regulations are not met.

17. Further, had the  Respondent  wanted  to  then  ask  questions  of  the
    Appellant upon Centre of Life and dependency within cross  examination,
    these not being formal matters upon which the  refusal  and  consequent
    appeal were based originally, the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have
    sought to establish if the Respondent was  seeking  to  make  a  formal
    application to amend the reasons for refusal by the Respondent,  before
    allowing extensive cross examination on those issues. It is not for the
    Respondent simply to go on a "fishing expedition" on issues not  raised
    within the Refusal Notice, simply to see what  answers  the  Appellants
    might then give. However, even if the Judge  was  correct  in  allowing
    questions in this regard before clarifying the  Respondent's  position,
    given that the questions regarding dependency and Centre  of  Life  had
    not formed any basis of the original decision, the Judge  should  have,
    after cross examination, pointed out that these were not  issues  which
    had been raised within the Refusal Notice,  and  should  have  at  that
    stage clarified with the Respondent to  whether  they  wished  to  seek
    permission to vary the refusal grounds to encapsulate those issues, and
    if so, the Judge should have ascertained whether or not the  Appellants
    required an adjournment, in the interests of justice and  fairness,  to
    be able to deal with those issues.

18. Even if the  Judge  himself,  in  light  of  the  evidence  given,  had
    considered that these matters were of concern to him, in  the  interest
    of justice and fairness, he should have sought to establish whether  or
    not the Appellants were actually in  a  position  to  deal  with  those
    issues on the day, or whether or not an adjournment would be  required.
    Simply  moving  directly  on  from   cross   examination   to   closing
    submissions, without affording the opportunity for  an  adjournment  to
    deal with the new issues, I consider to be procedurally unfair. It  was
    not simply a question of the representative for the Appellants  needing
    to ask for an adjournment, it is for the Judge to ensure a fair hearing
    and he should have offered that as an option.

19. Further, I consider that the  Judge's  findings  and  analysis  of  the
    evidence in respect of Centre of Life, and his findings that there  was
    no proof of Olubunmi having worked in Belgium from September 2013,  the
    only evidence being that on the application form completed by Tobi that
    Olubunmi had only worked between January and April 2014, but that there
    was no documentary evidence  of  earnings  or  their  circumstances  in
    Belgium, when this had not been an  issue  previously,  such  that  the
    Appellants could not have been expected to  produce  evidence  in  that
    regard, to be wholly unfair. If the Judge was concerned with  the  lack
    of evidence in this regard, he should have afforded the Appellants  the
    opportunity of adducing such evidence.

20. Further, the Judge  has  failed  to  take  into  account  the  relevant
    evidence that Tobi had been granted a residence card, which  would  not
    have occurred had the Respondent previously not accepted that  Olubunmi
    had transferred her Centre of Life to Belgium.

21. Further, I find that in circumstances where the question of  dependency
    had not previously been issued, the Judge's findings at [21]  regarding
    there been a lack of documentary evidence of the means of  the  sponsor
    in Belgium or of the remittance  monies  from  Belgium  to  the  United
    Kingdom and  a  lack  of  documentary  evidence  of  the  provision  of
    financial support by Tobi or Olubunmi to  the  Appellants  in  the  UK,
    again, to be procedurally unfair, given that the Judge does not  appear
    to have actually addressed this issue specifically with the  Appellants
    and given them the opportunity to seek an adjournment if necessary,  in
    order to obtain further evidence on the point, given  that  this  issue
    had not been contained within the original Refusal Notice.

22. In any event, the Judge has failed to take into  account  the  evidence
    that was contained within the bundle in terms of the statements setting
    out the support which is said to have been provided by  Tobi,  together
    with the household bills paid for by  Tobi.  The  Judge  had  therefore
    failed to take account of material evidence in this regard.

23. I therefore consider that the decision in this case has  been  vitiated
    as a result of procedural errors in the Judge allowing fresh issues  to
    be raised without any formal application to amend the  Refusal  Notice,
    and  without  affording  the  opportunity  to  the  Appellants  of   an
    adjournment to deal with the new issues and to provide further evidence
    in respect of issues that had not previously been in issue  within  the
    appeal. Further, there are clearly also material errors in this  regard
    in failing to take account of the evidence  that  there  was  on  those
    issues, in any event.

24. I therefore do find that the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie is vitiated by material errors of law and the decision is set
    aside. I therefore move on to remaking the decision. Given that it  was
    agreed between the legal representatives, that the  original  decisions
    made were based upon the old wording  of  Regulation  9,  that  was  in
    effect before the 1st January 2014, rather than the amended Regulation,
    such that the  original  refusal  decisions  made  in  respect  of  the
    Appellants were made on the basis  of  the  wrong  Regulation,  by  the
    Secretary of State originally, and given  the  concession  made  by  Ms
    Fijiwala that if there was a material error  of  law  in  the  original
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie, that the matter should
    be remitted back to the Secretary of State for lawful decisions  to  be
    made, I do find that as a result of the decision having been based upon
    the old wording of Regulation 9 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 rather  than  the  amended  wording,  I  find  that  the  original
    decisions made in respect of both Appellants  were  not  in  accordance
    with the Law, such that the Appellants'  appeals are  allowed  no  that
    basis and lawful decisions do need to be made in respect of both of the
    Appellants by the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M.J  Gillespie,  does  contain
material errors of law and is set aside;

I remake the decision allowing the Appellants appeal  on  the  grounds  that
the decisions made in respect of the Appellants were not in accordance  with
the Law.


Signed      Dated 6th February 2015

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
