
[pic]
IAC-AH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03435/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2014                            |On 11 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              SIMRANJEET SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although the Secretary of State is, strictly,  the  appellant  to  this
    appeal, I have for the sake  of  conformity,  described  Mr  Simranjeet
    Singh as the appellant, as he was in the First-tier Tribunal,  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

2.   The Secretary of State  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against  the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Burns   who,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 2 October 2014,  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal against the respondent's refusal of his application for leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  At the  request  of  the
    appellant, the appeal was decided by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  on
    the papers and without an oral hearing.

3.   The background to the appeal is the fact that the appellant's CAS  from
    his college  which was submitted with his application, was withdrawn by
    the sponsor before the respondent's decision was made  on  23  December
    2013.  The application therefore had to be refused  under  the  points-
    based system.  The judge allowed the appeal on the grounds of  fairness
    (relying on Thakur [2011] UKUT 151 and Patel [2011] UKUT  211)  and  on
    the basis that the respondent  had  not  followed  her  own  policy  of
    allowing the appellant 60 days to try to enrol at another college.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 12 November 2014; the grounds submitted that the cases  of
    Thakur and Patel should not apply when the CAS  was  withdrawn  by  the
    college and that the 60 days policy did not apply in this case  because
    the licence of the college had not been withdrawn.  Further, the policy
    only applied where the sponsor's licence had been  withdrawn  or  where
    the appellant himself had been culpable.

5.   Notice of the Upper Tribunal appeal hearing was sent to  the  appellant
    and to his solicitors on 17 November 2014.  On 8 December 2014, the day
    before the hearing, the solicitors sent a fax to the  Tribunal  stating
    that neither they nor  their  client  would  be  attending  the  appeal
    hearing and they relied on the documents submitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   They gave no reasons and did not seek an adjournment.

6.   Accordingly, in the absence of the appellant or his representatives,  I
    heard submissions from Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent.  He relied
    on the grounds and sought to distinguish the cases of Thakur and  Patel
    on the basis that, in both those cases, the colleges  in  question  had
    had their licences revoked and the appellants in those cases  were  not
    impacted in the reasons for revocation.  Accordingly, in  those  cases,
    the 60 day policy should have been applied. In  the  present  case  the
    policy does not apply because the Secretary of State was not implicated
    in any way in the withdrawal of the appellant's CAS but that  it  would
    appear from the  appellant's  own  statement  that  it  was  due  to  a
    disagreement between him and the college.  There could be  no  question
    of unfairness in the present case.  It  must  be  emphasised  that  the
    college's licence had not been and has not been  revoked.

7.   I have considered carefully the documentary evidence of  the  appellant
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  regrettable  that  he
    chose not to seek an oral hearing when  he  might  have  been  able  to
    explain what his disagreement was with the college or why they  revoked
    his CAS.  Similarly it is regrettable that he chose not  to  appear  at
    the Upper Tribunal hearing.  It must stated forcefully that the  burden
    of proof rests upon him. The appellant's own statement dated 19  August
    2014 which was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not attempt to
    explain why the CAS had been  withdrawn.  The appellant does  not  even
    hazard a guess.  The only hint is possibly to be found in  paragraph  5
    of his statement where the appellant says that the college  "had  tried
    to contact me but were unable to reach me when  I  was  due  to  attend
    lessons".  It may well be that  the  appellant  failed  to  attend  the
    course.  Nowhere in  his statement does he say that he did  attend  the
    college course regularly or at all.  I suspect that he would have  said
    that was the case if he had been a genuine student.   In  summary,  the
    appellant's statement can only be described as vague and economical  in
    its detail.

8.   It follows that, on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
    no question of fairness arose.  In the absence of any evidence from the
    appellant (or the college)  as  to  why  the  CAS  was  withdrawn,  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to conclude that the withdrawal was due
    to a dispute between the appellant and the college.  It  was  certainly
    not due to any action taken by the Secretary of State  to  withdraw  or
    suspend the sponsor's licence.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  therefore  made  an  error  of  law  in
    allowing the appeal on the papers and the  determination  must  be  set
    aside.

10.  In the absence of any clear evidence from the  appellant  and  for  the
    reasons I have set out above, I remake the decision by  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

11.  The First-tier Tribunal determination contained an error of law and  is
    set aside. I remake the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant, Mr Simranjeet Singh.

12.  I make no direction for anonymity.

13   The appeal having been dismissed, I make no fee award.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
11 December 2014

[pic]

