
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03495/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 July 2014                                 |On 20 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 navid ahmad
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Navid Ahmad, is a citizen of Pakistan and he was born on
    16 March 1986.  He appeals against a refusal of the respondent to grant
    him an EEA residence card as confirmation of a right to reside  in  the
    United Kingdom as  the  extended  family  member  of  a  qualified  EEA
    national.  The immigration decision was taken on 31 December 2013.  The
    appellant's appeal against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Reed) was dismissed in a determination promulgated  on  8  April
    2014.

 2. The term "extended family member" is defined in  paragraph  18  of  the
    2006 Regulations. In a detailed analysis of the  evidence,  Judge  Reed
    found that the appellant had not "demonstrated that he is indeed  in  a
    durable relationship with Ms Wloch" [the EEA national].  The  appellant
    therefore did not satisfy the requirements set out in  Regulation  8(5)
    and is not entitled to be considered for the issue of a residence  card
    under Regulation 17(4).  I  therefore  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
    Community Treaties.

 3. In summary the grounds of appeal assert that the judge  (i)  failed  to
    consider the detailed oral  and  written  evidence  of  Ms  Wloch,  the
    appellant's wife;  (ii) improperly applied the Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT
    00702 (Starred).  It is asserted in the grounds that a previous hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge (Judge  Atkinson)  had  led  to  the
    dismissal of a similar appeal "for reasons  of  credibility"  [grounds,
    3].  After the dismissal of his appeal on that occasion and his failure
    to persuade the Upper Tribunal that there had been a material error  of
    law, the appellant had simply submitted a new application in  September
    2013 "addressing the findings of the previous Tribunal and relying upon
    further additional evidence" [grounds 4].  The appellant  asserts  that
    Judge Reed  incorrectly  followed  the  principle  set  out  Devaseelan
    because he failed  to  consider  "a  large  volume  of  evidence  which
    rebutted the  previous  findings  [of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Atkinson] and explained any gaps ..." [grounds, 10]; (iii) reaching his
    findings as to the credibility of the appellant's  claim  to  be  in  a
    durable relationship with Ms Wloch, the judge had regard to  immaterial
    matters, for example the appellant's failure  to  give  a  satisfactory
    explanation as to why he remained in the United Kingdom at  the  expiry
    of his initial leave as a student;  (iv)  Judge  Reed  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that the appellant and Ms Wloch are not in
    a durable relationship.

 4. I find that none of the grounds of appeal have merit.   The  appellant,
    who appeared without a professional  representative  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, handed to me some written submissions which I have considered
    together with all the other documents before the Upper Tribunal. I gave
    the appellant every opportunity to address me  at  during  and  at  the
    conclusion of the appeal hearing.

 5. Dealing with the grounds as drafted by the appellant's  previous  legal
    representatives which I have summarised above, I find that  Judge  Reed
    did indeed take account of the evidence of Ms Wloch.  He summarised the
    evidence of Ms Wloch (given in Polish through an interpreter)  at  [14]
    et seq.  He refers  at  [11]  to  the  documentary  evidence  which  he
    considered.  There was no need for the judge to set out in extenso  the
    evidence of the witness, Ms Wloch.  The judge acknowledged  Ms  Wloch's
    claims that she and the appellant are in a durable relationship  but  I
    find that he has given very cogent and adequate reasons for  concluding
    that that evidence was not accurate.

 6. As regards the application of Devaseelan principles, the  judge  refers
    to that case at [21] and correctly noted  that  "the  findings  of  the
    [previous] Tribunal in relation to the facts existing at that time must
    be starting point for me ..."  The point  ignored  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal is that the "new evidence" adduced before Judge Reed "addressing
    the findings of the previous  Tribunal"  would  have  attracted  little
    weight in any event given that it appeared to consist of evidence which
    could and should have been put before Judge  Atkinson  in  the  earlier
    appeal.  Negative credibility findings cannot, as the grounds appear to
    assume, be simply wiped away in a subsequent appeal, by the  submission
    of additional evidence.

 7. As regards the judge's alleged "over reliance on immaterial matters", I
    find that this ground has no merit.  It  was  open  to  Judge  Reed  to
    examine all the evidence before him and conclude that the appellant had
    still failed to give credible explanations for remaining in the  United
    Kingdom following the expiry of his visa in 2011.  That  the  appellant
    had been prepared to lie about these matters to Judge Reed, as  he  had
    before the previous Tribunal, was clearly  pertinent  to  Judge  Reed's
    analysis of the  evidence.   Likewise,  the  judge  was  also  entitled
    [23(5)] to  attach  little  weight  to  the  evidence  of  friends  and
    acquaintances (who would testify as to the nature of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and Ms Wloch) because  none  of  those  witnesses
    attended before the Tribunal for their evidence to be tested  in  cross
    examination.

 8. The assertion in the grounds that the judge has failed to give  reasons
    for his conclusions at [24] has no merit.  The judge's  conclusions  at
    [24] are proceeded by very detailed analysis of the evidence and  clear
    and firm findings of fact as  to  material  parts  of  the  appellant's
    account.  The reasoning  is  entirely  adequate.   In  particular,  the
    judge's finding that the appellant was not in  a  durable  relationship
    with Ms Wloch which was based, in part,  on  the  appellant's  previous
    dishonesty, his continuing failure to explain parts of his  immigration
    history and inconsistencies in the  evidence  which  he  and  Ms  Wloch
    provided, was clearly open to the judge.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 18 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

