
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03859/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 March 2016                       |On 8 April 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                      v


                                    A D W
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms C Litchfield, counsel instructed by A & A Solicitors
LLP
                 _____________________________

                        DECISION & REASONS
                 _____________________________

1.    The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is  a  national
of Tanzania born on [ ] 1997. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  14  July
2002 with his mother, as a dependent of his father.  His  parents'  marriage
broke down in 2009 and the Claimant was granted further leave to  remain  as
his father's dependent on 13 August 2009 to 13 August  2014.  On  26  August
2009, the Claimant was taken by his father to live in Tanzania  against  his
wishes and without the knowledge of his mother.  During  this  time  he  was
sent to boarding school and  was  badly  treated.  On  16  April  2011,  the
Claimant was  brought  back  to  the  United  Kingdom  by  his  father,  who
abandoned him in August 2011. By that time, his mother had been detained  in
Yarls Wood IRC as an overstayer. The Claimant was taken  into  the  care  of
Social Services in September 2011, having been  found  living  on  his  own,
without food or money. In May 2012, the Claimant's mother was released  upon
the recommendation of Social Services and the Claimant has resided with  his
mother and a Mr Kumah, a British citizen, since that time.

2.    On 11 August 2014, the Claimant applied for an extension of his  leave
to remain on the basis of his private life. This application was refused  on
8 January 2015. An appeal was lodged against this  decision  on  23  January
2015 and the appeal came before Judge of the First tier Tribunal Malins  for
hearing on 24 August 2015. In a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  16
September 2015, she  allowed  the  appeal,  both  in  respect  of  paragraph
276ADE(iv) and paragraph 276A-D of the Immigration Rules.

3.    The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal,  in  time,  on  23
September 2015. The grounds in support of the application asserted that  the
Judge had erred materially in law: (i)  in  that  it  is  a  requirement  of
paragraph 276ADE that at the  date  of  application  a  claimant  has  lived
continuously in the UK for at least 7 years and this must be read  as  being
at least 7 years prior to the date of the application; (ii)  she  failed  to
set out to which Home Office guidance she was referring  when  allowing  the
appeal on the basis of 10 years long residence in the UK; (iii) the  current
long residence guidance makes clear that an application should  normally  be
refused if a claimant has been absent for more than 18 months in  total  and
the claimant could not meet the requirements of  the  rule  because  he  was
outside the UK for more than 18 months. The Judge does not identify in  what
way and to what extent she has jurisdiction to give effect  to  that  policy
and all she could do it that circumstances was to allow  as  "otherwise  not
in accordance with the law" if the Secretary of  State  had  not  considered
her discretion on this point.

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First  tier  Tribunal
Hollingworth on 27 January 2016, on the basis that an arguable error of  law
has arisen in relation to the  construction  placed  by  the  Judge  on  the
provisions of the Rules set out in  paragraph  276ADE  in  relation  to  the
question of living continuously in the UK for at least seven  years  at  the
date of the application.

Hearing - Part 1

5.    At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke  handed  up  the  decision  in  AG
Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082 and paragraph 276A  of  the  Rules.  He  submitted
that there were two substantive complaints:  (i)  the  Judge's  approach  to
paragraph 276ADE and  (ii)  her  approach  to  how  the  tribunal  exercised
discretion in the Claimant's  favour  pursuant  to  paragraph  276A  of  the
Rules. At [16.2.] of the decision the  Judge  asserts  that  the  definition
under paragraph 276ADE(iv) does not qualify the required period of  7  years
but he submitted that,  looking  at  the  wording  of  the  provisions,  the
claimant must have lived continuously in the UK at the date  of  application
nor prior to  the  application.  At  [16.4.]  the  Judge  found  "compelling
circumstances" within the Home Office guidance but the problem with that  is
that whilst it might be a criteria for the exercise of discretion  what  the
guidance actually says is that  if  absent  for  more  than  18  months  the
application should  normally  be  refused.  He  drew  my  attention  to  the
guidance on long residence dated 8  May  2015  at  page  14.  This  was  the
guidance in force at the date of hearing rather than the  date  of  decision
but the parties agreed that the wording of the exercise  of  discretion  had
not changed. He drew my attention to paragraph 276A (v) and  submitted  that
continuous  residence  shall  be  considered  to  have  been  broken  if  an
applicant has spent a total of more than 18 months absent  from  the  United
Kingdom during the period in question.

6.    Mr Clarke  drew  my  attention  to  the  decision  in  AG  Kosovo  and
submitted that the reality is that the refusal letter does not  address  the
10 year rule and it is  quite  clear  that  discretion  was  not  exercised.
Therefore, the appropriate course would have been to find  the  exercise  of
decision had not been in accordance with the law and to remit the appeal  to
the Secretary of State. Mr Clarke expressly accepted, in light  of  page  14
of the guidance, that there is a discretion where there has been an  absence
for more than 18 months in total.

7.    In response, Ms Litchfield accepted that  it  was  arguable  that  the
appeal should have been remitted back to  the  Home  Office.  She  submitted
that the application for permission  to  appeal  had  been  granted  on  one
ground only in relation to the construction of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and
she submitted that this did not  amount  to  a  material  error  of  law.  I
pointed out that nowhere in the decision had the First tier  Tribunal  Judge
addressed the second aspect of paragraph 276ADE(iv) and that was whether  it
was reasonable to expect the Claimant  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  She
responded that if one looked at the findings of  fact,  although  the  Judge
has not specifically said it is not reasonable for  the  Claimant  to  leave
the UK it was clear that this was her view at 15(b) (i)-(iii) and (d).

Decision regarding error of law

8.    In find that First tier Tribunal Judge Malins did not  err  materially
in law with regard to the ground of appeal in respect  of  which  permission
to appeal was granted. It is clear from the wording of  paragraph  276ADE(1)
and (iv) of the Rules that the requirements set out therein  are  that:  (i)
at the date of application an applicant is under the age  of  18,  (ii)  had
lived continuously in the United Kingdom for at least 7  years  (discounting
any period of imprisonment) and (iii) it would not be reasonable  to  expect
him to leave the United Kingdom. The Claimant was born on 13  May  1997  and
the date of his application for leave to remain on the basis of his  private
life was 11 August 2014, at which time he was 17 years of age. There  is  no
requirement on the face of the  Rule  that  the  7  years  must  immediately
precede the making of the application and I find  that  the  Judge  did  not
materially err, therefore, in finding that this aspect of the Rule was  met,
given that the Claimant resided continuously in the UK  from  14  July  2002
until 22 August 2009 [15 refers].

9.    However, I find that the Judge erred materially in law in  failing  to
consider the third aspect of paragraph 276ADE(iv)  viz  whether  or  not  it
would  be  reasonable  to  expect  him  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  Ms
Litchfield gamely attempted to argue that the Judge had done  so  implicitly
by way of her findings of fact at 15(b) and (d) but  it  is  the  case  that
nowhere in those sub-paragraphs nor else in the decision  and  reasons  does
the Judge give express consideration to this question.

10.   I further find that First tier Tribunal Judge Malins erred  materially
in law in allowing the appeal  outright  at  [17]  on  the  basis  that  the
Claimant met the requirements of paragraph 276A of the Rules with regard  to
ten years continuous long residence. As Mr Clarke  submitted,  the  Claimant
was and is unable to meet the requirements of paragraph 276A(v) because  the
continuity of his residence is considered broken by virtue of the fact  that
he has spent a total or more than 18 months absent from the  United  Kingdom
during the period in question. The Judge found as a matter of fact that  the
Claimant was absent for 20 months less 6 days [15(d)(i)].  The  only  basis,
therefore, upon which the Claimant could succeed with  regard  to  paragraph
276A of the Rules is if the Secretary  of  State  chooses  to  exercise  her
discretion in this regard, bearing in mind her guidance  on  Long  Residence
(8 May 2015) which provides at page 16:

       "If the applicant has been absent from the UK for more than 6  months
      in one period and more than 18 months in total,  the       application
      should normally be refused. However, it may be appropriate to exercise
      discretion  over  excess  absences  in  compelling  or   compassionate
      circumstances, for example where  the  applicant  was  prevented  from
      returning to the UK through unavoidable circumstances.

      This must be decided at senior executive officer (SEO)  level  with  a
      grant of leave outside the Immigration  Rules  being  the  appropriate
      outcome.

      Things to consider when assessing if the absence(s) was compelling  or
      compassionate are;

        ( for all cases - you must consider whether the individual returned
        to the UK within a reasonable time once they were able to do so

        ( for the single absence of over 180 days:

          ? you must consider how much of the absence was due to compelling
          circumstances and whether the applicant returned  to  the  UK  as
          soon as they were able to do so

          ? you must also consider the reasons for the absence ...

      All of these factors must  be  considered  together  when  determining
      whether it is reasonable to exercise discretion."

It is clear from the decision in AG  Kosovo  [2007]  UKAIT  00082  that  the
correct course is to remit the appeal back to  the  Secretary  of  State  in
order for her to consider the exercise her  discretion  whether  or  not  to
grant ILR on the basis of ten years continuous residence.



Hearing - Part 2

11.   I announced my decision at the hearing which was that the  First  tier
Tribunal Judge had made material errors of law and that I  proposed  to  re-
make the decision.  I  invited  the  parties  to  make  submissions  on  the
question of whether or not it would be reasonable to expect the Claimant  to
leave the United Kingdom.

12.   Mr Clarke stated that he had nothing to add.  Ms  Litchfield  drew  my
attention to paragraph 25 of her skeleton. She stated that the Claimant  has
lived in the UK since 2002 aged 5 and he is now aged 18. He  has  spent  his
formative years in the UK: all his education has been in the  UK  albeit  he
was forcibly taken to Tanzania, which is a factor to consider as to  whether
it is reasonable for him to go to Tanzania. He went  to  a  boarding  school
where he was beaten and abused and then  brought  back  to  the  UK  by  his
father and found by a family friend living on  his  own.  The  Claimant  was
then  taken  into  social  services  care  and  has  since  been   supported
financially  and  emotionally  by  Koji  Kumar.  He  had  a  very  difficult
experience in Tanzania but  was  reunited  with  his  mother  when  she  was
released from Yarls Wood in May

13.   In terms of whether  the  Claimant  should  return  to  Tanzania,  she
submitted that he has very strong ties with the United Kingdom in  terms  of
the length of time and his education and he has  a  settled  life  with  his
mother and Mr Kumar. She pointed out that the Claimant  has  suffered  abuse
from his father  at  [4]-[5]  of  his  witness  statement  and  Kent  Social
Services assessment at E19. She  said  that  he  has  no  contact  with  his
siblings in Tanzania; that it is not clear where his father is  but  he  may
still be living in Tanzania. She submitted that it  was  not  reasonable  to
expect him to return and it was possible that his father may try  to  locate
him. The only period of time he spent there after the age of 5  is  when  he
was forcibly detained in at boarding school in  Tanzania  where  beaten  and
abused. In respect of the Claimant's education he has academic  achievements
to his credit and he has managed to  do  that  despite  everything.  He  has
aspirations to study engineering at university but is  currently  unable  to
do so because he  has  no  leave.  In  all  the  circumstances  it  was  not
reasonable to expect him to leave.

14.   In response, Mr Clarke clarified that the  Claimant's  mother  has  no
immigration status or applications outstanding that  he  was  aware  of.  He
relied  upon  the  decision  in  EV  Philippines.  He  submitted  that   the
Claimant's circumstances should be considered in their own right.

Decision

15.   No challenge was made by the Secretary of  State  to  the  First  tier
Tribunal  Judge's  findings  of  fact   in   respect   of   the   Claimant's
circumstances consequently I  adopt  these  as  part  of  my  decision.  Her
findings material to my assessment of whether or not it would be  reasonable
to expect the Claimant to return to Tanzania are as follows:

    (i)    the Claimant is a wholly credible witness [14];

    (ii)   the Claimant has resided in the United Kingdom from 14 July 2002
    until 22 August 2009 and then from 16 April 2011 to date [15];

    (iii)  the Claimant was absent from the United Kingdom from  22  August
    2009 until 16 April 2011, during which time  he  had  extant  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom [15];

    (iv)   he was at  this  time  a  minor  and  not  responsible  for  his
    international travel or his immigration situation. He was without power
    and was literally taken by his father and deposited in boarding  school
    [15];

    (v)    he has attended primary  and  secondary  school  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has achieved 4 GCSE's and 8 level 2 BTEC certificates  plus
    he has enrolled on a number of sports/fitness based course and obtained
    various awards [15];

    (vi)   he has clear goals for his future education  involving  building
    on qualifications going upwards and has a clear  strategy  for  funding
    higher education and gives the impression of a person who will  succeed
    in his plans [15];

    (vii)  despite the many dreadful events in his life he has risen  above
    the all and has at no stage in any way "gone  off  the  rails".  Social
    services stated: "Amos is a well behaved and polite young person who is
    mature and very ambitious about his future." They further found that he
    was integrated well into the community at large and attended the  local
    church [15].

16.   It is clear that the Claimant is a young  person  who  has  spent  the
majority of his childhood from the age of 5 and  his  youth  in  the  United
Kingdom, bar the period of just under 20 months when he  was  taken  by  his
father to Tanzania and placed in a boarding school. He has been educated  in
this country and has hopes for further higher education and for his  future,
also in the United Kingdom.

17.   Whilst he is close to his mother,  she  does  not  have  any  form  of
immigration status in the United Kingdom. However, he is now  an  adult  and
his case has not been put on the basis of his family life but rather on  the
basis of his private life in the United Kingdom. There is a statement at  9-
10 of the Appellant's bundle from Mr Kodjo  Kumah,  a  British  citizen,  in
which he states that the Claimant has become  like  a  son  to  him,  having
lived with him for 4 years and he would personally be  completely  shattered
should he be  removed  from  the  UK:  "I  consider  myself  his  carer  and
surrogate father to him." I find that the Claimant has strong  private  life
ties with the  United  Kingdom,  based  on  his  length  of  residence,  his
education and his relationship with Mr Kumah. The evidence, which the  First
tier Tribunal Judge accepted, is that the Claimant has  not  maintained  any
family or private life ties with Tanzania.

18.   Mr Clarke drew my attention to the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in
EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]
EWCA Civ 874. However, this decision  was  essentially  concerned  with  the
best interests of children in a proportionality assessment  and  so  is  not
material to the decision that I have to make, namely  whether  it  would  be
reasonable to expect the Claimant, who is now 18, to return to Tanzania.   I
have had also regard to the decision of the former President  of  the  Upper
Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) where he states at 13:

    "iii)  Lengthy residence in a country other than the  state  of  origin
    can lead to development of social cultural and educational ties that it
    would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of compelling  reason
    to the contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear cut but
    past and present policies have identified seven  years  as  a  relevant
    period.


    iv)    Apart from the  terms  of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
    Tribunal notes that seven years from age four  is  likely  to  be  more
    significant to a child that the first seven years of life.  Very  young
    children are focussed on their parents rather than their peers and  are
    adaptable."

19.   The question of whether or not it would be reasonable  to  expect  the
Claimant to  return  requires  a  fact  based  analysis  of  his  particular
circumstances, bearing in mind the unchallenged findings  of  fact  made  by
the First tier Tribunal Judge. The Claimant resided in  the  United  Kingdom
from the age of 5 to the age of 12 and then from the age  of  almost  14  to
date. He did not choose to leave  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  intervening
period, indeed it was against his will. He has spent  more  11  years  as  a
child residing in the United  Kingdom  and  has  clearly  developed  social,
cultural and educational ties which I find  it  would  be  inappropriate  to
disrupt in the absence of any compelling reason to do so. For these  reasons
I find that it would be unreasonable to expect him now to leave  the  United
Kingdom.


Notice of Decision

20.   The Claimant's appeal with  regard  to  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the
Rules is allowed.

21.   The Claimant's appeal with regard to paragraph 276A of  the  Rules  is
allowed to the extent of being remitted back to the Secretary  of  State  on
the basis that the decision of 8 January 2015, at which time he was still  a
minor, was not in accordance with the law because  the  Secretary  of  State
did not consider paragraph 276A  of  the  Rules  at  all  nor  consider  the
exercise of her discretion with regard to her guidance in  respect  of  Long
Residence. When considering the length of leave to be granted,  I  draw  the
Secretary of State's attention to the findings of fact  made  by  the  First
tier Tribunal Judge at 16.3 of her decision and reasons and to  page  16  of
the guidance, set out at [10] above. I would also request  that  a  decision
is made with relative expedition, given that the Claimant is a young  person
in limbo and unable to pursue his education  in  the  absence  of  leave  to
remain in the United Kingdom.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

21 March 2016





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

21 March 2016




