
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03579/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 January 2014                            |On 23 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 GULZAR UMER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Rahman, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent appealed to a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the decision of the appellant of 8 January 2013 refusing to vary  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom, on the basis that he had not provided  all
    the evidence listed on the Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies  in
    support  of  his  application.   The  judge  took  into   account   the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal in Rodriguez [2013] UKUT  42  (IAC)
    and concluded, applying the evidential flexibility policy considered in
    that determination that the appellant, as  he  was  before  the  judge,
    qualified for the leave sought.

2.   The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision on the basis that the judge had not given adequate reasons why
    the documents provided showed that Mr Umer met the requirements of  the
    Rules and the respondent had not had the opportunity of giving detailed
    consideration to the documents.  Permission was granted on that basis.

3.   At an earlier hearing before me on 31  October  2013,  the  matter  was
    adjourned  on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would  make
    submissions on the authenticity of the documents and, in light of  that
    the respondent might make further submissions.

4.   I listed the matter for mention since I had had  no  response.   I  was
    assisted  by  Mr  Walker  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  who  provided
    documentary evidence to show that the documents had been  sent  by  the
    Presenting Officers Unit to the Entry Clearance Officer who  was  asked
    to give a view on  them.   The  response  was  that  according  to  the
    Immigration Liaison Adviser's experience  the  documents  were  in  the
    standard formats in which they are normally received and "seemed" to be
    genuine.

5.   On that basis, Mr Walker accepted that the appeal  of  Mr  Umer  should
    succeed, and Mr Rahman, from Mayfair Solicitors, who appeared on behalf
    of Mr Umer, was entirely content with that outcome.

6.   Accordingly, the decision of the judge  allowing  the  appeal  in  this
    case is maintained, albeit on the  somewhat  different  basis  that  Mr
    Umer's appeal succeeds under the Immigration Rules.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

