
                                                  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/03297/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 26 February 2016                    |        On 4 March 2016             |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR. SURAJIT MUKHERJEE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. E. Fripp, Counsel instructed by Daniel Cohen
                    Immigration Law Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid promulgated on  25  August  2015  which
    allowed Mr. Mukherjee's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal
    to issue him with a permanent residence card  as  confirmation  of  his
    right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 (the "Regulations").

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer  to  Mr.  Mukherjee  as  the
    Appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  Respondent,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as it was at least arguable  that  the
    reasoning was wholly inadequate.

 4. At the hearing Mr. Fripp accepted that for the  reasons  given  in  the
    grounds of appeal the decision was not sustainable.

 5. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing.  She referred  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statements.

 6. I announced that I found the decision involved the making of a material
    error of law as it was inadequately reasoned, and I remitted it to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  My reasons are set out below.

Error of law

 7. The judge does not set out the decision against which the Appellant  is
    appealing.  While he  states  that  he  has  read  the  refusal  letter
    carefully, and has taken into account the "justifications advanced  for
    the negative decision", it is not clear from the  decision  what  those
    justifications are, and therefore how the Appellant has addressed them.



 8. At paragraph [8]  he  states  that  he  has  outlined  the  "evidential
    elements of the evidence".  However when referring to  the  Appellant's
    oral evidence, he does nothing more than state that it is in line  with
    the Appellant's witness statement [4].  He does not set  out  what  the
    statement says, or what parts of the oral evidence were  in  line  with
    the contents of the statement.  He cites the case  of  Gondolia  [1991]
    Imm AR 519 to justify the fact that he has not detailed each and  every
    piece of evidence (paragraphs [6] and [9]), but he  fails  to  set  out
    those pieces of evidence which are relevant.  At no point does  he  set
    out how this evidence addressed the concerns of the Respondent to  show
    that the Appellant met the requirements of the Regulations.

 9. Further, in his "reasons and deliberations", he does not refer  to  any
    specific parts of  the  evidence  before  him.   It  is  therefore  not
    possible to tell from the decision how he was able to conclude that the
    Appellant met the requirements of the Regulations.   I  find  that  the
    failure to give clear reasons for his  decision,  as  accepted  by  the
    Appellant's representative, amounts to a material error of law.

10. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. At the hearing before me, Ms Fijiwala provided  the  Tribunal  and  the
    Appellant with further evidence for the purposes of the rehearing.

Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law and I set the decision aside in its entirety.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

I do not make an anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date 28 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


