
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/03116/2015
     IA/03117/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Decision given immediately following hearing  |                              |
|On 10 June 2016                               |On 12 July 2016               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                MS SYED HAQUE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For Ms Haque and [AK]: Ms M Ahammed, Legal Representative of RMS
                              Immigration Limited
For the Secretary of State:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting
                              Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. In this appeal, I am dealing with cross-appeals made by  the  Secretary
    of State  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wilson
    allowing an appeal of [AK] and also by Ms Haque against Judge  Wilson's
    decision refusing at the same time her appeal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision refusing her leave to remain.  For ease of convenience
    I shall refer jointly to Ms Haque and [AK] as "the  claimants"  and  to
    the Secretary of State as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The immigration history of  the  parties  is  as  follows.   The  first
    claimant, Ms Haque, arrived in this  country  as  a  student  with  the
    appropriate leave on 2 March 2006.  She has never been in this  country
    unlawfully  but  received  subsequent  grants  of  leave.   The  second
    claimant, [AK], was born in this country on [ ] 2006, that is a  little
    over nine months after the first claimant had arrived in this  country.
    The first  claimant's  husband  was  in  this  country  as  a  student.
    Subsequently the claimant has had two further children.  Prior  to  the
    expiry of the first claimant's then current leave both claimants,  that
    is Ms Haque and her oldest son applied  for  further  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules on the basis of their private and family life.  I  am
    not concerned with the position of the claimant's husband  or  children
    in this appeal.  The application was made as long ago as 4 May 2014 but
    it was not considered until sometime within 2015 when  it  was  refused
    and the appeal against that decision did not come on until  26  January
    2016 when it was heard at Hatton Cross before First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Wilson.  Following that  hearing,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  11
    February 2016, Judge Wilson dismissed the appeal of the first claimant,
    Ms Haque but allowed the appeal of the second claimant, her 9 year  old
    son.

 3. Both unsuccessful parties then sought permission to appeal against this
    decision.   The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  against  the  decision
    allowing [AK]'s appeal and Ms Haque appealed against the  Secretary  of
    State's decision dismissing her appeal.  Both the  Secretary  of  State
    and Ms Haque have been given permission to  appeal  which  is  why  the
    matter is now before me.

 4. The chronology is important in this appeal because the position now  is
    that Ms Haque has been in the  UK  lawfully  for  over  ten  years  and
    subject to passing the knowledge in  the  UK  test  and  obtaining  the
    appropriate certificates to show  that  her  knowledge  of  English  is
    sufficient she would, subject to any suitability issues that  might  be
    raised, be entitled to indefinite leave to remain under  the  ten  year
    lawful residence provisions within the Rules.  She has in  fact  passed
    the knowledge in the UK test and although  the  English  language  test
    certificates which she had previously obtained have now expired, it  is
    quite clear to this Tribunal from listening to her during  the  hearing
    that she will have no difficulty whatsoever in passing this test.   She
    has been in this country now for over ten years and speaks  English  to
    the standard to be expected from an educated and intelligent person who
    has been in this country for that length  of  time.   It  follows  that
    realistically it is in the judgment of this  Tribunal  inevitable  that
    she is now entitled to and there would be no reason to doubt  that  she
    would be granted indefinite leave to remain.  That must as  Mr  Wilding
    accepted during the hearing be a factor in any consideration that might
    have to be given to whether or not it will be proportionate for Article
    8 purposes for her now to be removed from this country.

 5. During the course of the hearing Mr Wilding accepted that in the  event
    that this Tribunal now was to find either that the decision with regard
    to the second claimant, the 9 year old child was sustainable or in  the
    event that even if it was not this Tribunal was to form the  view  that
    it would not be reasonable within paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules  to
    expect this child to be removed to Bangladesh, the decision with regard
    to Ms Haque could not be maintained because it would not be appropriate
    or proportionate for her to be removed to Bangladesh  in  circumstances
    where it was not reasonable for her 9 year old child to  go  with  her.
    It is not necessary to set out the various authorities which have  made
    it clear that decisions in family cases like this should be  considered
    together because it is obviously the case that the decision with regard
    to Ms Haque should have been made in light of what was going to  happen
    to her children and in particular that Judge Wilson had decided that it
    would not be proportionate for the reasons set out within the Rules  to
    remove the second claimant.  What Mr Wilding submitted, and  I  accept,
    is that the only basis upon which the first claimant, Ms Haque could be
    lawfully removed, would be if this Tribunal was to  consider  it  would
    not be unreasonable for her 9 year old child to be removed at the  same
    time.

 6. It is against this background that I now turn  to  consider  first  the
    position with regard to the second claimant, [AK], who will  be  10  in
    December.  When that happens of course, as the position  is  currently,
    he would be entitled to British citizenship as a child born in  the  UK
    who has resided here for ten years but of course that is  not  yet  the
    position and so that is not a consideration which at the  present  time
    is one that can be taken into account.  Also, when considering  whether
    or  not  Judge  Wilson's  decision  with  regard  to  his  position  is
    sustainable and although this would not  necessarily  be  the  position
    were I to have to reconsider the decision having found an error of law,
    as at that time the first claimant had not been in this country for ten
    years and so it could not be said as at that time that she  would  have
    had a right to remain under the ten year residence Rule.   Accordingly,
    I turn to consider the reasons given by the judge to allow  the  second
    claimant's appeal.

 7. When considering the position  of  the  second  claimant  Judge  Wilson
    looked at the provisions set out within paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of  the
    Rules where it is provided that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)
    will be made out if an applicant can show that he or she is "under  the
    age of 18 years and [has] lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least
    seven years (discounting any period of imprisonment) and it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect [him or her] to leave the UK".   In  this  case
    the second claimant had lived continuously in the  UK  for  over  seven
    years and was obviously under the age of 18  years  and  so  the  issue
    which had to be considered was whether or  not  it  was  reasonable  to
    require him to be removed to Bangladesh.  The  judge  in  his  decision
    considered a number of factors and although he discounted  an  argument
    based on the different levels of schooling  between  this  country  and
    Bangladesh, nonetheless he found for the reasons which he gave that  it
    was in his best interests to remain in this country and that  it  would
    not be reasonable for him to  return  to  Bangladesh  with  his  family
    "absent any  other  very  positive  public  interest  elements  and  so
    justifying it" of which "none have been brought to my attention  either
    in the refusal letter or the submissions from  the  Presenting  Officer
    before me".

 8. This was in my judgment a decision for Judge Wilson to make and  it  is
    again in my judgment adequately reasoned.  The second claimant  was  at
    the time of the judge's decision clearly thriving at  school.   He  was
    over 9 years old and had built up a network of friends with whom he had
    developed good friendships and as the judge found at paragraph 7 of his
    decision he also had built up positive relationships with his teachers.
     He also bore in mind the evidence of Dr O'Leary who had carried out  a
    number of standard psychological screening tests that the disruption to
    the second claimant's life would be  certainly  contrary  to  his  best
    interests.  Having regard to all these factors I do not  consider  that
    the judge's decision to the effect that it would not be in the  child's
    best interests to remove him and  that,  having  regard  to  the  other
    matters, it would not be reasonable either was  outside  the  range  of
    reasonable decisions available to him and for that reason I do not find
    that his decision with regard to  the  second  claimant  contained  any
    material errors of law.

 9. For the sake of clarity I should also make it clear that  had  I  found
    that that aspect of his decision needed to be re-made I would have  had
    to re-make it now in circumstances where the second  claimant's  mother
    has by this time which is June 2016 been put in a  position  where  she
    would clearly be able to obtain indefinite leave to  remain  under  the
    ten years' residence criteria so when this factor is added in it  would
    in my judgment, in any event, were I re-making  the  decision,  not  be
    reasonable now to require the second claimant to return.

10. With this in mind I turn now to consider formally the position  of  the
    first claimant.  Mr Wilding quite properly  accepted  that  it  was  an
    error of law for the judge not to consider her position  having  regard
    to the decision he was making in the case of the  second  claimant  and
    that concession was rightly made.  The first claimant did  not  at  the
    time have any right to remain under the Rules but I  do  have  to  have
    regard to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 which was inserted by Section 19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.
    With regard to the public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
    cases where consideration is given  to  the  Article  8  rights  of  an
    applicant the relevant provisions are as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest consideration  applicable  in  all
             cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
                  the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
                  interests  of  the  economic  well-being  of  the   United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons
                  who can speak English

             ...

             (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
                  the public interest does not require the person's  removal
                  where -

                  (a)  the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom."

11. The interpretation of 'qualifying child' is set  out  at  Section  117D
    which provides that

         "(a) 'qualifying child' means a person who is under the age  of  18
             and who -

         ...

         (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
             seven years or more."

12. As the second claimant has lived in the United Kingdom for  over  seven
    years and Judge Wilson found that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    him to leave the United Kingdom. As it is not suggested  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State that the first claimant does not have a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with her son, it must follow  that
    in light of the judge's decision that it would not  be  reasonable  for
    the second claimant to leave the UK, his decision dismissing the  first
    claimant's appeal cannot stand.  I accordingly must remake the decision
    with regard to the first claimant which I now do.

13. As I have already found, the  first  claimant  is  entitled  to  remain
    having regard to what is provided within Section 117B of the 2002  Act,
    because it would not be reasonable to expect  the  second  claimant  to
    leave the United Kingdom. Moreover, her case is much stronger than that
    now because she also should now be entitled to remain  under  the  long
    residence provisions within the Rules.  She speaks  very  good  English
    and she has passed the knowledge in the UK test.

14. Accordingly it follows that my decision in this case must be to dismiss
    the Secretary of State's appeal with regard to the second claimant  and
    to remake the decision in respect of the first claimant,  allowing  her
    appeal, which I shall now do.

Decision

 1) The appeal of the first claimant, Ms Haque,  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Wilson dismissing her appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision refusing her leave to remain is set aside  and  I  remake  the
    decision allowing Ms Haque's appeal.

 2) The Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Wilson
    allowing the second claimant's appeal against the decision refusing him
    leave to remain is dismissed;  Judge  Wilson's  decision  allowing  the
    second claimant's appeal is affirmed.






Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:     29 June 2016

