

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/03878/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 10th April 2015                           |On: 20th April 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                Abdul Qudoos
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ehtesham-Khan, Pride Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan date of birth 20th March  1983.
    He has permission[1] to appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Amin) to issue a Rule 9 Notice.


 2. The Appellant had previously had leave to enter the United Kingdom as a
    Tier 4 Migrant. On the 30th May 2013, the day  his  leave  expired,  he
    made an application to extend it. That was rejected as invalid  by  the
    Respondent on the grounds that the Appellant had not signed  the  form.
    The Appellant was then without leave and was unable to supply  a  valid
    CAS. For that reason a subsequent application, made on  the  27th  June
    2013, was also rejected. The 'offer letter' he had  supplied  from  his
    then Tier 4 Sponsor was not a CAS.

 3. The Respondent maintained that the Appellant had  no  right  of  appeal
    since the decision to refuse him leave to remain as a Tier  4  Migrant,
    made on the 27th  September  2013,  was  not  an  immigration  decision
    attracting a right of appeal.  The matter came before Judge  Amin,  who
    in her Rule 9 decision found for the Respondent.

 4. Before me Mr Kandola agreed that the decision must be set aside. It was
    an error of law to issue a Rule 9  decision  following  a  hearing.  It
    should have been a determination, guided by the  principles  in  Basnet
    (validity of application- respondent) [2012]  UKUT  00113  (IAC).    Mr
    Kandola further accepted that on the 20th March  2014  directions  were
    issued that the Respondent provide evidence to show that  the  original
    application had been properly  rejected  as  invalid,  and  that  these
    directions had not been complied with. The  Respondent  had  failed  to
    discharge the Basnet burden of proof, and in  those  circumstances  the
    Appellant should have been granted a right of appeal. I agree  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside.

 5. For his part Mr Ehtesham-Khan accepted that the decision appealed could
    not succeed under the Immigration Rules since  the  Appellant  had  not
    submitted a valid CAS.   He did however submit that  the  decision  was
    'not in accordance with the law' for a failure on the Respondent's part
    to exercise her discretion and act fairly.

 6. I agree. The Respondent now accepts that the application made  in  time
    in May 2013  should  not  have  been  rejected  as  invalid.  Had  that
    application been accepted the Appellant's leave would not  have  lapsed
    and he would not now  be  in  the  position  of  having  no  CAS.   The
    Appellant wishes to continue his studies by taking up  an  offer  of  a
    place to study for a PhD at the University of Leeds. He  cannot  accept
    that offer without leave, and having no leave he is unable to obtain  a
    CAS.    Mr  Ehtesham-Khan  submits  that  in  the   circumstances   the
    appropriate solution to this 'catch 22'  situation  would  be  for  the
    Respondent to issue the Appellant with  a  Certificate  of  Application
    which would enable him to make a new application to the  University  of
    Leeds, obtain a CAS and make a valid application for further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4  Migrant.    That  is  entirely  a  matter  for  the
    Respondent, but I agree that following her failure  to  show  that  the
    original application was invalid she should now exercise her discretion
    and  consider  whether  she  wishes  to  issue   the   Certificate   of
    Application.


    Decisions


 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside.

 8. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:

    "The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.


      The appeal is allowed as not in accordance with the law"


 9. I make no direction for anonymity because neither party  has  requested
    one and on the facts I do not consider such an order to be necessary.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     10th
                                 April 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt on
the 29th January 2015

