
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03196/2014
                                                               IA/03200/2014
                                                             & IA/03203/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 November 2014                            |On 12 November 2014          |


                                   Before
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                        MR MALIK ABDUL RAUF AWAN (A1)
                      MRS ZUBAIDA ABDUL RAUF AWAN (a2)
                      MISS LARAIB ABDUL RAUF AWAN (A3)
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Nasim, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction


     1. A1, a male citizen of Pakistan, applied for leave  to  remain  as  a
        Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant pursuant to para 245FD of  HC  395,
        as amended (the Immigration Rules) on 4 April 2012. The  appeals  of
        A2 and A3 are dependent on the application of A1. I  will  therefore
        refer only to A1 within my determination.


     2. As to the facts of the case, A1's application for  leave  to  remain
        was refused by the Respondent on 27 September 2012 on the basis that
        A1's  qualification,  a  Master  of  Business  Administration   (the
        relevant qualification for the purposes of paragraph 245FD  (c)  and
        Table 10 and paragraph 55 of Appendix A to  the  Immigration  Rules,
        hereinafter referred to as the award), was not obtained by A1  until
        after the date of application. This is because with his  application
        the Appellant provided a letter from his college,  Kaplan  Financial
        (Kaplan) dated 2 April 2012 confirming that the date  of  his  award
        was 11 April 2012. A1 requested  a  reconsideration  on  15  October
        2012, providing a further letter from Kaplan, dated 10  April  2012,
        confirming that the  date  of  the  award  was  4  April  2012.  The
        reconsideration request was refused by the Respondent on  4  October
        2013 and a removal decision was issued on 15 November  2013  against
        which A1 had a right of appeal. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron
        (the Judge) dismissed A1's appeal against the removal decision.


     3. The Appellants sought permission to appeal on the basis that:


        a. The Judge was aware that  the  Respondent  had  before  her  the
           letter from Kaplan dated 10 April 2012.  He  erred  at  [34]  in
           stating that leave under s 3C of the Immigration Act  1971  (the
           1971 Act) ended after the reconsideration  decision.  An  appeal
           was lodged and a Duty Judge had determined that it was  in  time
           and therefore leave was continuing for the purposes of s 3C;


        b. As the request for reconsideration was made whilst A1 had extant
           leave, and the Respondent had the  Kaplan  letter  of  10  April
           2012, the Judge erred at [34] in stating that the decision dated
           27 September 2012 was correct because "once the  reconsideration
           request is entertained the previous  decision  stands  withdrawn
           and decision on reconsideration is to be judicially scrutinised"
           (grounds, paragraph 7);


        c. The Judge did not determine A1's claim that refusing his request
           for  a  grant  of  leave  under  the  Tier  1  (PSW)  route   is
           discriminatory treatment and not in accordance with Article 6 of
           the Human Rights Act 1998;


        d. Given the Judge's finding at [43], that "...the Respondent  does
           not appear to have engaged properly with the fact that A1s (sic)
           qualification was obtained prior to  his  application  and  that
           this therefore may amount to arguably good grounds for  granting
           leave outside of the Immigration  Rules...",  the  Judge  should
           have allowed the appeal under Article 8  as  well  or  at  least
           remitted it to the  Respondent  for  further  consideration  and
           grant. This was particularly the case because it was  stated  in
           Mahad [2009] UKSC 16 that the Rules were not to  be  interpreted
           with the same strictness applicable to  the  construction  of  a
           statute  or  statutory  instrument  but  were  to  be  construed
           sensibly according to the natural and ordinary  meaning  of  the
           words.;


        e. A1 had legally been residing in the UK throughout and he  had  a
           legitimate expectation to continue his career in the UK.


     4. Permission was granted on the basis  that  "...the  Tribunal  should
        have considered allowing the appeal on the ground that the Secretary
        of State acted unfairly in refusing further leave to remain  due  to
        circumstances beyond A1's control, and that the decision of the  4th
        October 2013 (which maintained an earlier decision to  refuse  leave
        to remain) was thus not in accordance with the law."


     5. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24  response,  submitting  that  the
        Judge directed himself appropriately, that it was not the  fault  or
        responsibility of  the  Respondent  that  the  documentary  evidence
        provided by A1 prior to the date of refusal confirmed that the  date
        of the award fell outside the scheme  closure  date,  and  that  the
        Respondent had not managed to find any evidence that an earlier date
        of award had been supplied and in any event the  decision  made  was
        based on the evidence available to the Respondent at the time.


     6. In his submissions before me, as  to  chronology,  Mr  Nasim  stated
        that:


        a. A1 submitted with his application for leave a letter from Kaplan
           Financial (Kaplan), the institution at which he studied, dated 2
           April 2012 in which it was stated that the date of the award was
           11 April 2012;


        b. His application was refused on 27  September  2012  because  the
           award post-dated the application. He did not  have  a  right  of
           appeal as he had extant leave until 30 October 2012;


        c. He asked the Respondent to  reconsider  his  application  on  15
           October 2012, when he supplied a letter  from  Kaplan  dated  10
           April 2012 confirming that the date of the  award  was  4  April
           2012;


        d. The Respondent confirmed her  original  decision  on  4  October
           2013, after attempts by A1's representatives and by the local MP
           to obtain a response. In the refusal, the Respondent referred to
           the original basis for the refusal, that being  that  the  award
           post-dated the date of application. A1 did not have a  right  of
           appeal because he did not have extant leave.


        e. A removal decision was issued on 15 November 2013 which resulted
           in a right of appeal.  On  appeal,  the  Judge  found  that  the
           Respondent appeared to have before her,  when  A1's  application
           was reconsidered, the letter from Kaplan dated 10 April 2012 but
           made no reference this in the refusal letter of 4 October  2012.
           The Judge, however, found that the Respondent  was  entitled  to
           issue a removal decision on 15 November 2013 because A1 did  not
           have extant leave.


     7. Mr Nasim submitted that the Judge stated  that  A1  "...appeared  to
        have met  the  requirements"  [48],  that  the  Respondent  had  not
        "...engaged properly..." with the evidence  [43]  and  that  he  had
        "...great sympathy..." for the Appellants. He also  found  that  the
        date of the award was 4 April 2012 [34]. Mr Nasim accepted  that  A1
        could not make an application to vary leave on 15 October 2012  when
        he applied for reconsideration, because the PSW route was closed  on
        6 April 2012 and he could only therefore  seek  reconsideration.  He
        submitted that in view of the chronology and the Judge's finding  as
        to the date of the award,  the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
        evidence before him in relation to the reconsideration decision.  On
        the Judge's findings,  A1  met  the  requirements  at  the  date  of
        application.


     8. I pointed out to Mr Nasim that the Judge did not make a firm finding
        that the letter from Kaplan dated 10 April was in  fact  before  the
        Respondent when the reconsideration decision was made. He  submitted
        that the Judge stated that the evidence before  him  indicated  that
        the date of the award was 4 April 2012 [34].


     9. Mr Nasim accepted that A1 was appealing against the removal decision
        [2] but submitted that it was open to the Judge  to  find  that  the
        decision to remove was not in accordance with the  law  because  the
        removal decision was issued on the  basis  that  A1  had  no  extant
        leave, which in turn was based on the decision of 4 October 2013 and
        the concept  of  fairness  played  a  part  in  the  decision-making
        process. The failure by the Respondent to consider the evidence made
        the decision to remove 'not in accordance with the  law'.  He  asked
        how the decision to remove could be lawful when the  Respondent  had
        not engaged with important evidence.


    10. Mr Nasim also submitted that the Judge had before him evidence  from
        other students in A1's position who had been granted leave under the
        PSW route and the Judge did not deal with this aspect of  the  case.
        At p 6 of A1's bundle, which was before the Judge, were letters from
        Kaplan which confirmed the dates of the beginning  and  end  of  the
        award for A1 and the others in his position  and  the  date  of  the
        award was incorrect on A1's letter. This was subsequently  corrected
        by Kaplan in their  letter  of  10  April  2012,  in  which  it  was
        confirmed that since their letter of  2  April  2012,  "...Liverpool
        John Moores  University  (the  awarding  body)  have  confirmed  the
        marks..." and the date of the  award  is  given  as  4  April  2012.
        However, the Judge simply focussed on the leave issue (and may  have
        been right on the leave issue as  far  as  the  lack  of  leave  was
        concerned) but the removal decision was unlawful.


    11. Mr Avery submitted that there was simply  no  case  to  answer;  the
        Respondent was correct to refuse the  application  on  27  September
        2012 due to the evidence provided and that  decision  could  not  be
        impugned. The application for reconsideration does not extend  leave
        under s 3C. The initial decision was correct and the Respondent  was
        not under any duty to do more. The mistake in the letter of 2  April
        2012 from Kaplan was not the mistake of the Respondent.  A1  had  no
        right of appeal. He could not benefit from s 3C leave. The Judge was
        correct. If A1 had provided the further letter from Kaplan dated  10
        April 2012 before the date of the decision on 27 September 2012,  it
        may have been a different case. It was not clear from  the  evidence
        that A1 did provide it with the reconsideration request.


    12. He also submitted  that  to  engage  the  common  law  principle  of
        fairness, the decision had to be procedurally unfair, as  stated  in
        Marghia (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC), or Wednesbury
        unreasonable. The Respondent was not under a duty  to  reconsider  a
        decision and was entitled on  reconsideration  to  decide  that  the
        first decision was correct. The removal decision was lawful and  the
        grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement with the findings of
        the Judge. The Judge was  generous  in  his  interpretation  of  the
        situation and took this into account in his assessment under Article
        8.


    13. As to the situation of other applicants referred to by Mr Nasim,  Mr
        Avery submitted that it is never easy to be clear as to the basis on
        which leave was granted; it was not clear if  the  other  applicants
        submitted their evidence before the date of the original decision or
        on a reconsideration request. It was therefore difficult to  see  if
        the situations were like. There is no statutory appeal if a decision
        is reconsidered.


    14. In response, Mr Nasim reiterated the chronology and stated that  the
        Judge's decision at [35] and [36] could not be sustained because  he
        states that "Although it is  clear  that  the  Respondent  does  not
        appear to have properly engaged with the new evidence sent  in  with
        the reconsideration request  that  does  not  make  the  section  10
        removals unlawful." Naved (Student - fairness -  notice  of  points)
        Pakistan UKUT 00014 (IAC) made it clear that the failure to consider
        new evidence made a decision unlawful. If only the evidence provided
        at the date of decision was to be considered, what was the point  of
        a reconsideration request?


    15. Following submissions, I reserved my decision.  Mr  Nasim  submitted
        that if I were to find that there was a material error of  law,  the
        appropriate future course of action was for  me  to  find  that  the
        removal decision was not in accordance with the law and to remit the
        matter back to the Respondent to consider the new evidence.


    Analysis and reasons


    16. The only letter submitted by A1 with his application was the  letter
        from Kaplan dated 2 April 2012 in which the date of  the  award  was
        given as 11 April  2012.  The  Judge  was  therefore  not  wrong  in
        concluding, at [28], that  it  was  not  supplied  at  the  date  of
        application or before 27 September  2012  and  therefore  that  that
        decision was lawful.


    17. I accept  Mr  Avery's  submission  that  inconsistent  treatment  as
        between A1 and others in his position has not been established.  All
        the letters adduced show is that Kaplan issued letters to two  other
        applicants dated 2 April 2012 in which the date  of  the  award  was
        confirmed as  4  April  2012.  If  this  was  submitted  with  their
        applications (and we do not know this because insufficient  evidence
        was provided), it is likely  that  their  applications  for  further
        leave would have been successful if all other requirements were also
        met. Whilst the Judge did not deal  with  this  issue  specifically,
        there  was  insufficient  material  before  him  to  find  that  the
        treatment as between applicants was  inconsistent  or  that  A1  was
        discriminated against in  any  way.  The  Judge  did  not  therefore
        materially err in law.


    18.  It  is  incorrect  to  state  (as  submitted  in  the  grounds   of
        application) that the reconsideration  request  operated  to  extend
        leave resulting in a right of appeal when the decision was taken  by
        the Respondent on 4 October 2013. There is no authority before me to
        confirm that an application for reconsideration has  the  effect  of
        extending leave under s 3C of the 1971 Act. This provides:


          "3C Continuation of leave pending variation decision
          E+W+S+N.I.
             (1)  This section applies if-

                 (a) a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in
                 the United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for
                 variation of the leave,

                 (b) the application for variation is made before the leave
                 expires, and

                 (c) the leave expires without the application for variation
                 having been decided.


             "2.  The leave is extended by virtue of this section during
             any period when-

                 (a) the application for variation is neither decided nor
                 withdrawn,

                 (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,
                 Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 could be brought, while A1
                 is in the United Kingdom against the decision on the
                 application for variation (ignoring any possibility of an
                 appeal out of time with permission), or

                 (c) an appeal under that section against that decision,
                 brought while A1 is in the United Kingdom, is pending
                 (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act)."



    19. A1's  application  was  decided  on  27  September  2012.  Mr  Nasim
        confirmed that A1 could not make an application to vary  in  October
        2012 because the  PSW  route  was  closed.  In  the  absence  of  an
        application to vary existing leave, s 3C does not operate to  extend
        leave.


    20. The further submission in the grounds,  which  appears  to  indicate
        that an appeal  was  in  fact  lodged  against  the  reconsideration
        decision and accepted by a duty judge as  a  valid  appeal,  on  the
        evidence before me, was not, factually correct. Mr  Nasim  confirmed
        that the decision appealed against was the decision  to  remove,  as
        recorded at [2]. His submission was that the  removal  decision  was
        unlawful because the Respondent failed to engage with  the  evidence
        that was submitted with the reconsideration request.


    21.  Although Mr Nasim asked what the point of a reconsideration request
        was if new evidence was not going to be considered, I note that  the
        in the letter of refusal dated 27  September  2012,  the  Respondent
        does not invite A1  to  request  a  reconsideration.  He  is  simply
        invited to make a new application. The Respondent is  not  bound  to
        reconsider a decision. In the circumstances,  it  was  open  to  the
        Respondent to review the decision made  on  27  September  2012  and
        confirm that it was correct on the basis of the evidence before  her
        at the time it was made. The invitation by the  Respondent  in  that
        letter was to make a new application. It was open to A1  to  make  a
        new application under a different route if he wished  to  remain  in
        the UK to work. No authority was provided to me  to  establish  that
        the  Respondent  is  obliged  to  consider  new  evidence   when   a
        reconsideration request is made.


    22. In view of the above, I cannot find that the  removal  decision  was
        unlawful due to  procedural  unfairness.  Whilst  the  circumstances
        which resulted in the refusal of A1's application  on  27  September
        2012 were beyond his control, it was not the Respondent  who  erred,
        or acted unfairly, in her decision on the  evidence  before  her  at
        that time. The decision of 4 October 2013  could  only  be  'not  in
        accordance with  the  law'  if  the  Respondent  had  erred  in  her
        consideration of the evidence before her when the decision was taken
        on 27 September 2012.


    23. As to the submission, pursuant to Mahad, that the Immigration  Rules
        should not be strictly construed, in that case,  the  Supreme  Court
        was examining the ordinary meaning of the maintenance provisions for
        entry clearance applications under paragraph 284 of the  Immigration
        Rules and determined that words should not be added to the  relevant
        Rule. However,  the  ordinary  meaning  of  the  provisions  of  the
        Immigration Rules in relation to the PWS route was examined in  Raju
        and others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 754 and applied in see  Nasim  and
        others (Raju: reasons not to follow?) UKUT  00610  (IAC).  There  is
        nothing before me that establishes that when the ordinary meaning of
        the relevant Rule has been decided, it is possible  to  depart  from
        it. There is no inconsistency between Mahad on the one hand and Raju
        and Nasim on the other.


    24. With regard to the submission within  the  grounds  that  A1  had  a
        legitimate expectation that he would be permitted to remain  in  the
        UK to work, this was not substantiated in the grounds or before  me.
        There is no right under Article 8 to pursue a career in the  UK.  A1
        came to the UK to study. He completed his studies. Having  completed
        his studies, he has no right to  remain  or  legitimate  expectation
        that he will be permitted to remain in the UK beyond  the  terms  of
        his leave. There is no submission  within  the  grounds  (or  by  Mr
        Nasim) that the Judge's Article 8 assessment was flawed.




    Decision


    25. I find that there are no material errors of law in the determination
        of Judge Cameron; the grounds are simply  a  disagreement  with  his
        findings. His decision must therefore stand.


    26.  A1's  appeal  is  dismissed  and,  as  the  appeals  of  the  other
        Appellant's are dependent on his appeal, they too are dismissed.




    Anonymity


    27. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005 and I see no reason why an order should  be  made  pursuant  to
        Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                                  Date 12 November 2014

Manjinder Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In light of my decision to allow the appeal to the limited extent that the
decision of the Respondent is not in accordance with the law, I have
considered whether to make a fee award. I have had regard to the Joint
Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in Immigration Appeals (December
2011) and as appeals have been dismissed, I make no fee award fee award.


Signed                     Dated 12 November 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


