
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03022/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Sent              |
|On 4 July 2013                                  |On 31 July 2013            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                          MR AHMUD SHARIFF PEERALLY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Gokhool, Solicotor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Homse Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTION

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius who appealed against a decision
    of the respondent refusing him indefinite leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom outside of the Immigration Rules.  His application was refused.
     Following a hearing on 26 April 2013 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Kanagaratnam dismissed the appellant's subsequent appeal.  In so  doing
    he carried out  a  balancing  exercise  when  considering  whether  the
    respondent's decision would lead to a breach of the appellant's Article
    8 ECHR rights and concluded that it would not.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison who decided that the  judge  failed
    to consider the respondent's decision to  remove  the  appellant  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 in light
    of the authority of SSHD v Adamally & Jafferi UKUT 0414 IAC.

 3. The grounds though also complained that  the  judge  made  two  further
    errors and in particular in recording that the appellant had resided in
    the United Kingdom only "for a mere period of  three  years"  when  the
    reality is that it has been nine years.  Further,  that  the  balancing
    exercise of the judge is inadequate.

 4. In  opposing  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  Mr  Deller
    contended that some of the errors were not  material  but  acknowledged
    that if the balancing exercise has been effected on a mistaken fact  as
    to the length of time the appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    then there are serious concerns regarding the determination.

 5. We find in particular that the error in relation to the period of  time
    the appellant has been resident in the United Kingdom  is  such  as  to
    infect the whole of the judge's Article 8 balancing exercise.  We  also
    find it to be both defective and inadequate when considering the  issue
    of proportionality and that there has been a failure to weigh  all  the
    factors in favour and against the respondent's decision before reaching
    a conclusion.

 6. For these reasons we set aside the First-tier Tribunal's  determination
    and direct that there be a  new  hearing  where  the  appeal  is  heard
    afresh.  In making his submissions to us Mr  Deller  accepted  that  by
    making the removal decision simultaneous to  the  immigration  decision
    the appeal should have been allowed  on  that  singular  issue  to  the
    extent that the decision appealed against was not  in  accordance  with
    the law.

 7. We had hoped to proceed  to  hear  this  appeal  today.   Unfortunately
    whilst the appellant was present none of his witnesses  were.   It  was
    explained to us that no direction had been made by the Tribunal to  the
    effect that the parties should be ready to proceed in the  event  of  a
    material error of law being found.  We could find no such direction  on
    the Tribunal's file and therefore  accepted  the  inevitability  of  an
    adjournment.  In so doing we took into account the Practice  Directions
    and concluded that the appropriate way forward was for this  appeal  to
    be remitted to the First-tier to be heard de novo.

                                 DIRECTIONS

A.   The appeal is to be heard at 10am on 17 September 2013  at  the  Hatton
    Cross Hearing Centre.




Signed                              Date 16 July 2013.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
