
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03774/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |                      Promulgated and   |
|                                    |sent to parties                         |
|On 5 March 2015                     |                      On 11 March 2015  |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                roshan thapa

                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, instructed by Howe & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The applicant is a  citizen  of  Nepal.   He  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Broe  dismissing
    his appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  him
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the dependent relative of  his
    father, a former Ghurkha now settled in the United Kingdom.



First-tier Tribunal determination

 2. The factual matrix in this appeal is not contentious.  It is set out in
    paragraphs [23]-[25] of the First-tier Tribunal decision as follows:

           "23.  There is little dispute as to the  factual  background  to
           this appeal.  The appellant is a 28 year old man and  a  citizen
           of Nepal.  His father is a Ghurkha veteran who served from  1972
           to 1990  when  at  the  time  of  his  discharge  there  was  no
           settlement policy for Ghurkhas.  His father came to this country
           in 2006 and was granted indefinite leave  to  remain.   He  then
           returned  to  Nepal  following  the  death  of  the  appellant's
           youngest sister.  His father then came  back  to  this  country,
           followed by his mother in 2009.  She  is  now  settled  in  this
           country as are  two  of  the  appellant's  sisters.   His  other
           sister, the oldest, is married and has two children.  She spends
           her time in India and Nepal.

           24.   The appellant stayed in Nepal after his  parents  came  to
           this country.  He completed a university course in 2008 but  did
           not work thereafter.  He was supported by his father  and  lived
           in the family home which they still have.  He has a bank account
           in Nepal. He came to this country as a student in December  2010
           and has lived with his parents and sisters since then.   He  has
           gained a postgraduate qualification and he also worked part time
           for about six months.

           25.   I accept that his father  has  financed  his  studies  and
           provides some financial support in the form of  'pocket  money'.
           I also accept that, had he been able to do so,  it  is  probable
           that his father and the rest of the family would  have  come  to
           this country after his discharge in 1990.  I have no doubt  that
           the loss of the appellant's sister was traumatic for  the  whole
           family."

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal, relying on Ghising (Family life  -  and
    adults - Ghurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) (Ghising No.1).

Upper Tribunal appeal

 4. Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins on 22 July 2013, in the light of the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in  Gurung  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8.   At  an  error  of  law  hearing  on  26
    September 2013, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Wilson found  no  error  of
    law and dismissed the appeal.  The  Upper  Tribunal  determination  was
    promulgated on 10 October 2013.

Court of Appeal proceedings

 5. The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal.  The proceedings in  the
    Court  of  Appeal  were  stayed  pending  the  outcome  of  SG  (Nepal)
    C5/2013/2336, which concerned the  proper  threshold  for  family  life
    between adults.   In due course,  SG's  case  and  other  linked  cases
    allowed by consent and remitted to the Tribunal for remaking.

 6. On 12 February 2014, the proceedings  in  this  appellant's  case  were
    settled by a consent order and statement of reasons, the terms of which
    are important in determining what is to be done with the appeal now.

 7. In the Statement of Reasons, the Court of  Appeal  indicated  that  the
    appeal had been adjourned pending the outcome of; that  the  respondent
    agreed that the determinations of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal contained material errors of law; that the First-tier Tribunal
    judge had misdirected himself as to the test for  family  life  between
    adult family members; and crucially, that the respondent agreed that on
    the facts of this appeal, Article 8(1) was engaged.

 8. The Consent Order which the parties agreed was as follows:

      "1.   The application for permission  to  appeal  and  the  appeal  be
           allowed to the extent that:
   i) the determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) of the 10th October 2013 be set aside;
  ii) the determination of the First-tier Tribunal of the 24th May  2013  be
      set aside in its conclusion as to Article 8;
        2.  The appeal be remitted to the Upper Tribunal to be  reheard  (on
           the basis that it is accepted that the respondent's decision  is
           one  which  engages  Article  8(1)   applying   the   principles
           applicable to Article 8(2) set out in Gurung [2013] 1  WLR  2456
           and Ghising [No.2].
        3.  The respondent pay  the  appellant's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
           assessed if not agreed."

 9. The appeal was remitted to the Upper Tribunal 'for a rehearing  on  the
    issue of Article 8(2) and for the determination to be remade'  applying
    Gurung and Ghising No.2.  The respondent agreed to pay the  appellant's
    reasonable costs of the statutory appeal, to be assessed if not agreed.
     That was the basis on which the error of law hearing came before me.

Error of law hearing

10. At the beginning of the error of law  hearing,  having  regard  to  the
    respondent's  latest  policy  on  adult  family   members   of   former
    servicemen, issued in January 2015, Ms  Johnstone  for  the  respondent
    withdrew the underlying decision.  Ms Johnstone indicated that  it  was
    now the respondent's policy that all adult dependant Ghurkha  decisions
    should be withdrawn and reassessed in the light of that new  policy,  a
    copy of which she had brought to the hearing.

11.  She  confirmed  that  withdrawal  in  writing,  indicating  that   the
    respondent had withdrawn the immigration decision of  16  January  2013
    and that, in accordance with  rule  17(2)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)   Rules  2014,
    which came into force on 20 October 2014, 'the  appeal  is  treated  as
    withdrawn'.  As far  as  the  appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    concerned, that is correct.

12. However, pursuant to rule 17 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (Upper Tribunal Rules) as amended, the consent of the  Upper
    Tribunal is required if a party wishes to withdraw  their  case  before
    the Upper Tribunal.  Ms Johnstone applied to me for leave  to  withdraw
    the First-tier Tribunal decision.  In the alternative, there being  now
    no underlying decision, she asked that the  Upper  Tribunal  appeal  be
    dismissed.

13. For the appellant, Mr Jesurum opposed the withdrawal by the respondent,
    of which he had no notice until the hearing had begun.  He argued  that
    in the light of the consent order in the Court of  Appeal,  and  having
    regard to AG (Kosovo) at paragraph [30 the Article 8  issue  should  be
    determined before any policy matters  were  considered.   In  addition,
    applying SM (withdrawal of appeal  decision:  effect)  Pakistan  [2014]
    UKUT 64 (IAC), the Tribunal must dispose of the  appeal  even  where  a
    party's case had  been  withdrawn.   He  argued  that  the  appropriate
    disposal was to allow the appeal, applying the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ghising  &  Ors  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong;  weight)
    (Nepal) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) ('Ghising No.2').

14. Addressing himself to the matters set out in sub-paragraph (4)  of  the
    SM  (Pakistan)  guidance,  Mr  Jesurum  argued,  in  effect,  that  the
    withdrawal of the respondent's case before the Upper Tribunal  must  be
    taken to be a withdrawal of her opposition to the  appellant's  appeal.
    There was no question here of country guidance  being  required.    The
    timing of the withdrawal was not to  the  respondent's  credit,  having
    been made at the hearing with no notice whatever to the appellant  (not
    even between Counsel, before the hearing  began).   He  relied  on  the
    Court of Appeal consent order and the guidance in Ghising  No.2,  which
    had led to the change in the respondent's policy in January  2015.   He
    contended that it was inappropriate to allow the respondent to  re-make
    the decision unless she could show that, applying Ghising  No.2,  there
    might be a proper reason to continue to refuse to allow  the  appellant
    to settle, on suitability grounds capable of  redressing  the  historic
    injustice.

Discussion

15. In relation to the position of adult dependants of  Ghurkha  servicemen
    affected by the  historic  injustice,  I  am  guided  by  the  judicial
    headnote to the Upper Tribunal's decision in Ghising No.2, as follows:

           "(1) In finding that the weight to be accorded to  the  historic
           wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be  regarded  as
           less than that to be accorded the  historic  wrong  suffered  by
           British Overseas citizens, the Court of  Appeal  in  Gurung  and
           others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha  or
           BOC cases, the effect of the historic wrong  is  to  reverse  or
           otherwise alter the burden of proof that applies  in  Article  8
           proportionality assessments.

           (2) When an Appellant has shown  that  there  is  family/private
           life and the decision made  by  the  Respondent  amounts  to  an
           interference with it, the burden lies  with  the  Respondent  to
           show that  a  decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  (although
           Appellants  will,  in  practice,  bear  the  responsibility   of
           adducing evidence that lies within their remit and  about  which
           the Respondent may be unaware).

           (3) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others  was  not  the
           burden  of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in   a
           proportionality assessment. The Court held that, as in the  case
           of BOCs, the historic wrong  suffered  by  Gurkha  ex-servicemen
           should be given substantial weight.

           (4) Accordingly, where it is found that  Article  8  is  engaged
           and, but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would  have  been
           settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily  determine  the
           outcome of  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
           Appellant's favour, where the matters relied on by the Secretary
           of State/ entry clearance officer consist solely of  the  public
           interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.

           (5) It can therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha (and BOC)
           cases will not necessarily succeed, even though (i) their family
           life engages Article 8(1); and  (ii)  the  evidence  shows  they
           would have come to the United Kingdom with their father, but for
           the injustice that  prevented  the  latter  from  settling  here
           earlier. If the Respondent can point to matters over  and  above
           the public interest in maintaining a  firm  immigration  policy,
           which argue in favour of removal or  the  refusal  of  leave  to
           enter, these matters must be given  appropriate  weight  in  the
           balance in the Respondent's  favour.  Thus,  a  bad  immigration
           history and/or criminal behaviour may  still  be  sufficient  to
           outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the Appellant's side of
           the balance."

    Ms Johnstone for the respondent confirmed that no factors of  the  type
    mentioned in (5) of the guidance were recorded in the documents on  her
    file, and that she was unaware of any such factors in  the  appellant's
    case.  He did not have  a  bad  immigration  history  or  a  record  of
    criminal behaviour.  I remind myself that the respondent conceded,  and
    the Court of Appeal found, that Article 8(1) is engaged by  this  case,
    and that the First-tier Tribunal found,  and  the  respondent  has  not
    contested, that the appellant's father and the whole family would  have
    come to the United Kingdom at the end of the father's service in  1990,
    but for the historic injustice.

16. The respondent has withdrawn her decision and  seeks  to  withdraw  her
    case before the Upper Tribunal.  Not much assistance can be gained from
    her Rule 24 Reply as to what that case might be now, but  it  is  clear
    from the consent order of the Court of Appeal that it is  now  accepted
    on behalf of the respondent that Article 8(1) is engaged.  The guidance
    in SM (Pakistan) confirms that while the Upper Tribunal cannot withhold
    consent to the withdrawal of the underlying decision against which  the
    appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    continues to have jurisdiction in relation to  the  appeal  before  it,
    since
           "(2)  ... Such a withdrawal is not, without  more,  one  of  the
           ways in which an appeal under section  82  of  the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ceases to be pending."

17. The Upper Tribunal then gave guidance as to what must be done  in  such
    circumstances:

           "(3) When remaking a decision in a 2002  Act  appeal  where  the
           decision against which a person appealed has been  withdrawn  by
           the Secretary of State, the Upper Tribunal will need  to  decide
           whether:-
              (i)      to proceed  formally  to  dismiss  (or,  in  certain
              circumstances, allow) the appeal; or
              (ii)     to determine  the  appeal  substantively,  including
              (where appropriate) making a direction under  section  87  of
              the 2002 Act.

           (4) In deciding between (i) and (ii) above, the  Upper  Tribunal
           will apply the overriding objective in rule 2 of the 2008 Rules,
           having regard to all relevant matters, including:-

              (a)      the principle that the Secretary  of  State  should,
              ordinarily, be the primary decision-maker in the  immigration
              field;
              (b)      whether the matters potentially in issue are such as
              to require the Tribunal to give general legal  or  procedural
              guidance, including country guidance;
              (c)      the reasons  underlying  the  Secretary  of  State's
              withdrawal of the appealed decision;
              (d)      the appeal history,  including  the  timing  of  the
              withdrawal; and
              (e)      the views of the parties."

18. Dealing first with point (4), I accept of course  that  the  respondent
    should, ordinarily, be the primary decision maker  in  the  immigration
    field.  However, I recall also that as  recently  as  the  respondent's
    acceptance on 12 February 2014 by way  of  a  consent  order  that  the
    appropriate course is for the  decision  to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that Article 8(1) is engaged.

19. I have taken into account the views expressed by  both  parties  as  to
    what should be done.  I refuse to consent  to  the  withdrawal  of  the
    respondent's case before the Upper Tribunal since, in my  judgment,  it
    is in the interests of justice and  the  overriding  objective  that  I
    should now determine the appeal.  The facts have been found  and  there
    are  no  adverse  factors  identified  relating  to   this   particular
    appellant. No satisfactory explanation was advanced at the  hearing  as
    to why the Ghising No.2-compliant policy issued by  the  respondent  in
    January 2015 should affect that  assessment,  nor  why  the  respondent
    should have waited until the morning of the error  of  law  hearing  to
    withdraw her decision.

20. I apply the Ghising No.2 guidance.  This appellant  is  the  son  of  a
    father affected by the historic injustice and, with  the  rest  of  his
    family, would have come to the United Kingdom in 1990 at the end of his
    father's military service had it been possible for them to do  so.   He
    remains a dependant of his father, living at home in either country and
    supported by his father.  There is no reason why the appeal should  not
    be allowed outright and a direction made.

21. I gave an indication at the  hearing  that  I  proposed  to  allow  the
    appeal, but reserved my decision.  Mr Jesurum then raised the  question
    of costs.  This being an appeal from the First-tier Tribunal, paragraph
    10(1) governs the power to make a costs order. No  written  application
    under paragraph 10(5) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (Upper Tribunal Rules) had  been  made  before  the  hearing.   Mr
    Jesurum proceeded to write on a piece of  paper  'I  apply  for  costs'
    which he sought to hand up.  I refused to accept that as an application
    for costs:  paragraph 10(5) requires both  a  written  application  for
    costs and a statement of  costs  and  expenses  incurred.   Mr  Jesurum
    indicated that those instructing him may well make an  application  for
    costs after the hearing.  The Upper Tribunal will expect,  if  such  an
    application is made, that it should set out clearly the basis on  which
    the appellant contends that an award of costs should be made.

    Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal decision did contain a material error  of  law.
    It has been set aside and I now remake the  decision  by  allowing  the
    appeal.







    Direction

    The respondent is directed to grant the appellant leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom in line with his father and other family members  in
    the United Kingdom.

    Signed                                   Date




    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

