
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/03213/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th March 2015                           |On 25th March 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                     oladipupo temiloluwa lawal solarin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Van As, Legal Representative of Visa Inn
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This Appellant, Mr Solarin is a citizen of Nigeria whose date of  birth
    is recorded as 22nd April 1985.  On 2nd September 2013 he  was  granted
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 13th November 2013.
    On 11th November 2013,  before  the  expiry  of  that  leave,  he  made
    application for variation of his leave but  on  23rd  December  2013  a
    decision was made to refuse the application.  The application had  been
    made on the basis of long residence pursuant to  paragraph  276B  ("the
    ten year Rule").

 2. Not content with the decision of the Secretary of State  the  Appellant
    appealed and on 1st October 2014 his appeal was heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Telford sitting at  Harmondsworth.   Judge  Telford
    dismissed the appeal.  He found that the application was  deficient  in
    two  material  particulars.   Firstly  that  the  Appellant   had   not
    demonstrated that he met the English language requirement  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276B(iv) and that in any event the Appellant had  established
    that he had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for ten years.

 3. By Notice dated 5th December 2014 the Appellant  made  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  There  were  two  grounds.
    Firstly that Judge Telford had failed to recognise that at the material
    times the Appellant had the benefit  of  "3C  leave"  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration Act 1971 Act and as such leave which was capable  of  being
    taken into account when calculating a period of lawful  residence,  and
    secondly  had  overlooked  the  certificates  demonstrating  that   the
    Appellant in fact did meet the  English  language  requirement.   Those
    certificates appear in the Appellant's bundle and one can  only  assume
    that they  had  been  overlooked.   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt  the
    documents appear in a bundle filed under  cover  of  letter  dated  5th
    March 2014.

 4. Ms Savage for the Secretary of State accepts  that  the  Appellant  did
    have the requisite certification and accepts  that  the  Appellant  did
    have the requisite lawful residence.  In those circumstances there  was
    nothing for me to resolve.  The judge clearly erred but I can deal with
    this simply by setting the decision aside and re-making  it  such  that
    the appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed. The Decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside and remade such that the  appeal  to  the  First  tier
Tribunal is allowed.

Signed        Date 24th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have heard argument on both sides as to whether or not  the  award  should
be made.  Whilst I accept that when  the  application  was  first  made  the
Appellant did not have the necessary ten years.   By  the  time  the  matter
came before the Tribunal he did and it was open to the  Secretary  of  State
in those circumstances to change the decision.  That was not done.   In  the
circumstances I make a full fee award.

Signed        Date 24th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
