
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03823/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 6 November 2014                        |On 13 November 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                               Sarah Esi Andor
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Afzal, Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of Ghana, has been granted  permission
    to appeal the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy, who for
    reasons given in her determination dated  4  June  2014  dismissed  the
    appeal against the decisions refusing to vary the appellant's leave  to
    remain and to remove her.  The appellant had relied  on  grounds  under
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8.   She  was  unrepresented  at  the
    hearing before the judge.

 2. The appellant had made application for consideration outside the  Rules
    based on her private life in the United Kingdom. She first entered this
    country on 20 March 2003 and has had  lawful  leave  throughout.   That
    application was made in time on 25 January 2011; the  refusal  decision
    is dated 18 December 2013.

 3. The judge did not accept the appellant's evidence  that  her  sons  who
    serve in the armed forces had as to one,  British  citizenship  and  in
    respect of the other, settled status.  The appellant's husband had left
    her and no family life was advanced.  The  judge  considered  the  case
    under paragraph 276ADE but considered that no exceptional  factors  had
    been raised in the evidence apart from the fact that her  parents  were
    dead and she had no close relatives in Ghana.  Thus she concluded  that
    it would not be unjustifiably harsh to require the appellant to return.

 4. I invited Mr Afzal to summarise the grounds of challenge having  regard
    to the somewhat discursive nature of those on which permission had been
    granted.  He argued the correctness of the judge rejecting the  claimed
    status of the appellant's sons in the light of  her  finding  that  the
    appellant had been a  credible  witness.   New  material  now  provided
    showed that the appellant had been telling the truth  in  this  regard.
    As I observed to Mr Afzal, error on this basis would not be  sufficient
    to persuade me that the decision required to be set aside.

 5. On further examination of the determination however it  became  evident
    that the judge had not given any consideration to  the  length  of  the
    appellant's lawful residence in the United Kingdom from  2003  and  the
    fact that by the date of the hearing pursuant to statutory 3C leave she
    had completed ten years' lawful residence.  I  gave  permission  to  Mr
    Afzal to amend the ground to clarify this aspect of  challenge  to  the
    Article 8 considerations.

 6. Ms Johnstone took a sensible approach and agreed that  the  failure  by
    the  judge  to  address  this   aspect   undermined   the   Article   8
    consideration.  She and Mr Afzal accepted that the determination needed
    to be set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal having regard  to
    the necessity for clear factual findings and  a  consideration  of  the
    impact of ten years' lawful residence on the Article 8 claim.

 7. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal is  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision is set aside and  the  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for its reconsideration.


Signed                                           Date 12 November 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


