
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/03653/2013
     IA/03655/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th July 2013                               |On 6th August 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                arman fayyaz
                                 salma arman
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devine made following a hearing  at  Birmingham  on
    22nd May 2013.



Background

 2. The first claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 27th March 1982 and
    the second is his wife and dependant.

 3. On 15th February 2012 he applied for further leave to remain as a  Tier
    4 student.  The Respondent wrote to him on 19th July 2012 following the
    revocation  of  the  licence  of  his  proposed  college  stating  that
    consideration of the application would be suspended for a period of  60
    calendar days during which time it was open to him to  submit  a  fresh
    application in a different  category  or  to  leave  the  UK.  On  15th
    September 2012 he varied his application.

 4. The claimant provided, with the application, a letter from the Bank  of
    the Punjab confirming that a Mr Muhammad Fayyaz had been issued with  a
    loan.  In his covering letter he explained  that  he  was  awaiting  an
    affidavit from his father, Muhammad Fayyaz, confirming that  the  funds
    referred to in the bank letter were available to him.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the application on 14th January 2013  on
    the grounds that the bank letter was not in his name and not acceptable
    evidence that the requisite funds were available  to  him.   The  judge
    said that the claimant had been funded by his  father  since  he  first
    came to the UK in 2006.  In order to support  the  current  application
    his father secured a loan and the Secretary  of  State  was  made  well
    aware of it some four months before the date of decision.  The claimant
    had made the situation entirely clear in his application  and  covering
    letter and the judge concluded  that  the  documents  supplied  by  him
    clearly showed that he was supported by his father and that  the  money
    was available.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    there was no evidence that the claimant had access to the loan  and  he
    did not send the signed affidavit with the application.  The  affidavit
    of 10th September 2012 said that the loan had  been  received  and  the
    funds were available but the letter from the bank dated 14th  September
    2012 was four days later.  There was no evidence to show that the  loan
    was genuinely available and  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  been
    deprived of giving detailed consideration to the documents.

 7. It was also submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for admitting evidence that  he  was  arguably  prevented  from
    considering by  the  operation  of  Section  85A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 8. On 24th June 2013 Designated Judge Shaerf said that  the  Secretary  of
    State was represented at the hearing and  the  Tribunal  file  did  not
    disclose that there was any application for an adjournment to  consider
    the authenticity of the documentary evidence.  The Presenting Officer's
    concerns  were  recorded  in  the  determination  and  the  judge  gave
    sustainable reasons for accepting the documents and  for  finding  that
    the claimant would continue to be maintained  in  his  studies  by  his
    father.

 9. However he then went  on  to  state  that  the  grounds  correctly  and
    properly assert that the judge arguably erred in  law  by  taking  into
    account documents which were subsequent  to  the  application  and  are
    inadmissible evidence by reason of  Section  85A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by  Section  19  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007.

The Hearing

10. Ms Everett said that she was not instructed to withdraw  the  challenge
    to the determination but she had nothing to say to advance the  grounds
    upon which permission was granted.

Findings and Conclusions

11. The Secretary of State was not given permission to argue that the judge
    should not have accepted that the affidavit established that  the  loan
    was genuinely available.  That was a  matter  for  the  judge  and  any
    grounds  challenging  that  aspect  of  his  decision   are   a   plain
    disagreement with it and nothing more.

12. With respect to the Section  85A  point,  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider the evidence because it was before the Secretary of  State  at
    the date of application, namely evidence that the claimant's father had
    been supporting his studies since 2006, the letter from the Bank of the
    Punjab dated 14th September 2012 confirming that the  father  had  been
    issued with a loan and finally  a  letter  from  the  claimant  himself
    confirming that his father had signed an affidavit in confirmation that
    the sums referred to in the  letter  were  available  to  him  and  the
    affidavit had been posted to him from Pakistan. Moreover arguably, even
    if he had considered the affidavit, it would not be inadmissible  under
    Section 85A since it was adduced to show that the bank loan was valid.

Decision

13. The judge's decision stands.





Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


