







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03168/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 20 October 2014                           |On: 30 October 2014          |
|Prepared: 28 October 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                              Mr Zeeshan Latif
                           no anonymity order made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, counsel (instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor   Solicitors LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 12th July  1990.  His
      appeal against the decision of the respondent refusing his application
      to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant was dismissed by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan in a determination  promulgated  on  11th
      July 2014.


   2. The respondent had contended that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of  paragraph  245ZX(a)  and  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
      Immigration Rules. The assertion was that the appellant had  presented
      false documentation in support of his applications.


   3. Both parties were represented at the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
      tribunal on the 3rd July 2014.  On behalf of the respondent an attempt
      was made to rely on the refusal letter which contended that  the  bank
      statement submitted "had been  proven  to  be  false  by  the  issuing
      authority." However, it was accepted at the hearing that there was  no
      further evidence from the respondent with regard to the allegations of
      deception [19].


   4. On the evidence before him, the Judge found "on the higher standard of
      proof on the balance of probabilities" that  the  respondent  had  not
      established that the appellant had exercised deception in  support  of
      his application for leave to remain in the UK [23]. The appellant  had
      provided a written  statement  in  which  he  claimed  that  the  bank
      statement he furnished was in fact genuine.


   5. The Judge found that it was not enough for the respondent  "to  simply
      state the claimed evidence of forgery by way of  a  statement  in  the
      refusal, she has to provide evidence  to  corroborate  the  statement"
      [22]. This she had failed to  do.  Accordingly,  there  was  no  other
      evidence apart from a mere assertion of the deception in the refusal.


   6. However, the Judge noted that the appellant  did  not  give  any  oral
      evidence. His statement  produced  at  the  appeal  hearing  where  he
      asserted  that  the  bank  statement  furnished   was   genuine,   was
      accordingly not able to be challenged  by  the  respondent  in  cross-
      examination  [24].  The  appellant  provided  no  further  documentary
      evidence to show that he had funds for the consecutive  28  days.  The
      Judge  stated  that  although  the  respondent  had  not   established
      deception "doubts  as  to  the  appellant's  bank  statement  remain."
      Accordingly he went on to find that the appellant had not  established
      that he met the requirements of the rule with regard to maintenance.


   7. On 5th September 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on the basis that it was arguable  that
      adequate reasons for the Tribunal's decision had not  been  given:  MK
      (Duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC).


   8. Mr Murphy who did not represent the appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal,  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  in  support  of   the
      application for permission.


   9. He submitted that the sole reason relied on in  the  refusal  decision
      dated 20th December 2013 was that the appellant  failed  to  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 245ZX(a) because his  application  fell  for
      refusal under paragraph 322(1A).


  10. There were no other grounds of refusal. Once the Tribunal  found  that
      the respondent failed to discharge the burden resting on her  relating
      to the alleged deception, "the appellant's application is complete  as
      the statements which were incorrectly considered as  fraudulent  would
      now be considered."


  11. Thus the sole basis for not awarding the ten points for maintenance no
      longer existed and he met the requirements for the grant of leave.


  12. The contention by the Judge that  there  are  "doubts  over  the  bank
      statement" is not supported by  any  reasoning.  Proper  reasons  were
      required for such a finding. No reasons had been given to  doubt  that
      the bank statement was  genuine  and  accordingly  the  appellant  was
      entitled to be awarded points for maintenance.


  13. The bank statement for the relevant 28 day period  had  been  produced
      before the First-tier Tribunal. It was also produced before the  Upper
      Tribunal.


  14. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Kenny sought to adduce  evidence  that
      had not been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  regard  to  the
      impugned statement. She relied on the application submitted as part of
      the Rule 24 response, dated 15th  September  2014.  It  is  stated  at
      paragraph 6 that the respondent would seek to  rely  on  the  document
      verification report and associated documentation at a re-hearing.  She
      made no further submissions.


  15. Ms Kenny referred to the accompanying  letter,  where  the  respondent
      sought to submit three pieces  of  evidence  for  consideration.  That
      evidence consisted of the request for  document  verification  by  the
      Home Office (in respect of the impugned  bank  statement),  the  email
      correspondence between the FCO  and  the  appellant's  bank,  and  the
      document verification report provided to the Home Office.


  16. It is asserted that the appellant's case was one of those chosen to be
      managed under the new electronic system of paperless file  management.
      "Unfortunately, there were problems  in  ensuring  that  all  relevant
      documents had been scanned to the Home Office database."  Accordingly,
      the respondent's bundle did not contain all the relevant documents  on
      which the respondent relies.


  17.  Mr  Parkinson,  who  has  made  the  application  on  behalf  of  the
      respondent, stated that he only became aware of the problem  'the  day
      before'.  (That would have been on or about the 14th September  2014).
      He then took immediate action to rectify the deficit.


  18. The evidence produced was the overseas request form. The  document  to
      be verified, namely the bank statement, was identified.


  19. It is stated that the bank letter and the statement were forwarded  to
      the "concerned bank" for verification via email. The bank, via  return
      email, confirmed that the documents submitted are "fake".


  20. In the email sent in reply, it is  simply  stated  that  the  attached
      documents are found "fake".


  21. In the document verification report it is claimed  that  the  document
      was false. However, the basis for  that  claim  is  not  set  out.  In
      particular, there is no further detain or analysis  or  assessment  by
      the verifying officer as to why it is said to be false.


  22. Mr  Murphy  opposed  the  application  to  adduce  this  evidence.  He
      submitted  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  meet  the  relevant
      requirements for its admissibility pursuant to paragraph 15(2A) of the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


  23. I refused the respondent's attempts to adduce this evidence. There has
      been no explanation as to why it was not submitted to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. As indicated, the respondent was represented at the hearing.
      The evidence, such as it is, was available in December 2013.


  24. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, on 3rd  July  2014,  no
      attempt had been made by the respondent at that stage to  adduce  that
      evidence. Nor has any explanation been given as to why  it  could  not
      have been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal timeously.   There  has
      accordingly been unreasonable delay in producing that evidence.


  25. In any event, the basis upon which the document is said to be  "false"
      or "fake" has not been given. There continues to be a mere  assertion.
      Accordingly, even if admitted, the statement would not be  treated  as
      forged by a Tribunal as there was no clear evidence before it. A  bare
      allegation of forgery, or an assertion by an entry  clearance  officer
      that he believed that the document was forged, could not carry weight:
      RP (Proof of Forgery) Nigeria [2-6] UKAIT 00086.


      Assessment


  26. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to give  any  reasons
      for the doubts that he stated remained  as  to  the  appellant's  bank
      statement [24].  Proper reasons for that finding  must  be  given.  In
      this case no reasons at all were given to support  that  finding.  The
      bank statement relied on was produced and it showed that the appellant
      had funds available for the necessary consecutive 28 days.


  27. I accordingly find that there has been a material error of law  and  I
      set aside the decision and re-make it.


  28. The only reason for refusing the appellant's application was  that  he
      failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(a) as it  had  been
      refused under  paragraph  322(1A),  namely  that  the  bank  statement
      concerned had been forged.


  29. The Judge's finding that the respondent had failed  to  discharge  the
      burden of proof in that  regard  has  not  been  the  subject  of  any
      challenge.


  30. There were no other grounds of refusal. The appellant had contended in
      his  witness  statement  that  the  bank  statement  was  genuine  and
      authentic. That statement was produced and showed the necessary  funds
      were available for the consecutive 28 days required.


  31. I accordingly find that the  appellant  was  entitled  to  be  awarded
      points for maintenance under Appendix C.


     Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. I re-make the decision and substitute for  it
      the following decision:


      The appeal of the appellant is allowed.


      No anonymity order made











                               Signed                 Date:  28/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




