
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03309/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent    |Decision & Reasons                |
|On 24th April 2016                        |On 26th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                mr SHERAZ ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Lorraine Barton (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Andy McVeety (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge G D Tobin, promulgated on 1st July 2015, following a  hearing  at
    Manchester on  23rd  April  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Sheraz  Ali,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  25th
    May 1984.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  Secretary
    of  State,  dated  3rd  December  2014,  refusing  his   refusing   his
    application for a residence card as the extended family  member  of  an
    EEA national under Regulations 8(1) and 8(2) of the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that, having entered the UK on 7th  May  2011,
    and then seeking leave to remain as a student, which  was  granted,  he
    claims to have married a Mrs Adrienn Balog,  a  Hungarian  national  in
    December 2012, but that after that his EEA  residence  application  was
    refused on 23rd September 2013, because the marriage had  broken  down.
    He is now dependent upon his EEA national Sponsor, a cousin.

The Refusal Letter

 4. The refusal letter makes the point that the Appellant had not submitted
    any evidence of his dependency on his EEA national Sponsor at any time,
    either in Pakistan or in the United Kingdom.  He had not  provided  any
    evidence that he was dependent on his EEA national Sponsor  immediately
    prior to entering the United Kingdom.  In fact, when on 17th April 2011
    he was issued with entry clearance to come to the UK as a  student,  he
    made no mention whatsoever of the fact that he was dependent  upon  his
    Sponsor.  As for his claimed dependency, the only evidence that he  had
    submitted was one letter from the NHS Blood Transplant that is  undated
    as evidence that he is dependent upon his EEA sponsoring cousin.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge dismissed the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was simply not credible when taken  in  conjunction  with  the
    evidence of his Sponsor.  The judge observed how,

         "The Appellant grew up living with his father, mother and  siblings
         in Pakistan.  The Appellant's father owned a very large house  with
         his brother (i.e. the Appellant's other  uncle).   The  Appellant's
         father and uncle appeared to have  well  paid  government  jobs  in
         Pakistan and a very large  house,  sufficient  to  accommodate  two
         large families.  The Appellant said that prior to leaving Pakistan,
         he was financially supported by his Sponsor who lived initially  in
         Belgium and then in the UK.  There is no  documentary  evidence  to
         corroborate this and the Sponsor was not in particularly well  paid
         employment, so I do not accept that this was the case".  (Paragraph
         13)

 6. The judge then went on to record how the Appellant had moved to the  UK
    and initially lived with his uncle, met his wife who was Hungarian, and
    married her and applied for a residence card but  his  application  was
    rejected because "he was not  in  a  genuine,  substantive  or  durable
    relationship" (paragraph 14).

 7. The judge went on to  observe  how  "the  Appellant's  Sponsor  was  in
    relatively modest accommodation and  the  Appellant's  account  of  his
    living arrangements with his Sponsor is not credible" (paragraph 15).

 8. The judge added with the conclusion that, "I do  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was financially dependent on his EEA national Sponsor  either
    in Pakistan or the United Kingdom" (paragraph 16).

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the adverse credibility  findings
    were not open to the judge and the judge was wrong to have concluded as
    he did.

11. On 12th December 2015, the Upper Tribunal  granted  permission  on  the
    basis that "The judge may have erred by failing to set out  anywhere  a
    summary of the evidence heard" and that "the reader should be  able  to
    fully understand the claim".

12. On 20th January 2016, a robust Rule 24  response  was  entered  by  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.  It made the following  points.   First,
    the judge did set out reasons for the refusal and previous refusals  at
    paragraphs 2 to 5 of the determination.  Second, the judge did set  out
    the case  for  governing  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA  Regulations  (at
    paragraphs 10 to 12).  Third, the judge did assess the  credibility  of
    the appeal as is clear from paragraphs 13 to 17 of  the  determination.
    Finally, the case law does make it clear that Article 8 is not arguable
    in EEA Regulation appeals.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 24th May  2016,  Ms  Barton,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant submitted that the judge's determination failed
    to set  out  a  summary  of  the  evidence  heard.   The  judge's  core
    conclusions are set out at paragraph 13  but  these  were  without  the
    evidence being described.

14. Second, the judge had had regard to irrelevant  circumstances  when  he
    stated that the Appellant had married a Hungarian national by the  name
    of Adrienn Balog but, "I  do  not  accept  that  this  was  a  genuine,
    substantive or durable relationship" (paragraph 14) as this was  not  a
    live issue before the judge.

15. Third, Ms Barton also applied under Rule 15(2)(A) for new  evidence  to
    be submitted before this Tribunal.  Mr McVeety, appearing on behalf  of
    the Respondent Secretary of State, opposed it  vehemently.   Ms  Barton
    submitted that this evidence showed the degree and extent of dependency
    that the Appellant had upon his Sponsor in the United Kingdom.  On this
    basis it was open to this Tribunal, and well within its discretion,  to
    allow consideration of this evidence.  Mr  McVeety  replied  that  Rule
    15(2)(A) cannot be used  to  go  behind  a  judge's  determination,  by
    producing evidence, which could  have  been  produced  earlier,  unless
    there is a proper explanation as to why that evidence  could  not  have
    been produced.  Ms Barton explained that the fact  that  her  solicitor
    had not been able to provide her with a reason, and  that  she  herself
    was unable to provide this Tribunal with a reason, was not a basis  for
    prejudicing the Appellant such that this Tribunal "should not put  this
    Appellant on the back foot".

16. I disagree.  Rule 15 is not a licence  for  litigants  to  undermine  a
    judicial Tribunal's decision, on the basis of evidence, which could and
    should have been put before that Tribunal, but  was  not,  without  any
    adequate explanation whatsoever being  proffered.   That  is  the  case
    here.  I have no hesitation in rejecting that evidence.   I  apply  the
    overriding principle and conclude that  this  evidence  should  not  be
    considered.

17. Ms Barton went on to explain that the judge was wrong to conclude  that
    the Appellant was not credible because he gave no reasons for this.  Mr
    McVeety in his submissions replied that reasons were given.  It  simply
    was not credible that an Appellant, described by the  judge  as  coming
    from a wealthy family in Pakistan,  with  a  large  house,  and  people
    holding government jobs, should find it necessary to  become  dependent
    upon a market worker in the UK  with  no  evidence  being  provided  in
    support.

18. As for Ms Barton's submission that the judge had regard  to  irrelevant
    considerations by referring to the fact that the  Appellant's  marriage
    with Ms Adrienn Balog  was  not  a  genuine,  substantive  and  durable
    relationship,  this  was  not  an  irrelevant  consideration   as   the
    application to remain on the basis of a marriage  to  an  EEA  national
    failed precisely because the marriage did not come up to proof  in  the
    very part by the Regulations.

No Error of Law

19.  I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  did  not
    amount to the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)
    of TCE 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   It  was  made
    clear in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 341 that,

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have  won  or  lost"  (per
         Haddon-Cave J).

20. This is precisely the case here.  There is no requirement that a  judge
    should set out a summary of the evidence.  However, even  if  that  was
    the case, it is plain that the judge does precisely this  at  paragraph
    13 when he begins that, "The evidence of the Appellant and the  Sponsor
    (i.e. the Appellant's uncle) was not credible...".  The judge then sets
    out in detail the position.  In the same paragraph  the  judge  records
    that, "The Appellant said  that  prior  to  leaving  Pakistan,  he  was
    financially supported by his Sponsor who lived initially in Belgium and
    then in the UK.   There  is  no  documentary  evidence  to  corroborate
    this...." (paragraph 13).

21. That is exactly in conformity with the refusal  letter  which  observes
    that "The only evidence that you have submitted as  evidence  that  you
    reside with  your  EEA  Sponsor  is  one  letter  from  NHS  Blood  and
    Transplant that is undated".  It is completely in conformity  with  the
    conclusion that, "You have not provided any evidence of your dependency
    on your EEA national Sponsor at any time, either in Pakistan or in  the
    United Kingdom".

22. Moreover, it cannot  be  a  matter  of  irrelevance  that  this  is  an
    Appellant who had tried a number of means and methods to remain in  the
    UK, arriving first as a student, on which occasion he made  no  mention
    whatsoever of the fact that he was dependent upon his UK Sponsor in any
    way, before getting married to a Hungarian national, in what turned out
    to be a futile attempt to remain in the UK, and only then  in  apparent
    desperation putting in a claim  that  he  was  dependent  upon  his  UK
    Sponsor, but which  was  wholly  unsubstantiated  with  any  supporting
    evidence, until an application was made  today  under  Rule  15  by  Ms
    Barton for further matters to be considered by this Tribunal.

23. This is simply not tenable.  The claim is devoid  of  any  merit.   The
    determination by Judge G D Tobin is meticulous, as it is measured,  and
    provides reasons for refusal, and an analysis of  the  applicable  case
    law, and the recital of the evidence heard, together with  the  reasons
    for its rejection.  There is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

25. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd July 2016

