
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03750/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 18 February 2015                          |On 23 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                            Mr MD Shoriful Islam
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith of Counsel, instructed by SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Napthine promulgated on 29  July  2014  dismissing  the  appeal  of  Mr
    Shoriful Islam against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department dated 2 January 2014 to refuse variation  of  leave  to
    remain and to issue removal directions pursuant to Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.



Background

2.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 21 October 1990.   He
    was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  based  on  a  successful
    application for entry clearance made on  19  June  2011  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant to study with the  City  of  London  Business
    College.   He  entered  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  that  entry
    clearance on 12 July 2011 with leave valid until 30 September 2013.

3.   On 30 September 2013 he  made  an  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant.   That  application  was
    refused for reasons set out  in  the  combined  'reasons  for  refusal'
    letter and Notice of  Immigration  Decision  of  2  January  2014  with
    reference to in particular paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv) and paragraph  322(3)
    of the Immigration Rules.

4.   The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal for reasons set out in his decision.

5.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chambers  on  18  September  2014,  but
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on 18 December 2014.

6.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 9 January 2015.

Consideration

7.   The basis of the Respondent's refusal of  the  Appellant's  application
    was that the Appellant was considered to be in breach of the conditions
    of his leave in that he had pursued studies for which he was  not  duly
    authorised and were otherwise not permitted.  This, it was said, was  a
    breach of the condition imposed pursuant to Rule  245ZW(c)(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Respondent otherwise awarded the Appellant  the
    points  that  he  claimed  both  in   respect   of   'Attributes'   and
    'Maintenance' under the Points-Based System.  However,  the  Respondent
    relied upon the perceived breach of  condition  in  invoking  paragraph
    322(3) of the Rules.

8.   The relevant parts of paragraph 322 are as follows:

         "322. In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension  of  stay
         set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following provisions apply
         in relation to the refusal of an application for leave  to  remain,
         variation of leave to enter or remain or,  where  appropriate,  the
         curtailment of leave."

         There is then a subheading "Grounds on which leave  to  remain  and
         variation of leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  to
         be refused" and there then follow a number of  subparagraphs  which
         are  not  applicable  in  this  case.   There  is  then  a  further
         subheading "Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave
         to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  should  normally  be
         refused" under which subparagraph  (3)  appears  in  the  following
         terms:

         "(3) failure to comply with any conditions attached to the grant of
         leave to enter or remain".

9.    It  may  be  seen,  therefore,  that  paragraph  322(3)   provides   a
    discretionary basis for refusal as opposed to a mandatory basis.

10.  The Respondent's concerns in this particular case arose  by  reason  of
    the Appellant providing documents in support  of  his  application  for
    variation of leave to  remain  which  indicated  that  in  addition  to
    completing three units from the City of London Business  College  at  a
    level 5 HND Diploma in Business  Management,  the  Appellant  had  also
    secured a level 5 Diploma  in  Management  from  the  London  Guildhall
    College.  It is in respect of  the  studies  at  the  London  Guildhall
    College that the Respondent asserted that the Appellant was  in  breach
    of the conditions of his leave.

11.  On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant  essentially  argued
    that this was a supplementary course and was  thereby  permitted  under
    paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv)(3) and not a breach.  The relevant Rules  are  a
    matter of public record and it is unnecessary for me to set them out in
    any further detail here save to quote the terms of sub-sub-subparagraph
    (3) which comprises the words "supplementary study".

12.  In my judgment it is clear that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  a
    number of material errors  in  his  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal. The following matters are fundamental.

     (1) He misdirected himself on  the  burden  of  proof  in  respect  of
         paragraph 322(3).  At paragraph 4 of the  determination  the  Judge
         states "The burden of proof is on the  Appellant  to  show  on  the
         balance of probabilities that all the requirements laid down for  a
         Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  in  the  Immigration  Rules  are
         fulfilled.  Those requirements are set out  in  the  'Decision  and
         Reasons'."  That, as a simple statement, is accurate.  However, the
         Appellant had  demonstrated,  and  it  had  been  accepted  by  the
         Respondent  that  he  had  demonstrated,  that  he  did  meet   the
         requirements under the Rules for a Tier 4 Student Migrant  -  which
         was recognised in that he  was  awarded  the  points  that  he  had
         claimed.  Paragraph 4 in which the judge is setting out  his  self-
         direction as to the burden of proof  disregards  paragraph  322(3),
         and thereby fails to identify that the burden in that regard was on
         the Secretary of State.  In my judgment this is reinforced by  what
         is said at paragraph 18 of the Judge's decision, where  he  states:
         "On the totality  of  the  evidence  before  me  I  find  that  the
         Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof...".

     (2) The Judge erred in failing to recognise that paragraph 322(3)  was
         discretionary and  that  the  Respondent  had  not  exercised  such
         discretion.  No reference is made to the discretion at all  in  the
         body of the Judge's decision, and insofar as  paragraph  322(3)  is
         referred to it is set  out  incompletely  at  paragraph  7  of  the
         decision.

    (3)  The Judge misdirected himself as to the admissibility of evidence.
          At paragraph 8 of the decision the Judge  had  regard  to  section
         85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He set
         out subSection A:

             "The Tribunal may consider evidence adduced by  the  appellant
             only if it -

             (a)  was submitted in support of and at the time of making the
                  application to which the immigration decision related."

         This was to disregard the  provision  of  section  85A(4)(d)  which
         makes an exception in the following terms:

              "The Tribunal may consider evidence adduced by the  appellant
             only if it -

             (d)  is adduced in connection with the  Secretary  of  State's
                  reliance on  a  discretion  under  Immigration  Rules,  or
                  compliance with a requirement  of  Immigration  Rules,  to
                  refuse an  application  on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                  acquisition of points under the points-based system."

         That  provision  was  applicable  in  the  circumstances   of   the
         Appellant's case.  The Secretary of State's invocation of paragraph
         322(3) was not a matter that related to the acquisition of  points,
         the Appellant having in fact been successful in securing the points
         claimed.

13.  It is clear that this latter error was a material error in that it  led
    to the Judge failing to have  regard  to  documents  presented  by  the
    Appellant in support of his appeal - in particular at pages 15  and  16
    of the Appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle.  These were letters from
    each of the institutions at which the Appellant had been studying.   In
    respect of the City of London Business College (which had in the course
    of the the Appellant's studies become merged with another  college  and
    changed its name to Blake Hall College with no material  difference  in
    terms of the issues in this appeal), in a letter dated 28 January  2014
    that institution indicated that the Appellant had  continued  with  his
    course "without interruption" and had been "a full-time student".   The
    other letter, a letter from  the  London  Guildhall  College  dated  13
    February 2014, refers to the Appellant being enrolled  at  the  college
    "on a part-time basis".  It is also stated  in  that  letter  that  the
    Appellant "completed his studies on a supplementary basis with us".

14.  Ms Smith underscores the significance of  this  latter  observation  in
    the context of the London Guildhall College  being  a  'highly  trusted
    sponsor', and so to be presumed to be aware of the  restrictions  under
    the Rules in respect of the conditions imposed on the grant of leave of
    a Tier 4 Student holding a CAS from a particular institution.   Whether
    or not that point is sound is perhaps not the issue.   The  real  issue
    here is that the Judge did not give any consideration to these  matters
    because he had wrongly excluded from consideration the letters to which
    I have just referred.

15.  In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal Judge also  misdirected  himself
    in failing to have regard to or otherwise obviously apply the  language
    of paragraph 245ZW(c)(iv)(3).  As already indicated the relevant phrase
    there is 'supplementary study'.  The Judge, however, repeatedly  refers
    to 'subsidiary' study, and indeed at paragraph 14 it is  apparent  that
    the Judge considered this to be material in that he had regard  to  the
    different levels, at least in his  perception,  of  the  qualifications
    obtained by the Appellant from the two institutions  at  which  he  had
    been studying.

16.  There is no basis to consider that  the  phrase  'supplementary'  would
    prevent some form of study at  a  similar  or  higher  level  from  the
    principal study.  Such a conclusion could not to be  derived  from  the
    normal meaning of the words used, or indeed from anything in the IDIs -
    the relevant extracts of which were before the First-tier Tribunal.

17.  In any event in this regard it seems that the Judge may have  proceeded
    under a factual misconception in that at paragraph 14 in referring to a
    higher level of qualification at the Guildhall,  and  in  paragraph  11
    referring to a level 4 BTEC from the City of London  Business  College,
    the Judge appears to have disregarded the  evidence  that  demonstrates
    that the Appellant's study at the City of London Business  College  was
    in respect of a level 5 qualification.

18.  In all those circumstances there are significant material  errors  such
    that in my judgment the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set
    aside.

Re-making the decision

19.  I turn then to a consideration of remaking the decision in the  appeal.
     As already observed, paragraph 322(3) if applicable  is  discretionary
    and in those circumstances I have given some thought to remitting  this
    appeal to the Respondent simply on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law  because  no  reference  is
    made in the decision letter to the element of discretion.

20.  However, as also observed above, the burden  is  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to establish the due engagement of paragraph 322(3) in the  first
    place.   In  this  regard  there  is  no  particularisation   or   even
    recognition of subparagraph 245ZW(c)(iv)(3) in the decision letter of 2
    January 2014.  To that end there is no engagement by the  Secretary  of
    State with the issue of whether or not studies at the London  Guildhall
    College could be considered to be supplementary study or not.

21.  As the evidence emerged before the First-tier Tribunal and  during  the
    course of the discussions today it seems that the only  possible  basis
    upon which it might be said  that  the  Appellant's  studies  were  not
    'supplementary' was if they had hindered his progress.  In this context
    I have in mind the provisions of the IDIs - the Tier 4 policy  guidance
    version 03/2013 was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  states  the
    following at paragraph 308:

         "You are allowed to do  a  supplementary  course,  for  example  an
         evening class,  as  well  as  your  main  course  of  study.   This
         supplementary course can be in any subject and  does  not  have  to
         relate to your main course of study.  You do  not  need  permission
         from us to  undertake  a  supplementary  course  and  you  are  not
         required to tell your Tier 4 sponsor.  However, you must make  sure
         that your supplementary course does not  in  any  way  hinder  your
         progress on your main course of studies."

22.  The question of hindrance potentially arises in circumstances where  in
    the event the Appellant completed three units of his level 5 diploma at
    the City of London Business College, yet completed in its entirety  the
    level 5 diploma at  the  London  Guildhall.   This  potentially  points
    raises an issue as to whether the Appellant failed to complete  all  of
    the requisite units at the City of London Business College  because  he
    was distracted by his studies elsewhere.

23.  However, this is not a matter to which the Respondent's  decision-maker
    had any regard.  As I have already observed, the decision-maker has not
    averted to subparagraph 245ZW(c)(iv)(3) at all.  It seems to me that it
    would be inappropriate for the appeal process to be used, as  it  were,
    for a 'fishing expedition' into the Appellant's studies to see  whether
    that provision might be engaged.  It  is  for  the  Respondent  in  the
    decision to make it clear as to the basis of the decision. On the facts
    here,  the  Respondent  has  not  made  it  clear  on  what  basis  the
    Appellant's additional study ran contrary to the  restrictions  imposed
    on his leave, and has not otherwise in any event  made  it  clear  why,
    even if there were a relevant  breach  of  conditions,  the  discretion
    under 322(3) should have been exercised against the Appellant.

24.  In all those circumstances in my judgment the Secretary  of  State  has
    failed to discharge the burden of proof both to  show  that  322(3)  is
    engaged or, if it is, why  the  discretion  therein  should  have  been
    exercised against the Appellant, who otherwise scored sufficient points
    to support his Tier 4 application.  The Secretary of  State's  decision
    was not in accordance with the Rules and the appeal is  to  be  allowed
    accordingly.

Notice of Decision

25.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  material
    errors of law and is set aside.

26.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is allowed.

27.  No anonymity direction is made.

    The above represents a corrected transcript of an  ex-tempore  decision
    given at the hearing on 18 February 2015.



Signed        Date: 21 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid,  I  have
considered making a fee award.  Mr  Nath  has  not  sought  to  advance  any
submission as to why a full fee award should not be made given the basis  of
the decision on the appeal now made. Accordingly I make a full award of  the
fee paid by the Appellant.

Signed        Date: 21 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
