

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03285/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th November 2013                         |On 28th November 2013        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                          The Hon. MRS JUSTICE LANG
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     T A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lingajothy of Linga & Co. solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent appeals against  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Immigration Judge Seifert) promulgated on  5th  August  2013.
    The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction  because  of  the
    medical evidence, which we continue in respect of our determination.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, whose date of  birth  is  21st
    February 1984.  He applied for a residence card under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("EEA Regulations  2006")  on
    the basis that he was an extended family member of his aunt, Mrs S S.

 3. On 19th December 2012, the Respondent refused  his  application  for  a
    residence card under regulation 17(4), on the basis that he was not  an
    extended family member within the meaning of reg.  8,  EEA  Regulations
    2006.   The Appellant appealed against that decision.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal made careful and full findings of fact, on  the
    evidence before it.  It held that the Appellant met the requirements of
    reg. 8(2), in that he was Mrs S's nephew; he had  been  dependent  upon
    her, and lived as part of her household in Sri Lanka; and he  continued
    to be dependent on her and live as part of her household in the UK. The
    Respondent did not challenge this finding.

 5.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  held  that  the  Appellant  met   the
    requirements of reg. 8(3), in that  he  was  Mrs  S's  nephew,  and  on
    serious mental health grounds, he strictly required her personal care.

 6. The Respondent's first ground of appeal was that,  in  concluding  that
    the Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  reg.  8(3),  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to have regard to the case of TR [2008] UKAIT 00004.

 7. We consider this ground of appeal has no merit. It is apparent from the
    determination that the First-tier Tribunal correctly set out  the  test
    under reg. 8(3).  The Respondent's presenting officer drew the  Judge's
    attention to the precise wording and submitted  that  it  was  a  "high
    test".  The Judge was not required to  cite  the  case  of  TR  in  her
    determination.  She concluded that the test was met in this case, based
    on the medical reports and the evidence from  Mrs  S.   Her  conclusion
    does not disclose any error of law.

 8. The Respondent's second ground of appeal was that, once the  First-tier
    Tribunal had decided that the Appellant was an extended  family  member
    within the meaning of reg.8(2)  or  (3),  the  application  had  to  be
    remitted back to the Respondent to make a decision  under  reg.  17(4).
    The First-tier Tribunal purported to allow the appeal  against  refusal
    of a residence card under the EEA Regulations 2006, which  it  did  not
    have power to do, as a final decision under reg. 17(4) had not yet been
    made by the Respondent.

 9. In Aladeselu v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 144, the Court of Appeal said (per Richards LJ at [52]):

         "a finding that an applicant comes within  regulation  8  does  not
         confer on him any substantive right  to  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom. Whether to grant a residence card is a matter for decision
         by the Secretary of State in the exercise  of  a  broad  discretion
         under regulation 17(4), subject to the procedural  requirements  in
         regulation 17(5). All this is underlined by the observations of the
         court in Rahman as  to  the  nature  of  the  host  Member  State's
         obligations under article 3(2) of the Directive... In  the  present
         case, .. the Secretary of State has yet to consider the applicants'
         cases pursuant to regulation 17(4) and (5).  When she does so,  she
         will have to decide whether in all  the  circumstances  it  appears
         appropriate to issue a residence card. Those circumstances will  no
         doubt include the extent of the applicants' financial and emotional
         dependency on the sponsor (though the First-tier Tribunal's limited
         finding  of  fact  in  respect  of  financial  dependency  will  be
         binding)...."


10. Applying Aladeselu to this case, the Respondent should now  re-consider
    whether or not to grant a residence card under reg. 17(4), in the light
    of the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that he is an  extended  family
    member as defined in reg. 8.

11. We do not accept the Appellant's submission  that  the  Respondent  has
    already  made  a  final  decision  under  reg.  17(4).   Although   the
    Respondent's letter of 19th December 2012 was  a  refusal  to  grant  a
    residence card under reg. 17(4), it is clear that the sole basis of the
    decision was that the Appellant was not an extended  family  member  as
    defined in reg. 8.   The Respondent did not go on to consider  whether,
    if the Appellant was an extended family member, she would exercise  her
    discretion under reg. 17(4) to grant him a residence card.

12. Having carefully considered the First-tier Tribunal's determination, we
    have concluded that it only ruled in respect of reg. 8.   At  no  stage
    did it purport to make any ruling in respect of reg.  17(4),  or  state
    that the Appellant was now entitled to a residence card.  The basis  of
    the Respondent's decision to refuse a residence card was set out  fully
    and accurately.  Therefore, the First-tier Tribunal in  this  case  did
    not exceed its proper remit. Unlike the First-tier Tribunal in the case
    of Ihemedu [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC)  which  formally  (and  erroneously)
    decided that the appellant was "entitled to a residence card".

13. We do however accept that the First-tier Tribunal made a material error
    of law in the drafting of its formal "Decision",  at  the  end  of  its
    determination, when it stated "Appeal  allowed  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006".  This  did  not  adequately
    reflect the determination which had  been  made,  because  it  was  not
    expressly limited to reg. 8, and did not remit the application  to  the
    Respondent for re-consideration.  On this limited basis, we  allow  the
    Respondent's appeal. Therefore we set aside the decision and re-make it
    in the same terms as the First-tier Tribunal,  save  that  the  section
    headed "Decision" will be replaced in the following terms:

         "The appeal is allowed as  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  grant  a
         residence card on the basis that the Appellant was not an  extended
         family  member  within  the  definition  of  reg.  8,   Immigration
         (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  was  not   made   in
         accordance  with  the  law.   The  Appellant's  application  for  a
         residence card be remitted to the Respondent for re-consideration.

14. Finally, in our view, the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  decision  in
    relation to Art. 8 ECHR, and therefore there  is  no  decision  against
    which the Respondent can appeal.   The appeal was not allowed under Art
    8; it was not referred to in the formal "Decision" at the  end  of  the
    determination.  In paragraph 59, it merely set out its  views  on  what
    its decision on Art. 8 would have been, if it had reached  a  different
    conclusion in relation to reg. 8.  We note that the Court of Appeal  in
    Aladeselu made no criticism of the Tribunal for making observations  on
    the merits of the appellant's claim, on factors which could be relevant
    to the Respondent's exercise of discretion.

     DECISION

    Appeal allowed.  The First-tier Tribunal made an error on a point of
    law and we re-make the decision, in the same terms as the original
    determination, save that the formal  'Decision' will be in the
    following terms:


         The appeal is allowed  as  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  grant  a
         residence card on the basis that the Appellant was not an  extended
         family  member  within  the  definition  of  reg.  8,   Immigration
         (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  was  not   made   in
         accordance  with  the  law.   The  Appellant's  application  for  a
         residence card be remitted to the Respondent for re-consideration.






                                                            MRS JUSTICE LANG
                                                             06 January 2014






