
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03768/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 25 February 2015                           |On 6 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                              MR YUNUS KORKMAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel instructed by Kuddus Kamal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Turkey and his date of birth  is  6  June
    1988.  He made an application on 13 June 2013 for leave  to  remain  to
    establish himself in business  pursuant  to  Rule  21  of  HC  510  (in
    accordance with the  Turkey-European  Community  Association  Agreement
    Standstill Clause).

2.   The appellant's case is that he intends to become  a  business  partner
    with Mr Kelleci in an existing business, MK Barbers.  He has  funds  to
    invest in the business from the sale of motor vehicles and he  has  the
    necessary skills in order to work as a barber namely a kalfalik belgesi
    which is a pre-master certificate.

3.   The application was made under paragraph 21 of HC 510.  These were  the
    Immigration Rules that were  in  force  in  1973.   Under  the  Turkey-
    European  Community  Association  Agreement  the  UK  may  not   impose
    conditions for business applicants less favourable than those in  force
    in 1973.  Paragraph 21 of HC 510 reads as follows:

         "People admitted as visitors may  apply  for  the  consent  of  the
         Secretary of State to their establishing themselves  here  for  the
         purpose of setting up in business, whether on their own account  or
         as partners in a new or existing business.  Any such application is
         to be considered on merit.  Permission will depend on a  number  of
         factors, including evidence that the  applicant  will  be  devoting
         assets of his own to the business, proportional to his interest  in
         it, that he will be able to bear his share of any  liabilities  the
         business may incur, and that his  share  of  its  profits  will  be
         sufficient to support him and any dependants.  The applicant's part
         in the business must not amount to  disguised  employment,  and  it
         must be clear that he will not  have  to  supplement  his  business
         activities by employment for  which  a  work  permit  is  required.
         Where the applicant intends to join an existing  business,  account
         should be produced to establish its  financial  position,  together
         with a written statement of the terms on which he is to enter into;
         evidence should be sought that he will be actively  concerned  with
         its running and that there is a genuine need for his  services  and
         investment.  Where the application is granted the applicant's  stay
         may be extended for a period of up to twelve months, on a condition
         restricting his freedom to take employment.  A person admitted as a
         business man in the first instant may  be  granted  an  appropriate
         extension of stay  if  the  conditions  set  out  above  are  still
         satisfied at the end of  the  period  for  which  he  was  admitted
         initially."

4.   The application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of
    8 January 2011.  The appellant appealed and his appeal was dismissed by
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Oxlade  in  a  decision  that  was
    promulgated on 17 July 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on 18 November 2014.  The matter  came  before
    me on 7 January 2015 when I found that the judge had  made  a  material
    error of law and I set aside the decision to allow the appeal.  A  copy
    of my  decision  is  annexed  to  this  decision.  It  can  be  briefly
    summarised. At the hearing the judge  raised  an  issue  that  was  not
    raised by the respondent. This was that there was no evidence  that  MK
    Barbers is an established  business.   The  judge  did  not  take  into
    account material evidence  which  established  that  the  business  was
    established. The judge raised the issue but refused to  admit  evidence
    produced by the appellant on the point.

5.   I adjourned the matter and made directions.  The  matter  was  relisted
    before me on 25 February 2015.  The Secretary of State  had  failed  to
    comply with the directions and I proceeded on the basis that there  was
    no other issue taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  other  than  those
    explicitly raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  Those issues  are
    whether or not the appellant has the necessary skills  and  whether  or
    not there has been a transfer of funds  into  the  appellant's  account
    from a third party, Huseyin  Gundogdu.   There  is  also  an  issue  in
    relation to the timing of the application. Both parties agreed that the
    hearing could proceed by way of submissions only.

The Appellant's Evidence

6.   The appellant's evidence is contained in his witness  statement  of  27
    March 2014 and can be summarised.

7.   The appellant came to the UK as a visitor however when he was  here  he
    met Mehmet Kelleci and realised that there was an opportunity to  start
    a hairdressing business. Mr Kelleci is the owner  of  MK  Barbers.   It
    took the appellant some time to prepare an application. Many barbers in
    Turkey work having been issued with a kalfalik belgesi  (a  certificate
    of pre-master) issued by the Ministry of Education. Mehmet Kelleci, had
    a barber's business in Turkey having  been  issued  with  one.  In  any
    event, the appellant has obtained further  hairdressing  qualifications
    from the Barber Academy in the UK.

The Evidence of Mehmet Kelleci

8.   Mehmet Kelleci's evidence is contained in his witness  statement  of  3
    April 2014 and can be summarised.

9.   Many barbers operate in Turkey  having  been  issued  with  a  kalfalik
    belgesi.  Mr Kelleci ran a barber's  shop  with  the  same  in  Turkey.
    Mr Kelleci wrote a  letter  which  was  submitted  in  support  of  the
    application in which he asserts he owns his own barber's shop which  is
    trading in the name of MK Barbers in Dalston, London and he  wished  to
    take the  appellant  as  a  business  partner.   The  appellant  is  an
    experienced barber and will be investing funds in his business.

Other Evidence

10.  There is a letter from Barber Academy National which is  undated.   The
    author is D Reynolds and asserts that the appellant has great barbering
    skills and shaving skills and that they have observed his skills.

11.  There is a letter from Huseyin Gundogdu of 2 April 2014.  The  original
    letter is in Turkish and it has been translated.  Mr  Gundogdu  asserts
    that he bought vehicles from the appellant for 32,245 Turkish lira  and
    that he paid the sum into the appellant's bank account.

12.  There is a letter from the appellant's father Mr  Bekir  Korkmaz.   The
    original was in Turkish and it has been translated.  Mr Korkmaz asserts
    that he sold the appellant's cars for him to Mr Huseyin Gundogdu.

13.  There is a short statement from Mr Yildiz.  The original of this  dated
    1 April 2014 is in Turkish and  it  has  been  translated.   Mr  Yildiz
    asserts that he is the owner of a hairdressing business in  Turkey  and
    that he has a pre-master certificate.  He asserts that  in  Turkey  you
    can open such a  shop  and  run  such  a  business  with  a  pre-master
    certificate.

14.  There are a number  of  documents  relating  to  the  purchase  of  the
    vehicles, including a registration certificate relating to both a  Ford
    and a KIA vehicle.  There are tax documents relating  to  the  vehicles
    and documents from the appellant's bank in Istanbul indicating that the
    funds were put into his account and  subsequently  transferred  to  his
    account in London.

Submissions

15.  Mr Walker indicated that he relied on the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    and the issues raised therein.  It was then decided that  it  would  be
    appropriate to hear Mr Aslam's submissions first of all in light of the
    fact that Mr Walker did not have a full set of papers and had not  seen
    my decision dated 12 January 2015 until just before the hearing.

16.  Mr Aslam made submissions during which he referred me to  the  relevant
    evidence and the issues in the case.  Mr Walker then went on to concede
    that there was evidence relating to the ownership of  vehicles  and  in
    relation to the funds.  He then went  on  to  submit  that  the  issues
    raised in the Reasons for Refusal Letter fall away when considering the
    evidence as a whole.  It was clear that the Secretary of State did  not
    consider all the documentation submitted by the appellant in support of
    his application.

Findings and Reasons

17.  The appellant made the application on 13 June 2013.   He  indicated  in
    his application that  he  wished  to  work  with  Mehmet  Kelleci.   He
    submitted a draft partnership agreement and a business plan  and  other
    documents.  He submitted a second  letter  of  9  July  2013  including
    further documentation relating to MK Barbers.  There is a  letter  from
    the  appellant's  solicitors  of  11  July   2013   enclosing   further
    documentation relating to the appellant's application.

18.  There were no credibility issues raised by Mr Walker and I  accept  the
    evidence of the appellant and his witnesses.  It is very clear that the
    documents were not before the decision maker and had they  been  it  is
    likely that the application would have been granted.  The secretary  of
    state was not assisted by the  piecemeal  nature  of  the  application.
    However, the appellant's evidence including  the  documentary  evidence
    establishes on the balance of probabilities that the appellant has  the
    necessary  skills  to  trade  as  a  barber.  The  appellant   provided
    sufficient documentary evidence that he owned  vehicles  which  he  had
    sold to Mr Gundogdu and that 32,000 Turkish lira was  transferred  from
    his account in  Istanbul  to  the  account  in  London.   I  take  into
    consideration the fact that the appellant did not make his  application
    until three days before the  expiry  of  his  leave.   Considering  the
    evidence as a whole I do not find that this undermines his credibility.
    No further issues were raised by the Secretary of State.

19.  Having set aside the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal,  I  remake  it
    allowing it under the Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 5 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

