
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03101/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 October 2014                            |On 10 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR DEORAM NEETYE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Saeed, Counsel instructed by Inayat Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent whom I shall refer to as the appellant as he was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal is a citizen of Mauritius and his date of birth
    is 1 February 1952.

2.       On 18 June 2012 the appellant made an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as the dependant of his daughter. The  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision of 7 January 2013.  The
    application was considered under paragraph 317 of HC 395  and  Appendix
    FM.

3.       The appellant arrived in the UK on 9 January 2012  with  his  wife.
    They were granted entry clearance as visitors.  It was not accepted  by
    the decision maker that the appellant is mainly  financially  dependent
    on his daughter and there was no evidence  that  the  appellant's  wife
    could not look after him. It was noted by the decision maker  that  she
    had not submitted evidence of her illness. The decision maker concluded
    that the appellant had not established that he would  be  living  alone
    outside the UK in the most exceptional circumstances.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gibb  in
    a decision which was promulgated on 16 June 2014 following a hearing on
    23 May 2014. The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal by
    Upper Tribunal Goldstein on 22 September 2014.  Thus  the  matter  came
    before me.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   Judge Gibb recorded that the appellant's application  resulted  from  a
    serious stroke.  His wife did not make an application at the same  time
    because she had returned  to  Mauritius  to  attend  to  administrative
    arrangements (relating to the appellant's retirement on health  grounds
    from his job as a police officer).  She returned to  the  UK  in  April
    2013 and she then made an application as a dependent relative but  this
    was refused (under the new rules) on 11 July 2013.  She did not have  a
    right of appeal because she had extant leave.

6.   Judge Gibb made the following findings;

         27.  The more difficult issue is whether the appellant can meet the
             high  test  of  living  alone  outside  the  UK  in  the  most
             exceptional compassionate circumstances.  In  addressing  this
             question I will deal, first, with the  issue  of  whether  the
             presence of the appellant's wife would mean, in  itself,  that
             the appellant could not meet the requirement of living  alone.
             On this point I do not accept  the  submission  by  Mr  Kotas.
             There  is  nothing  in  the  relevant  IDIs  to  suggest   the
             limitation that he  proposed   The  IDIs  simply  contain  the
             following:


                       'Applications from  married  couples  should  not  be
                  refused solely on the basis that they have each  other  to
                  turn to.' [Emphasis in the original].


         28.  There is nothing here to suggest that this  should  not  apply
             where applications have not been made at the same time.   This
             is a situation where the appellant and  his  wife  arrived  as
             visitors  together.   The   circumstances   leading   to   the
             application that is the subject of this  appeal  arose,  as  a
             result of the appellant's stroke, when the  couple  were  both
             here in the UK as visitors.  The different  application  dates
             were due to the fact that the appellant's wife had  to  return
             to  Mauritius  in  order  to  deal  with  the   administrative
             consequences of the appellant's stroke.  When  this  had  been
             accomplished an application was made on her behalf  to  remain
             in the UK with her husband on the same basis.  The  fact  that
             the Immigration Rules changed in-between the two  applications
             does not appear to me to make any difference.  The simple fact
             is that the appellant and his wife,  as  a  couple,  are  both
             seeking to remain as  elderly  dependent  relatives  of  their
             daughter and son-in-law.  It has not been suggested  that  the
             IDIs are not relevant to the  appellant's  application,  which
             was to be considered under paragraph 317.  In considering  the
             assessment of the  appellant's  circumstances,  therefore,  it
             appears to me that the IDIs give clear guidance to a decision-
             maker, and that  the  appellant's  application  could  not  be
             refused solely on the basis that the application has his  wife
             to turn to.


         29.  The central issue  remains,  however.   That  is  whether  the
             appellant would  be  living  alone  in  the  most  exceptional
             compassionate  circumstances.   I  accept  that  this   is   a
             demanding and difficult test to meet.  In this case,  however,
             my view is that it has been  met.   The  appellant  is  highly
             dependent and has the need for daily care.  The position  that
             he finds himself in after the stroke is one of serious illness
             and  incapacity.   It  is  not  a  temporary  condition.   The
             unfortunate circumstances of the family dispute means that the
             appellant and his wife would be isolated.  On the basis of the
             medical  evidence  showing  the  appellant's  wife's   current
             condition it appears to me that she is not well enough to take
             on the considerable burden of caring for the  appellant  on  a
             daily basis.  The evidence establishes that there are no other
             relatives who would be able or willing to step into the breach
             and provide the sort of care that is currently being  provided
             by the appellant's daughter.  Even if the appellant's daughter
             and son-in-law were to make arrangements and provide financial
             backing for a care package in Mauritius it  therefore  appears
             to me, given the severity of the appellant's  condition,  that
             this  would  meet  the  test  of  living  alone  in  the  most
             exceptional compassionate circumstances.  Even with  the  care
             of his daughter and son-in-law, and with the benefits  of  the
             best care available in the  circumstances,  the  appellant  is
             still struggling psychologically to come  to  terms  with  the
             impact of the stroke.  If he were in a position where  he  was
             deprived of this care it appears to me that  the  consequences
             could be disastrous.  Despite the high level of  the  relevant
             test, therefore, it appears to me to be met  in  this  unusual
             and difficult case.


         30.  I understand that it was argued on the appellant's behalf that
             his wife could not be expected to go to  Mauritius  with  him.
             In my view, however, the question under  consideration,  which
             is in any event hypothetical given that the  appellant  is  in
             fact in the UK, is better considered on the hypothetical basis
             that the appellant's wife would be with him if he were  to  be
             in Mauritius.  If this was considered on the  basis  that  the
             appellant would be in Mauritius  without  his  wife  then  the
             position  is  even  more  straightforward.   Given  the  clear
             guidance in the IDIs, and the appellant's  wife's  own  health
             difficulties, the conclusion is the same whether considered on
             the basis that the appellant's wife would be with him, or not.


7.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that the Judge erred  in
    relying on the IDI  because  the  appellant's  wife  had  not  made  an
    application at the same time.  It was asserted by  the  appellant  that
    his wife had made an application for asylum but there was no record  of
    this and in these circumstances she was an overstayer and as such could
    return to Mauritius to care for her husband. He  would  not  be  living
    alone outside the UK in the most exceptional circumstances.  The  Judge
    misdirected himself when applying the  test  of  the  most  exceptional
    circumstances and he failed to provide adequate reasons.

8.   I heard oral submissions from both parties.  Mr Wilding argued that  it
    was not open to the Judge to find that the appellant's wife had made an
    application for asylum.  This was a question of fact and  there  is  no
    record of such an application having been made.  This is not a material
    error in isolation but the effect of it is that the appellant's wife is
    an overstayer who can be removed.  The Judge's approach to the IDIs was
    flawed.  The IDI refers to applications in the  plural.   The  starting
    point should have been  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  would  be
    together in  Mauritius.   These  erroneous  findings  impacted  on  the
    Judge's decision that the appellant would be living alone  outside  the
    UK in the most exceptional circumstances.  The  Judge  did  not  engage
    with the high threshold referred to by the Court of Appeal  in  Mohamed
    [2012] EWCA Civ 331.  Mr Wilding referred specifically to  paragraph  4
    which reads as follows:-

        "Put another way, is the question which the decision-maker  has  to
        answer -


         (a)  whether, but for the support provided by relatives settled  in
             the UK, the applicant would be living in the most  exceptional
             compassionate circumstances (the 'but for' test,  which  takes
             support out of the calculation), or


         (b)  whether, notwithstanding the  support  provided  by  relatives
             settled in the UK, the applicant is  already  living  in  such
             circumstances (the 'notwithstanding' test, which  incorporates
             support in the calculation)?


     Mr Wilding submitted that the correct test  adopted  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal is that in paragraph 4(b).


6.   Mr Saeed made submissions in the context of his Rule  24  response  and
    relied on the decision of KC & Ors [2007] EWCA Civ 327.

Conclusions

7.   The Judge did not an error of law.  He found that the evidence  of  the
    appellant, his wife and his daughter was credible.  The evidence before
    the Judge was that the appellant's wife had,  through  her  solicitors,
    called the respondent to inform them that she wished to  claim  asylum.
    This telephone call was made on 9 October 2013 and the solicitors  were
    still waiting for a date for a  screening  interview.   The  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal noted that  there
    was no record  of  an  asylum  application  having  been  made  on  the
    respondent's system.  The Judge did not find that  an  application  for
    asylum had been made but clearly accepted that  a  telephone  call  had
    been made and that this was the appellant's wife's intention.

8.   The Judge decided that the fact that the appellant's wife had not  made
    an application as a dependant relative at the same time as her  husband
    did not result in the IDI not applying this  case.  He  gave  full  and
    detailed reasons and for his decision which  are  consistent  with  the
    wording of the IDI. There is no requirement that the applications  have
    to be made at the same time.

9.   In  any  event,  the  above  arguments  are  not  material.  The  Judge
    considered the most  compassionate  exceptional  circumstances  in  the
    context of the appellant's wife returning with him to  Mauritius.  This
    is clear from paragraphs 29 and 30 of the determination. He found  that
    she was not well enough to take care of the appellant  because  of  her
    own ill health and that on return they would  be  isolated.  The  Judge
    considered the appeal on the basis that  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    would be together in Mauritius.  In  addition  the  Judge  applied  the
    "notwithstanding test" preferred by the Court of Appeal in Mohamed (see
    [29]). It is clear that he understood that the test is stringent.

10.  The Judge gave clear  and  coherent  reasons  why  he  found  that  the
    appellant met the test  having  properly  directed  himself.  There  is
    nothing irrational or perverse about the conclusion.  The  grounds  are
    an attempt to re-argue the case in a disagreement with the findings.

11.  The decision of Judge Gibb stands.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 7 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

