
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                               Appeal Numbers: IA/03988/2015
                                                               IA/03805/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2016                        |On 31 March 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 FEROZ SHAH
                                 BILAL KHAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation

For the Appellant: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Mr Richardson instructed by Elegant Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
   First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Mays, promulgated on 4 September 2015, to
   allow the respondents' appeal against the decision to refuse them leave
   to remain in the UK as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants. The FtT allowed
   the appeal on the basis that the decision was not in accordance with law
   and directed that the respondents be given an opportunity to respond to
   issues raised by the Secretary of State before a decision is made on
   their application.

2. The respondents (hereinafter "the claimants" and individually "the first
   claimant" and "the second claimant") are citizens of Pakistan.

3. The first claimant, who was born on 21 December 1985, was granted leave
   to enter the UK on 10 January 2009 on a student visa and thereafter was
   granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (post study) Migrant. On 22 August
   2014 he applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant
   under the Points Based System.

4. The second claimant, who was born on 1 August 1989, was granted leave to
   enter the UK on 26 January 2009 as a student. Thereafter he was granted
   leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student and then as a Tier 1 (Post Study)
   Migrant. On 8 August 2014 he applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1
   (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the Points Based System.

5. The claimants' case is that they have established, and are directors of,
   a business consultancy firm and that they satisfy the requirements under
   the Points Based System to be granted leave to remain as a Tier 1
   (Entrepreneur) Migrants.

6. The Secretary of State, following an interview with the claimants on 22
   October 2014, rejected their applications on the basis that she was not
   satisfied as to the genuineness of their intention to establish and
   invest funds in a business. Both claimants were sent a refusal letter,
   dated 12 January 2015, stating that they had failed to demonstrate they
   were genuine entrepreneurs in accordance with Paragraphs 245DD(h) and (i)
   of the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State gave several reasons for
   so finding, including:
     a. The absence of evidence of the business being developed before it
        was incorporated on 8 July 2014 and the lack of preparation to
        establish it.
     b. Only a single contract with a third party was submitted and it was
        considered to not be genuine. The Secretary of State gave a number
        of reasons for reaching this conclusion about the contract which
        were based on an analysis of the contract itself, internet research
        about the third party with whom the contract was entered
        (hereinafter "the third party") and claimed discrepancies in the
        interviews with the two claimants.
     c. Failure to supply documents to account for business expenditure.
     d. Discrepancies in information given at interview by the claimants as
        to sums invested in the business, registering the website and
        involvement of a third party (called "The Scorp").


7. The claimants appealed and their appeal was heard by FtT Judge Mays.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

8. The FtT stated that, following Ahmed and another (PBS): admissible
   evidence [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC), it could not consider any documents
   that were not before the decision maker when the decision was made. The
   claimants had submitted a number of such documents and the FtT, at
   paragraph [22], made clear they would not be considered.


9. The FtT did not then address the substantive matter that was under
   appeal; that is, whether the claimants were entitled to leave to remain
   in consequence of meeting the requirements under Paragraph 245DD of the
   Immigration Rules including in particular those at sub-paragraphs (h) and
   (i) which pertain to the genuineness of the application.


10. Instead, the FtT considered whether the Secretary of State's decision
   was procedurally fair. At paragraph [23] the FtT stated that:

      "The Appellants attended an interview relating to their applications,
      at which they were asked a number of questions. The issue which arises
      is whether that interview and the reliance on material procured by the
      Respondent from research carried out on her behalf which was not put
      to the Appellants was procedurally unfair."


11.  Following a detailed review of the issues raised by the Secretary of
   State, the FtT concluded at paragraph [37]:



        "I have found that the Respondent should have put the research
        undertaken and the conclusions she draw from that to the Appellants
        as a matter of fairness. The Respondent did not allow the
        Appellants the opportunity of making representations in relation to
        material factors upon which the Respondent founded in making her
        decision. The failure to do so means that the Respondent has failed
        to comply with the common law duty of fairness and the requirement
        to act fairly in the decision making process. For these reasons I
        conclude that the Respondent's decision is not in accordance with
        law"

Grounds of appeal and submissions

12. There are two grounds of appeal:
     a. firstly, that the FtT failed to adequately reason why the Secretary
        of State's decision was not in accordance with law; and
     b. secondly, that there was no procedural unfairness as the claimants
        had an opportunity to respond at the appeal hearing (which they
        attended) to the points taken against them in the refusal letter.


13. Mr Melvin argued that although the FtT made numerous findings for and
   against the refusal letter it did not adequately reason why the appeal
   should be remitted. He submitted that, read as a whole, and taking into
   account how the claimants responded during their interviews, it is clear
   that neither claimant has the expertise to run the proposed business.
   There were obvious discrepancies between them at interview, it was
   apparent little or no research had been conducted by them and they should
   not have been taken by surprise in respect of the points taken against
   them by the Secretary of State. Based on the evidence before it, the FtT
   should have dismissed the appeal.


14. Mr Richardson responded by stating that there are only two points made
   in the grounds of appeal: (a) that the decision lacked adequate
   reasoning; and (b) the claimants had an opportunity to give oral evidence
   to counter the points taken against them but chose not to do so.

15. With regard to the first point, Mr Richardson argued that the FtT's
   decision is well reasoned and makes clear where it found there to be
   procedural unfairness and where it did not. As the claimants had not been
   given an opportunity to address a number of issues raised by the
   Secretary of State it was not possible for the Secretary of State (or for
   the FtT, making a decision on the basis of the evidence that was before
   the decision maker) to fairly make a decision.



16. In respect of the second point, Mr Richardson argued that under Ahmed
   the claimants were not able to give new evidence at the hearing and the
   FtT properly had Ahmed in mind when considering whether the decision
   taken by the Secretary of State was procedurally fair.


Consideration

17. In considering the first ground of appeal, which concerns the adequacy
   of the FtT's reasoning, I have kept in mind the recent Upper Tribunal
   decision VV (grounds of appeal) Lithuania [2016] UKUT 00053 (IAC) where
   it is stated:

      An application for permission to appeal on the grounds  of  inadequacy
      of reasoning in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must generally
      demonstrate by reference to the material and arguments  placed  before
      that Tribunal that (a) the matter involved a substantial issue between
      the parties at first instance and (b) that the Tribunal either  failed
      to deal with that matter at all, or gave reasons on that  point  which
      are so unclear that they may well conceal an error of law.

18. The FtT's decision is far removed from the type of decision
   contemplated in VV as being one where a ground of inadequacy of reasoning
   could prevail. The FtT has dealt, in detail, with the issue of procedural
   fairness and has clearly explained why it reached the conclusion that the
   Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with law.


19. The FtT set out its reasons for finding there was procedural unfairness
   at, inter alia, paragraphs [25], [26], [27], [29] and [31]. In these
   paragraphs the FtT considered particular issues raised by the Secretary
   of State in her refusal letter that were relevant to the question of the
   genuineness of the application and then set out its reasons why, in the
   context of reaching a finding on these issues, procedural unfairness had
   arisen. For example, at paragraph [25] the FtT described how the
   Secretary of State made an incorrect assumption about where the second
   claimant had previously worked but failed to give him an opportunity to
   clarify the position. At paragraph [27] the FtT considered the Secretary
   of State's internet research which purported to show the primary business
   at the location of the third party appeared to be a hair stylist and
   found that unfairness arose from not putting this to the claimants. At
   paragraph [29] the FtT found unfairness arising from the Secretary of
   State placing reliance on the results of an internet search about the
   funds available to and activity of the third party without raising the
   matter with the claimants. And at paragraph [29] the FtT found that the
   Secretary of State, before relying on what it understood had been said by
   the first appellant about training employees, should have put her
   concerns to him.


20.  Having found there to be a number of instances where the Secretary of
   State failed to give the claimants an opportunity to respond to or
   comment upon information obtained by, or conclusions drawn by, the
   Secretary of State the FtT determined that there had been a failure to
   act fairly in the decision making process.

21. In my view, the FtT has written a clear and cogent decision, in which
   the parties would not have been left in any doubt as to the reasons the
   decision had been reached. Accordingly, there is no merit in submitting,
   as the Secretary of State does in its first ground of appeal, that the
   decision contains an error of law because of inadequate reasoning.

22. I now turn to the second ground of appeal, whereby the Secretary of
   State argues that there was not procedural unfairness because the
   claimants had an opportunity to give oral evidence at the appeal hearing.



23. This appeal concerned a decision of the Secretary of State made under
   the Points Based System where the prohibition on new evidence specified
   in section 85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
   applies.

24. The Upper Tribunal has interpreted the prohibition on new evidence in a
   strict fashion. As explained in Ahmed:

         "where  a  Points  Based  application  is  made  and  refused,  the
         assessment by the Judge is to be of the material  that  was  before
         the decision-maker rather than a new consideration of new material.
         In other words the appeal if it is successful is on the basis  that
         the decision-maker with the material before him should have made  a
         different decision, not on  the  basis  that  a  different  way  of
         presenting  the  application  would  have  produced   a   different
         decision."

25. The Upper Tribunal in Ahmed makes clear that in a case determined  under
   the Points Based System the FtT not only must ignore  any  material  that
   was not before the Secretary of State's decision maker but cannot make  a
   decision on the basis that a different decision would have  been  reached
   had the information been presented differently.

26. Following Ahmed, the FtT in this appeal  could  only  have  placed  very
   limited  and  circumscribed  reliance  on  oral  evidence  given  by  the
   claimants at the hearing. This is because the oral evidence  at  the  FtT
   hearing would not have been before the decision maker and the  claimant's
   appeal could only succeed before the FtT if the decision maker, with  the
   information before him (which  would  of  course  not  include  the  oral
   evidence at the FtT hearing) should have made a different decision.

27. Accordingly, I do not accept the Secretary of State's argument that  the
   claimants had  an  opportunity  to  address  the  points  raised  in  the
   rejection letter at the appeal hearing.  They  had  no  such  opportunity
   because following Ahmed the FtT was obliged to make its decision  on  the
   basis of the material that was before the decision maker and not  on  the
   basis of new evidence given by the claimants at the hearing.

28. For the reasons I have given, I  am  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of
   State is unable to succeed under either of  her  grounds  of  appeal  and
   accordingly I find that the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mays
   shall stand.


    Decision

    a. The appeal is dismissed.

    b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of a material error of law and shall stand.


   |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 18 March 2016                 |

