











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03787/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 16 February 2016               |On 1 April 2016                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Akwasi Djan
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Akther, counsel (instructed by Genga and Co
Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 25 August  2015  allowing
      the claimant's appeal  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the
      Immigration Rules. At [24] he stated that he was  persuaded  that  the
      claimant "... comes within the relevant immigration law, as amended".


   3. In her application for permission to appeal, the  secretary  of  state
      contended that it was unclear  on  what  basis  the  appeal  had  been
      allowed. It was uncertain whether it was allowed under  the  Rules  or
      under the Human Rights Convention. There was a lack of clarity  as  to
      what law the Judge was referring to when he stated that  the  claimant
      was "benefiting from the rule of law' [23].


   4. In addition, it is contended that the Tribunal  made  no  findings  of
      fact and as a result, it is not possible to determine  on  what  basis
      the appeal was allowed. No findings were  made  as  to  how  long  the
      claimant had been in the UK, nor the circumstances of that  residence.
      There was moreover no reasons as to why there was anything  compelling
      preventing his removal.


   5. On 23 December 2015, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davidge  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal on the basis  that  there  had
      arguably been  vague  and  inadequate  references  to  the  claimant's
      "coming within the rules" without explicit expression of any  relevant
      rule. There were no findings of  fact  made  by  the  Judge  and  when
      considering "evaluative matters" he failed to set out any reasoning as
      to why the factors weighed in the balance for or against the  claimant
      or the weight attached.


   6. Ms Akther, who had not represented the appellant before the First-tier
      Tribunal, referred to the Rule 24 response presented by  counsel,  who
      had represented the appellant. That response is dated 21 January 2016.


   7. In the response it is contended at paragraph 3,  that  the  claimant's
      "principal submission" is that at the hearing it had been conceded  by
      the presenting officer that the  appeal  be  allowed  because  of  the
      failure of the secretary of state to consider that  the  claimant  had
      previously been granted leave to remain. There was however no evidence
      produced by counsel to support those assertions.


   8. Mr Bramble was not prepared to accept that such  concession  had  been
      made on the grounds  referred  to  in  paragraph  3  of  the  Rule  24
      response.


   9. In the Rule 24 response, there is reference  to  counsel's  attendance
      note at the hearing on 5 August 2015, in which it is stated  that  the
      presenting officer accepted that the refusal letter did  not  consider
      the content of the previous grant letter and  ought  to  have.  It  is
      further contended that the presenting officer stated that  she  agreed
      that the appeal ought to be allowed because of the failure to consider
      the previous grant letter.


  10. Ms Akther referred to the skeleton argument presented  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal by counsel, dated 5 August 2015.


  11. There it was noted that the claimant is a national of Ghana born on 20
      June 1980. He arrived in the UK on a visit visa on 17 July  1999  when
      he was 19 years old. He has been living with  his  father,  a  British
      citizen. His leave to remain expired  on  10  December  1999.  He  has
      worked since 2000 and has lived here since his arrival.


  12. He is in a relationship with Ms Evelyn Addai,  a  national  of  Ghana.
      They have three children, born in 2007, 2009 and 2013. His application
      dated August 2012 for leave to remain on the basis  that  his  partner
      and two elder children had limited leave to remain was refused in  May
      2013. Various representations were then made to the secretary of state
      to reconsider that application. The claimant was asked to  complete  a
      statement of additional grounds by letter dated 13 June 2014.


  13. On 18 September 2014, the claimant was granted limited leave to remain
      until 21 November 2014 in line with his partner and children.


  14. In the decision letter it was  stated  that  he  failed  to  meet  the
      eligibility requirements of Appendix FM of the rules. However, it  was
      considered that exceptional circumstances  applied  to  his  case,  in
      relation to his  two  children.  Therefore,  in  accordance  with  the
      "exceptional circumstances" section of the Home  Office  "guidance  on
      application of EX.1 - consideration of a child's best interests  under
      the family rules  and  in  Article  8  claims  where  the  criminality
      threshold in paragraph 399 of the rules do  not  apply"  it  had  been
      decided to grant him  limited  leave  to  remain  on  account  of  the
      exceptional circumstances of his particular case.


  15. At that stage he was granted leave to remain in line with the  current
      leave granted to his partner and three children.


  16. However, in the same refusal  letter  dated  18  September  2014,  the
      secretary of state noted that he would  be  issued  with  a  biometric
      residence permit card stating that he had limited leave to  remain  in
      the UK "initially for 30 months."  However, instead of  being  granted
      leave to remain for 30 months, he was in fact granted leave to  remain
      valid from 18 September 2014 until 21 November 2014.


  17.  In  a  letter  from  his  solicitor  to  the  Home   Office   seeking
      clarification, the Home Office responded on  7  October  2014  stating
      that the claimant had been granted leave to remain in  line  with  the
      rest of his family.


  18. In the meantime the claimant's partner and  children  applied  for  an
      extension of their leave to remain in the UK which was expiring on  21
      November 2014.


  19. Accordingly, on 28 October  2014  the  claimant  himself  applied  for
      further leave to remain. On 11 December 2014, his  partner  and  three
      children were in  fact  granted  limited  leave  to  remain  until  11
      December 2017.


  20. Despite the grant of leave to remain to  his  family,  the  claimant's
      application was refused on 14 January 2015.  It  was  considered  that
      whilst his eldest child had lived in the UK for seven years, it  would
      not be unreasonable to expect him and the other children to return  to
      Ghana and there would not be significant obstacles for the claimant in
      re-integrating back into society in Ghana.


  21. It is evident that the decision letter dated 14 January 2015  did  not
      make any reference to the previous grant of leave  to  remain  to  the
      claimant or to the decision letter of 18 September 2014  granting  him
      leave to remain.


  22. As already noted, counsel who represented the claimant at  the  First-
      tier Tribunal contended that the presenting officer accepted that  the
      refusal letter did not consider the content of the previous grant  and
      ought to have. There is however no proper evidence adduced by  counsel
      in support of that contention.


  23. It is accordingly contended that the failure by the secretary of state
      to have regard to the concession  allegedly  made  by  the  presenting
      officer at the hearing constituted an abuse of process and  unfairness
      to the  claimant.  The  challenge  to  the  Judge's  determination  is
      accordingly said to be unsustainable in the light of the concession.


  24. In the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination, he records that  the
      presenting officer invited him to  dismiss  the  appeal,  particularly
      indicating that the burden of proof was  on  the  claimant  [11].  The
      Judge then records that counsel for the claimant emphasised  the  fact
      that the best interests of the children should permit him to allow the
      appeal. There was accordingly no reference in the determination to the
      concession referred to in the Rule 24 response.


  25. It is acknowledged in the Rule 24 response that the  determination  by
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not identify  any  immigration  rule
      under which the appeal was allowed, or whether it was in fact  allowed
      under Article 8 ECHR. However, it is contended that the error  is  not
      material "because of the concession made."


  26. It is further contended that even if the determination is found to  be
      flawed the appeal  should  nevertheless  have  been  allowed  and  the
      claimant should have been granted limited leave to remain for the same
      reasons as set out in the decision  letter  dated  18  September  2014
      granting him leave in line with his family. There had been  no  change
      in circumstances.  The  secretary  of  state  has  a  public  duty  of
      consistency.


  27. In addition, consideration must be given as to whether the decision to
      refuse to vary leave to remain and to remove the claimant is  contrary
      to the best interests of his children pursuant to s.55 of the 2009 Act
      and in breach of Article 8 ECHR - JO and Others  (s.55  duty)  Nigeria
      [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC). The rights of the family as a  unit  must  be
      considered.


  28. Ms Akther is contended that  there  is  no  sensible  reason  for  the
      claimant to  leave  the  UK  in  order  to  make  an  entry  clearance
      application to enter the UK. That would involve a separation from  his
      partner and children, with whom he shares a family life. Nor would  it
      be proportionate to expect his partner and children to leave the UK.


  29. In reply, Mr Bramble stated that he was  "happy  to  accept  that  the
      circumstances of the case showed that the claimant  had  been  granted
      leave to remain in line with his family members". The decision  letter
      dated 14 January 2015 acknowledged that his partner had limited  leave
      to remain in the UK until  11  December  2017.  That  applied  to  his
      children as well.


  30. Mr Bramble accepted that the  subsequent  extension  of  his  family's
      leave to remain should also have been taken into  account  and  should
      have been revisited.


  31. He accepted that it is on that basis that the decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal was not in accordance with the law as  no  consideration
      had been given to the claimant's submission that his partner and three
      children were granted leave to remain until December 2017 and that  he
      had been granted limited leave to remain in line with their  grant  in
      the earlier decision.


  32. In considering "exceptional circumstances" (including  Article  8  and
      human rights) the secretary of state should have considered and  taken
      into account the fact that his partner and children's application  had
      been extended until December 2017.


     Assessment


  33. For the reasons set out in the grounds seeking permission, I find that
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did contain  a  material
      error on a point of law. In particular, no findings of fact were made.
      Nor is it possible to determine on what basis the appeal was  allowed.
      Nor was any consideration given or reasons  provided  as  to  why  the
      claimant should be entitled to remain in the UK or  whether  there  is
      anything compelling to prevent his removal.


  34. As noted by Judge Davidge when  considering  evaluative  matters,  the
      Judge failed to set out any reasoning as to the factors which  weighed
      in the balance for and against the claimant or the weight attached.


  35. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision and re-make it.


  36. I have referred to the history of the claimant's various  applications
      for leave to remain as well as those made by his  partner  and  family
      members.


  37. On 18 September 2014 the claimant was granted limited leave to  remain
      until 21 November 2014 in line with  his  partner  and  children.  The
      secretary  of  state  noted  that  although  he  failed  to  meet  the
      eligibility  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  it  is  considered  that
      exceptional circumstances  apply  to  his  case  in  relation  to  his
      children. Therefore in accordance with  those  circumstances,  and  in
      accordance with Home Office guidance, it  was  decided  to  grant  him
      limited leave to remain due to such exceptional circumstances.


  38. It was also stated in the same decision (at page 2) that "... we  will
      issue with a biometric residence permit (BRP) stating  that  you  have
      limited leave to remain in the UK initially for 30 months."


  39. On 11 December 2014, the claimant's partner and  three  children  were
      granted limited leave to remain until 11 December 2017.  The  claimant
      himself had applied on 28 October 2014 for further leave to remain.


  40. Despite the grant of leave to his family to remain until  11  December
      2017, the claimant's application was refused on 14 January 2015.


  41. In the absence of any proper foundation or evidence from  counsel  who
      represented the claimant before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  I  am
      unable to find that the concession relied upon had in fact  been  made
      at the hearing. It is in conflict with the recording by the First-tier
      Tribunal Judge that the presenting officer  in  fact  invited  him  to
      dismiss the appeal, indicating that the burden of  proof  was  on  the
      claimant.


  42. As accepted by Mr Bramble however, the decision letter of  14  January
      2015 made no reference to the earlier grant of leave to remain to  the
      claimant or indeed  to  the  decision  letter  of  18  September  2014
      granting him leave to remain. The secretary of state  thus  failed  to
      consider the previous grant of leave to remain which  had  been  taken
      pursuant to the "exceptional circumstances"  section  of  the  refusal
      letter.


  43. In the "exceptional circumstances" section of the refusal letter dated
      14 January 2015, there was no reference at all  to  the  secretary  of
      state's recent decision dated 18 September 2014 where the claimant was
      granted limited leave to remain in line with that of his  partner  and
      children. There the secretary of state stated  that  when  considering
      Home Office policy in respect of his children,  he  would  be  granted
      limited leave to remain due to exceptional circumstances.


  44. However, that was not revisited and as  accepted  by  Mr  Bramble,  it
      should in the circumstances have been. There had  been  no  change  in
      circumstances relied on by the secretary of  state.  The  inconsistent
      approach, which remained unexplained,  results  in  the  decision  not
      being in accordance with the law.


  45. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I remake  it
      and allow the claimant's appeal to  the  extent  that  he  be  granted
      limited leave to remain in the UK until 11 December 2017 in accordance
      with the leave granted to the claimant's partner and three children in
      their decision dated 11 December 2014.


      Notice of Decision


      The secretary of state's appeal is dismissed.


      No anonymity direction is made.














      Signed                             Date 16 March 2016






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

