
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03172/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 21 January 2015                           |On 3 February 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Happy Thobekile Ngulube
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Hannan of Corban Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge R L Walker) allowing the appellant's appeal  against  a
    refusal to grant her further leave  to  remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and Art 8 of  the  ECHR.   The  judge  found  that  the  decision
    breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

 2. For convenience I will refer to the parties as they appeared before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born  on  14  May  1977.
    She first entered the United Kingdom on 17 September 2006 with leave as
    a student valid until 31 October 2009.  She  was  subsequently  granted
    extensions of leave until 10 November 2013.

 4. On 9 November 2013 the appellant applied for further leave  to  remain.
    The basis of that  application  was,  in  essence,  her  claimed  close
    relationship with her sister and her three nephews and nieces with whom
    she lived in the UK.

 5. On 20 December 2013, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant
    further leave to remain under the Immigration Rules (in particular para
    276ADE) and under Art 8 of the ECHR.  In  addition,  the  Secretary  of
    State made directions for the appellant's  removal  to  Zimbabwe  under
    s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 20 August 2014, Judge  Walker  allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  He accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    established "family life" for the purposes of  Art  8  with  her  adult
    sister and her nieces and nephew.  Further, he accepted the evidence of
    an Independent Social Worker (Mr Robert Simpson) that  the  appellant's
    removal would not be in the best interests of her nephew and two nieces
    and the interests of the children outweighed the public  interest  such
    that the appellant's removal was not proportionate.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the following grounds:

         "Making a material misdirection in law

         3.   Having found that the Appellant could not qualify for leave to
             remain under the Immigration Rules, it is submitted that  only
             if there may be arguably good grounds for  granting  leave  to
             remain outside of the Immigration Rules, would it be necessary
             for the  Judge  to  proceed  to  consider  whether  there  are
             compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under
             the, as per R (on the application of)  Nagre  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

         4.   The Judge has directed himself to the above test, at paragraph
             31, however he has failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  why
             there are arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain,
             and why the circumstances are compelling and not  sufficiently
             recognised under the Immigration Rules.

         5.   It is submitted that the relationship  between  the  Appellant
             and her sister does not go beyond  normal  emotional  ties  as
             required to qualify as "family life" in light  of  Article  8.
             The Appellant has helped her sister, as many  siblings  would,
             but this does not go beyond normal emotional ties.

         6.   Even if there is family life between  the  Appellant  and  her
             sister and her nephews  and  nieces,  the  refusal  is  not  a
             disproportionate interference.

         7.   Grants of leave outside of the Immigration Rules are  reserved
             for the most exceptional cases and should not  be  used  as  a
             means to circumvent the requirements of the Rules,  which  are
             in themselves a complete code.

         8.   It is submitted that the Judge has erred in  law  in  allowing
             the appeal  under  Article  8  and  the  decision  is  not  in
             accordance with the law.

         9.   Permission to appeal is respectfully sought."

 8. On 8 October 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Foudy)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that: "the judge failed to give adequate reasons for  allowing
    the appeal outside the Rules."

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

10. In his submissions, Mr Richards did not pursue the point made in  paras
    3 and 4 of the grounds that the judge had erred in law  by  failing  to
    consider whether there were "arguably good grounds" for granting  leave
    outside the Rules before going on to consider whether  there  were  any
    "compelling circumstances" which justified a grant of leave outside the
    Rules.  Mr Richards took that position, no doubt, in the light  of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  985.
    There, at [128] Aikens LJ (with whom  Maurice  Kay  LJ  and  Treacy  LJ
    agreed)  concluded  that  there  was  no   "threshold"   criterion   of
    "arguability" before a decision maker was required to consider  whether
    leave was justified outside the Rules under Art 8 (see  also  R  (Aliyu
    and Aliyu) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin) at [59]).

11. Instead, Mr Richards centred his submissions on the judge's  reasoning.



12. First, Mr Richards submitted that the judge had failed to give adequate
    reasons for his finding that  the  appellant  had  established  "family
    life" with her adult sister.  He submitted that the  only  reason  that
    appeared to be given for finding that  there  were  "more  than  normal
    emotional ties" between them was that the appellant  looked  after  her
    sister's children when her sister went to work.  Secondly, Mr  Richards
    submitted that the judge had failed to carry out the balancing exercise
    inherent in proportionality and give adequate and  proper  reasons  for
    his finding that the appellant's removal would  not  be  proportionate.
    In particular, he criticised the judge at para 35 of his  determination
    for stating that the public interest was not a  strong  argument  based
    upon the appellant's good immigration record and that she  was  capable
    of working and earning money.  Mr Richards submitted that, although the
    judge had referred to part  5A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("NIA Act 2002")  at  para  10  of  his  determination,
    thereafter he had  failed  to  take  it  into  account,  in  particular
    s.117B(1) which stated that the maintenance of immigration control  was
    "in the public interest".  Mr Richards submitted that the appellant was
    a student who no longer qualified for leave on that basis and it was in
    the public interest that she should return to her  own  country  or  be
    removed.

13. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had materially erred in law and he
    invited me to set aside the decision  and  order  a  rehearing  of  the
    appeal.

14. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Hannan submitted that the judge had  not
    materially erred in law.

15. First, she submitted that he had asked  himself  the  correct  question
    whether there were "compelling  circumstances"  and  secondly,  he  had
    taken into account all the evidence.  She pointed out that at paras  23
    and 26 of the determination he had expressly stated that he had done so
    and had found the evidence before him, namely that  of  the  appellant,
    her sister and Mr Simpson, the Independent Social Worker  credible  and
    truthful.  Thirdly, she submitted that the judge had  fully  considered
    the circumstances at paras 27-35 of his determination including at para
    29 setting out and, at para 30 accepting,  the  expert  opinion  of  Mr
    Simpson that it was not in the interests of the appellant's nephew  and
    nieces that she should be removed, the impact of which would  be  "very
    damaging".  Fourthly, Ms Hannan  submitted  that  the  judge  had  been
    entitled to conclude that the nature of the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her sister  and  her  sister's  children  was  such  that
    "family life" existed.  Ms Hannan submitted that it was not  irrational
    for the judge to conclude that, in all the circumstances, the impact on
    the appellant's family and the appellant (including the best  interests
    of her nephew and nieces) outweigh the public interest.

Discussion

16. It was accepted before the judge that the appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, in particular  para  276ADE  and
    that her appeal rested exclusively upon her Art 8 claim.

17. First, I deal with the issue of the judge's finding  that  family  life
    existed between the appellant and her sister and  her  sister's  nephew
    and nieces.  At para 32 the judge said this:

         "I accept that there is an  established  family  life  between  the
         Appellant  her  sister  and  her   nieces   and   nephews.    Their
         relationship does go beyond the normal emotional ties between  such
         relatives."

18. Mr Richards did not suggest that the judge had misdirected  himself  in
    looking for more than "normal emotional ties".  That is consistent with
    authority, for example, Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Ghising (Family
    life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) at [50]-[62].

19.  The  judge  summarised  the  evidence   concerning   the   appellant's
    relationship with her sister and her nieces and nephew at  paras  14-20
    as follows:

         "14. The Appellant resides in the same household  with  her  sister
             Florence and her three children, two girls aged 12 and 8 and a
             boy aged 10.  They  live  together  at  10  Rifles  Lane,  The
             Maltings, Shaftsbury, North Dorset.  The Appellant  has  lived
             with her sister, nieces and nephew for most of  the  time  she
             has been in the UK and since 2006.  She plays a major role  in
             the upbringing and development of her nieces  and  nephew  and
             also has a very strong and supportive  relationship  with  her
             sister.  Her role with the children and the time she has spent
             with them has resulted in them looking upon her  as  a  second
             mother.  She has helped raise them since her arrival in 2006.

         15.  When the Appellant arrived in 2006 she soon became aware  that
             her sister's husband was being abusive to her sister  as  well
             as causing difficulties and  upset  for  the  children.   This
             abuse sometimes manifested itself as domestic violence against
             the sister.  It also involved rape and sexual assault.

         16.  The level of domestic violence was such that the  police  were
             called on several occasions.  Ultimately in 2011 the  sister's
             husband was arrested and removed  from  the  then  matrimonial
             home.  The sister, fearing for her safety went  to  a  women's
             refuge with the children and where she stayed  for  6  months.
             The Appellant did not accompany her at this time but  went  to
             visit regularly as well as seeing the children.  After  the  6
             months the sister has found the current  accommodation  at  10
             Rifles Lane and the Appellant resumed living with her  sister,
             her nieces and nephew.

         17.  The sister's husband has failed to provide financially  or  in
             anyway for his family.  He is no longer in contact with any of
             them and  has  not  been  since  the  last  domestic  violence
             incident in 2011.

         18.  The Appellant has provided the  much-needed  support  for  her
             sister and the children.  This has  been  not  only  practical
             support with looking after the children, taking them to school
             and  out  socially  but  emotional  support.   This  has  been
             provided when the sister and her children have been vulnerable
             and traumatised and when such support was needed by them.

         19.  Both the Appellant and her sister work as carers.  Their  work
             schedules are arranged so that somebody is always at home with
             the children.  The Appellant contributes towards the  finances
             of the household.

         20.  If the Appellant had to leave  her  sister's  home  then  this
             would be a very serious  situation  for  her  sister  and  the
             children.  They would lose  the  support  she  provides.   The
             sister would not be able to work and it would clearly  not  be
             in the best interests of  the  children.   Their  relationship
             does amount to a family life and  taking  the  Appellant  away
             from this would result in a breach of Article 8 and would be a
             disproportionate decision."

    At para 27 the judge made the following finding:

         "27. I accept that the Appellant has been providing  very  valuable
             support, in all respects,  to  her  sister  and  her  children
             especially after the end of the abusive relationship with  her
             sister's husband.  I accept the  evidence  that  the  children
             have  now  for  some  considerable  time  been  treating   the
             Appellant as a second mother.  She carries out the same  roles
             with them as their own mother."

20. At para 28, based upon Mr Simpson's report and the oral  evidence,  the
    judge stated that:

         "the Appellant was  the  stronger  character  of  herself  and  her
         sister.  This has enabled her to give the guidance and  support  to
         her sister and the children."

21. That evidence, in my judgment, strongly underpins the  judge's  finding
    that the relationship between the appellant on the  one  hand  and  the
    appellant's sister and the children of the appellant's  sister  on  the
    other was one of more than "normal emotional ties".  At  para  35,  the
    judge referred to the circumstance  as  a  "unique  family  situation".
    Whether or not the situation was "unique", it was unusual and,  bearing
    in  mind  the  history  of  domestic  violence  directed  against   the
    appellant's sister, was one which the judge was entitled to  find  that
    amounted to "family life" between the appellant and the  other  members
    of her family.

22. In addition, in reaching his finding, the judge set out in detail paras
    8.2-8.15 of Mr Simpson's report at para  29  of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "29. I accept the conclusions in the report that if  the  Appellant
             is removed from the UK then her sister and the  children  will
             suffer trauma and loss.  The report goes on to say:

             '8.2 I am of the view that the fracturing  impact  would  vary
                  between the children, their mother and the  Appellant  and
                  based upon my knowledge and understanding of  the  history
                  of the family, I do not believe this family is  likely  to
                  recover in any meaningful sense, from such an event.

             8.3  I would  expect  that  the  eventual  fragmentation  will
                  follow a period of deterioration, possibly exacerbated  by
                  a  recurrence  of  the  mother's   poor   mental   health,
                  logistical issues of managing three  children  alone,  the
                  global impact of her past abusive experience, and  in  all
                  probability the necessity for the local authority to begin
                  to intervene.

             8.4  It may be further argued that the absent  father  to  the
                  children is likely to see the removal of the Appellant  as
                  the removal of a protective barrier,  and  the  author  is
                  unable to state with  any  certainty  that  his  would  be
                  something that the Appellant's sister would find  easy  to
                  resist, if  she  were  to  feel  that  the  only  credible
                  protector to  the  family  was  no  longer  present  as  a
                  guardian.

             8.5  I base these observations upon the reaction and behaviour
                  of both of the adults when recounting the  events  of  the
                  past abuse, and the determination of the children's father
                  even when the Appellant was present in the home.  It would
                  appear that if the Appellant is not in the  country,  were
                  the Appellant's father attempt to return  there  would  be
                  little to prevent him from doing so.

             8.6  I would be very concerned about the long-term affect  the
                  separation from the Appellant would have on the children.

             8.7  I believe that the removal  of  the  Appellant  from  the
                  children's' lives is not in the children's best  interest.
                  I believe that the two  adults  in  what  appear  parental
                  roles, the Appellant  is  probably  the  parent  with  the
                  greatest earning potential if she is allowed to remain  in
                  the UK.  The income required for a family with two  adults
                  and three children, even at a basic and good enough level,
                  is likely to be substantial.

                  .....

             8.14 In the author's opinion, if the Appellant is  permanently
                  removed  from  the  UK,  and  therefore  the   family   is
                  conversely permanently broken, this  will  be  an  end  to
                  their  family  life.   The  children  have  accepted,  and
                  internalised their  family  as  it  now  is.   It  is  not
                  appropriate mindful of the experiences of the children, to
                  speculate with them about how their might  look  if  their
                  family if one of them were not present; given that it  has
                  taken some time to achieve their current level of security
                  and  stability,  speculation  of  the  removal  of   their
                  credible protector might also be described as  emotionally
                  abusive.

             8.15 In summary, if the Appellant were to be removed from  the
                  UK, the impact upon the children would  be  very  damaging
                  and no in the children's' best interests.'"

23. At para 30, Judge Walker stated:

         "I accept Mr Simpson's opinions and conclusion as being credible."

24. The interdependency between the appellant and the other members of  the
    family is highlighted by Mr Simpson.  That interdependency is such that
    he considers that the appellant's removal would be "very  damaging"  to
    the children and  not  in  their  best  interests.   Equally,  he  also
    identified the importance that the  appellant  plays  in  her  sister's
    wellbeing given the history of domestic violence.

25. There is no doubt that that history has created significant  ties  (and
    indeed dependency) between the family members.  The judge  clearly  had
    this evidence in mind when he made the positive finding in  respect  of
    "family  life"  in  para  32.   He  applied  the  correct  approach  in
    recognising that more than "normal emotional ties" had to exist and, on
    the evidence, which he expressly accepted I see no basis for concluding
    that he was not entitled to reach that  finding  given  the  weight  of
    evidence before him.

26. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reason for his conclusion that the appellant's  removal  would
    not be proportionate.  That conclusion is expressed at paragraph 35  of
    the judge's determination as follows:

         35.  The need to maintain effective immigration  control  in  these
             particular  circumstances  is  not  a  strong   argument   the
             Appellant has a good immigration record, she has obtained  her
             qualifications and appears to be a person who  is  capable  of
             working and earning.  Set against this is  the  unique  family
             situation and the disruption that would be caused to  this  by
             the  Appellant's  removal  and  which  would  be  serious  and
             substantial especially for the children.  The  needs  of  this
             family group particularly the children far outweigh any public
             interest considerations."

27. That finding has, of course, to be seen in the light of  the  whole  of
    the judge's determination including his  positive  credibility  finding
    and his acceptance  of  Mr  Simpson's  view  that  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's removal on the children would be "very damaging" and not in
    their best interests.  There was  also  the  potential  impact  on  the
    appellant's sister if the "protective barrier"  of  the  appellant  was
    removed (see para 8.4 of Mr Simpson's report).

28. Mr Richards placed some reliance upon s.117B(1) of  the  NIA  Act  2002
    which states that:

         "maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the  public
         interest."

29. This point was not raised in the grounds where no reliance  was  placed
    specifically on Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002.  Nevertheless, Mr Richards
    developed the submission that in para 35 the judge had  been  wrong  to
    state that "immigration control" is "not a strong argument".

30. In my judgment, para 35 should not be read as the  judge  stating  that
    "effective immigration control is [not] in the public interest".   What
    the judge is saying in para 35 is that there  are  good  countervailing
    factors that go to  outweigh  the  "public  interest"  in  "maintaining
    effective immigration control".  He identifies  those  factors  as  the
    appellant's good immigration record, and that she is capable of working
    and earning.  As s.117B(2) states, it is in the public interest that an
    individual is "financially independent" which is, without reference  to
    s.117B(3), the point to which Judge Walker is, in part, alluding.

31. In my judgment, this was not a straightforward case  of  an  individual
    who was a student and who no longer qualified to stay under the  Rules.
    The "unique family situation"  of  the  appellant  was  significant  in
    assessing  proportionality.   Indeed,  the  evidence  of  Mr   Simpson,
    accepted by the judge, was powerful in reflecting the  damaging  effect
    upon the children of the appellant's removal.  The judge  made  express
    reference to  this  in  para  35  of  his  determination.   It  is  not
    suggested, in the grounds or by Mr Richards in  his  submissions,  that
    the judge was not entitled to find that the appellant's removal was not
    in the best interests of the children and would be  damaging  to  them.
    Neither is it suggested that  the  judge  gave  excessive  (irrational)
    weight to their interests rather than taking them  into  account  as  a
    "primary consideration".  Indeed, as  I  pointed  out  to  Mr  Richards
    during the hearing, the grounds do not raise an irrationality challenge
    at all.  They only raise a reasons challenge.

32. In my judgment, the judge correctly approached the issue of whether the
    appellant should be granted leave outside the Rules under  Art  8.   He
    clearly directed himself that there must be "compelling circumstances".
     He made a number of positive findings in the appellant's  favour  both
    in relation to her family life and the impact upon the children of  her
    removal.  At paragraph 35, he noted a number of positive aspects of the
    appellant's circumstances including her  good  immigration  record  and
    her, in effect, self-sufficiency.  He then concluded that on the  basis
    of the evidence the disruption to the "unique family  situation"  would
    be "serious and substantial especially for the  children".   I  do  not
    accept Mr Richards' submission that the judge failed  to  carry  out  a
    balancing exercise when he concluded that:

         "the needs of this  family  group  particularly  the  children  far
         outweigh any public interest considerations."

33. Paragraph 35, when read - as it must - in the context of the  whole  of
    the determination and the judge's findings,  adequately  sets  out  the
    judge's reasons for finding  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.

34. For these reasons, I do not accept Mr  Richards'  submission  that  the
    judge erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal under Article 8.

Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision stands.

36. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal, in allowing the appeal, made a fee  award  of  �140
payable to the appellant  which,  as  I  have  dismissed  the  Secretary  of
State's appeal, remains the appropriate fee award.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
