
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03485/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th June 2013                               |On 8th July 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                 grace kwapi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Torro of Counsel instructed by Turpin and
Miller Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Dove  made
    following a hearing at Birmingham on 25th March 2013.



Background and immigration history

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Uganda, born on 26th September 1976.

 3. She entered the UK with leave as a student on 15th August 2002 and over
    time her leave was extended until 31st May 2009.

 4. She made an in time application for further leave to remain as a Tier 4
    (General) Student on 29th May 2009 which was refused on 9th July  2009.



 5. In the reasons for refusal letter relating to the application which was
    the subject of the appeal before the  judge,  that  is  for  indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of continuous residence  in  the  UK,  the
    Secretary of State erroneously stated that the application refused on 9
    July 2009 was with no right of appeal  which  is  plainly  wrong.   The
    application was refused because no bank statements had been  submitted.



 6. On 28th August 2009, following the refusal the Appellant did not appeal
    but wrote to the Respondent stating that she  wished  to  resubmit  the
    application, explaining that whilst she accepted that she did not  have
    adequate funds in her bank account  at  the  time  of  sending  in  the
    original application, she attached a bank statement as new evidence.

 7. On 14th September 2009 the Respondent replied, stating  that  the  bank
    statements which had now been submitted still  did  not  show  adequate
    funds in the account.

 8. On 29th September 2009 the Appellant had obtained sufficient funds  and
    re-submitted the application.  She was advised on 6th November 2009  to
    submit a fresh application, which she did on 3rd December  2009.   That
    application led to the grant of leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student from 18th February 2010 to 1st May 2010.

 9. On 29th April 2010 the Appellant submitted a further  application.   It
    was refused on 3rd June 2010 because the  Appellant  was  not  able  to
    satisfy the requirements for a Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies
    or the maintenance requirement.  She made a further application on 16th
    June 2010 and was then granted leave from 5th July 2010  to  30th  July
    2012.

10. On 27th July 2012 the Appellant applied for indefinite  leave.  On  the
    8th January 2013 the Respondent refused and relied on the gaps  in  the
    Appellant's continuous residence, namely the five month gap  from  July
    2009 until December 2009 and a fifteen day gap in June 2010.

The judge's determination

11. The judge recorded that the Appellant's  representative  conceded  that
    there was more than one gap in the Appellant's residence.  In fact that
    was wrong.  The decision notice received by the Appellant was dated 3rd
    June 2010, the deemed  date  of  service  being  7th  June  2010.   The
    Appellant was afforded a full  right  of  appeal  against  the  refusal
    providing her with ten clear  days  of  continuing  leave  pursuant  to
    Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.   The  expiry  of  that  appeal
    window was on 21st June 2010. Since the re-application was made on 16th
    June 2010 within the  appeal  window,   there  was  no  gap  in  lawful
    residence.

12. The Appellant sought to challenge the judge's  decision  on  the  basis
    that he had made a fundamental error in respect  of  the  gaps  in  the
    Appellant's leave since he had dismissed the appeal on the  basis  that
    she had more than one gap which was wrong.

13. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons stated in the  grounds
    by Judge Sharp on 20th May 2013.

14. On 4th June 2013 the Respondent served a reply opposing the appeal.  It
    is the Respondent's case that even if the judge had  erred  in  finding
    that there had been multiple gaps, on the incorrect concession  of  the
    Appellant's representative, it was immaterial in the light of the  fact
    that the first gap in residence was over five months and  for  none  of
    the reasons specified  in  the  policy  relating  to  the  exercise  of
    discretion.

The Hearing

15. Mr Torro argued that the judge had erred in law and the  appeal  should
    be allowed insofar as the matter should be remitted to the Secretary of
    State in order to consider it in the light of her  policy  relating  to
    continuous lawful residence.

16. The policy states that where there is a single gap in lawful  residence
    it may be appropriate to use discretion if an applicant:

           o "has a single short gap in lawful residence through making one
             single previous application out of time by no  more  than  ten
             calendar days, and

           o meets all the other requirements for lawful residence."

17. Caseworkers are instructed to use their judgment in cases  where  there
    may be exceptional reasons why a single application was made more  than
    ten days out of time.  For example exceptional reasons can be used  for
    cases where there is:

           o a postal strike

           o hospitalisation, or

           o an administrative error made by the UK Border Agency.

18. Caseworkers are advised not to normally use discretion for cases  where
    an applicant had more than one gap in their  lawful  residence  due  to
    submitting one or more of  their  previous  applications  out  of  time
    although it could be appropriate to exercise discretion  if  there  are
    multiple gaps which have been caused by events outside their control.

19. Mr Torro submitted that the evidence showed that the Appellant  had  at
    all times maintained proper contact with the Border Agency and  was  in
    correspondence with them throughout the period between  July  2009  and
    December 2009.  This was not a case of a person being refused and  then
    doing nothing, which was relevant to the question of whether discretion
    should have been exercised under the policy.  The evidence was that she
    had made a continuous effort to keep in touch.  It could  not  be  said
    that the decision letter of 8th January 2013 was a proper reflection of
    the facts.  He relied on the case of D S Abdi where it  was  held  that
    the decision in that case was not in accordance with  the  law  on  the
    basis that there had been factual error.

20. Mr Nath submitted that even if the judge had been wrong with respect to
    the number of gaps in  lawful  residence  the  mistake  was  immaterial
    because the length of the gap between  the  expiry  of  leave  and  her
    subsequent grant was five months and much longer than the ten  day  gap
    cited in the policy.

Findings and Conclusions

21. The Respondent made a factual error in stating that the  Appellant  had
    two gaps in lawful residence and this error was repeated by the  judge.
    The case should therefore have been assessed on the basis of  a  single
    gap of five months.

22. It is the Appellant's contention that, because of  the  misapprehension
    of facts, the decision was not in accordance with the law  because  the
    Secretary of State did not consider the exercise of her  discretion  as
    she was required to do under the policy.

23. However the policy simply does not apply to the Appellant.  This is not
    a case of a short period of time between the expiry of lawful leave and
    a subsequent application.  Nor is it a case  where  matters  have  been
    delayed because of factors beyond the Appellant's control.

24. When she made her initial application in July 2009 she could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules.  She did not have the requisite funds in
    her bank account.  It seems that she only managed to  get  those  funds
    together at the end of September 2009, some four  months  later.   This
    situation is entirely outwith the terms of the policy which envisage  a
    much shorter break in lawful residence not a four month  gap  when  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  were  not  met.   In   these
    circumstances there is nothing unlawful in  the  Respondent's  decision
    not to refer to her policy.

25. The fact that it  seems  to  have  been  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    maintained contact with the Respondent  at  all  times  and  sought  to
    rectify the situation as soon as she could will be relevant when and if
    any decision is made to remove her in the context of  arguments  raised
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.





Decision

26. The decision of the Immigration Judge  is  set  aside  and  re-made  as
    follows.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
