
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/03641/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 February 2016                       |On 30 March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     h k
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, Malik Law Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 28 August 2015  which  allowed  the
    appeals of the appellant, his wife and his daughter  against  decisions
    of the Secretary of State to remove them from the United Kingdom.

2.   The Secretary of State  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law  in  a  material  respect  by  wrongly  finding  that  the
    daughter's application under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules
    should be allowed.  The judge had mistakenly found  that  the  daughter
    complied with that Rule on the basis that she had lived continuously in
    the United Kingdom for over seven years and it was  not  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the United Kingdom.  That was a  finding  that  was
    factually incorrect since the child had arrived with her mother in 2005
    but had returned to India with  her  mother  in  2009.   She  had  then
    returned to the United  Kingdom  in  October  2010.   Accordingly,  the
    daughter could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in allowing her appeal on that  basis.
    Further, in the context of the appeals in relation to the parents,  the
    erroneous finding that the  daughter  complied  with  Rule  276ADE  was
    carried forward into the proportionality assessment which  was  carried
    out by the judge in terms of the claim under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.  Accordingly, the Secretary of State argued
    that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  the
    appellant parents was also fundamentally flawed.

3.   Mr Balroop on  behalf  of  the  appellants  submitted  that  we  should
    distinguish  between  the  appellants  in   this   case.    Independent
    assessments had been  carried  out  under  Article  8  which  were  not
    vitiated by the accepted material  error  of  law  in  respect  of  the
    daughter.

4.   Having considered the terms of the First-tier Tribunal's decision,  and
    in the light of the accepted and correct concession that  there  was  a
    material error of law in respect of the daughter's appeal by the First-
    tier Tribunal, we have concluded that that material error  was  carried
    forward into the Article 8 assessment carried out  in  respect  of  the
    parents.  This is clearly seen at paragraph 79 of the determination  in
    which the judge considers firstly that it is in the best  interests  of
    the daughter that she should remain in the  UK  and  that  the  parents
    should also remain there as her parents.  In our view, had  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  appreciated  that  the  daughter  did  not  fulfil  the
    requirements of  Rule  276ADE,  it  is  unlikely  that  it  would  have
    performed the proportionality assessment as was in fact done.

5.    In  the  circumstances  we  find  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  has  affected  the
    decisions in each of these cases and we will remit each  case  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh determination  before  a  different
    judge.



Signed                                  Date


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal






