
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/03134/2015
                                                               ia/03304/2015
                                                               ia/03486/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 18 August 2015                      |             On 11 December 2015    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            sj (first appellant)
                            mj (second appellant)
                            kj (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Williams, Andrew Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Zimbabwe who were born in 1971, 1979 and
    2000 respectively.  The first and second  appellants  are  husband  and
    wife and the third appellant is their child.  The  appellants  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 2 January 2015  to  refuse
    their applications for leave to remain.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Kelly) in a decision promulgated on 22 April 2015 dismissed the appeal.
     The appellants now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The third appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for more than seven
    years.  The grounds assert that he satisfied  the  requirements  of  E-
    LTRPT.2.2(d) and that the judge had failed  to  take  account  of  that
    fact.   Granting  permission,  Judge  Colyer  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that the third appellant met the requirements of ELTRPT.2.2(d)
    and also the requirements under EX.1.  It was not clear from the  grant
    of permission, however, or indeed from the grounds of  appeal  why  the
    judge may arguably have erred in his assessment of the evidence and, in
    particular, his application  of  the  necessary  test  in  this  appeal
    (whether that application was by way of EX.1 of Appendix FM or  Article
    8 ECHR).  The  judge  correctly  considered  whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles in the way of  the  appellants  continuing  their
    private and family life in Zimbabwe notwithstanding the fact  that  the
    third appellant had been living in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than
    seven years.  That was described as  "the  ultimate  question"  by  the
    judge [21] and accepted as such by Miss  Oliver,  who  represented  the
    appellants before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge  went  on  to
    conclude as follows at [22 - 24]:

    I bear in mind that the third appellant has continuously resided in the
    United Kingdom for a period of nearly 10 years and that this period  of
    residence has occurred during a critical  period  of  his  development;
    that is to say, between the ages of 5 years and 14 years.  However,  as
    he himself told me, his father has never hidden from him the fact  that
    they might one day have to return, as a family, to Zimbabwe. The  third
    appellant is not in my judgment at a particularly important juncture in
    his education. He has only relatively recently  embarked  upon  courses
    leading to GCSEs which, with the exception of Business Studies,  he  is
    not due to sit until the summer of 2016. Whilst a case could  no  doubt
    be made - all other things  being  equal  -  for  the  third  appellant
    completing his education in the UK, the fact remains that,  as  a  non-
    British national, he is not entitled to do so.

    In assessing the best interests of the third appellant, I have  adopted
    the approach propounded by Lewison LJ in EV (Philippines v SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 -

    In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of  the
    children must be made on the basis that the facts are as  they  are  in
    the real world. If one parent has no right to  remain,  but  the  other
    parent does, that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
    conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then that is  the
    background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate
    question will be: is it reasonable to expect the child  to  follow  the
    parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?

    In this case, neither of KJ's parents have any right to remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom.  On  the  contrary,  they  have  been  residing   here
    unlawfully for the past three years. They have always known that  their
    leave  to  remain  was  limited,  and  they  thus  had  no   legitimate
    expectation of being permitted to settle in the UK. Moreover, there  is
    no obvious alternative to KJ returning with his parents to Zimbabwe. It
    is not suggested, for example, that his best interests would be  served
    by him remaining with his maternal aunt, who lives  in  Birmingham  and
    has indefinite leave to remain. Thus, whilst there are undoubtedly some
    contra-indicators, I am satisfied on balance that the third appellant's
    best interests are  served  by  him  returning  to  Zimbabwe  with  his
    parents. This will undoubtedly cause a degree of hardship for  all  the
    members of this honest and hardworking family, but I am satisfied  that
    they will be able to assist each other in overcoming such difficulties;
    difficulties which I in any event hold to be outweighed by  the  public
    interest in maintaining the economic well being of the country  through
    the consistent application of immigration controls.

 3. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge failed properly to apply EV
    (Philippines) (see  above).   The  appellant  asserts  that  the  judge
    determined the child's best interests when he should instead have  been
    considering whether it was reasonable to expect the third appellant  to
    follow his parents back to Zimbabwe.  Frankly, that argument amounts to
    little more than sophistry; the judge's analysis of  the  child's  best
    interests inevitably included  the  consideration  of  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect him to return to Zimbabwe  with  his  parents.   I
    find that there is no indication at all that the judge has not followed
    the ratio of EV (Philippines). Indeed, the judge acknowledged that this
    was a "honest and hardworking family" and  that  they  would  no  doubt
    suffer a degree of hardship upon return to Zimbabwe, but  it  was  also
    plainly open to the judge, on the facts before him,  to  conclude  that
    there were no very significant obstacles in the way of  the  appellants
    continuing their family life  in  Zimbabwe  or,  indeed,  that  it  was
    unreasonable  for  the  third  appellant,  notwithstanding   his   long
    residence in the United Kingdom, to return  with  his  parents  to  his
    country of nationality.  The judge's decision is  supported  by  cogent
    and  clear  reasoning  which  was  plainly  in   line   with   relevant
    jurisprudence, including EV (Philippines).  The Upper  Tribunal  should
    only interfere with an analysis of the First-tier Tribunal where  there
    are good reasons for doing so and I can identify  no  such  reasons  in
    this instance.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 10 November 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

