
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
Ia/03818/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                    | Determination Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2016                           | On 26 April 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                             sai krishna bandari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                  IMMIGRATION OFFICER (MANCHESTER AIRPORT)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Deborah Revill, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Phil Mangion, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Cope) dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision taken
    on 20 January 2015 to revoke the appellant's EEA residence card and  to
    give directions for his removal to Italy.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1988 who originally came to
    the UK as a student and had leave to remain as a student until 31  July
    2014. The EEA sponsor, CC, is a citizen of  Italy  born  in  1979.  The
    parties have been in a relationship since August 2013 and were  married
    on 21 March 2014 in London.  The  appellant  was  issued  with  an  EEA
    residence card on 14 May 2014 which was valid  for  a  period  of  five
    years. CC worked in the UK until the end of July 2014 when she returned
    to Italy because he father had suffered a stroke. CC has since returned
    to the UK every month for a few days at a time.  In  October  2014  the
    appellant took up employment in Carlisle and the household moved there.
    In January 2015 the appellant visited CC in Italy and was not  admitted
    to the UK upon  his  return  to  Manchester  Airport.  He  was  granted
    temporary admission. Following interviews  the  respondent  decided  to
    revoke the EEA residence card. CC claims that she has now  returned  to
    the UK and works as an art restorer.

 4. The respondent decided that CC was not in the UK, having left for Italy
    in July 2014. The appellant was not therefore seeking to  join  an  EEA
    national in the UK who had a right to reside there and had no right  to
    be admitted under regulation 11 of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations"). The respondent was also not
    satisfied that the marriage was not one of convenience only.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at North Shields on 23 April 2015. He was not represented.  The
    respondent conceded that  refusal  of  entry  on  the  grounds  of  not
    accompanying  or  joining  CC  was  unsustainable  given  that  CC  was
    physically present at the hearing. The First-tier Tribunal  also  found
    that the marriage was not one of convenience. However, the  appeal  was
    dismissed because the judge was not satisfied that  CC  was  exercising
    treaty rights and had not done so since 30 July  2014.  The  respondent
    was therefore entitled to revoke the EEA residence card because it  had
    not been shown that CC was exercising treaty rights on any basis in the
    UK.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on  9
    December 2015 on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    wrongly placed the burden of proof upon the appellant in  a  revocation
    case, the judge should have considered the appellant's right to  reside
    as an EEA family member as at the date of hearing and the judge  failed
    properly to consider Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules  and  the
    Regulations.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 5 January  2016  the  respondent  submitted
    that in order to justify revocation it was only  necessary  to  show  a
    change of circumstances as per paragraph 27 of Samsam (EEA:  revocation
    and retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 (IAC).

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Miss Revill submitted that the judge had incorrectly placed the  burden
    of proof upon the appellant and the respondent had to  prove  that  the
    grounds applied. The legal burden remained on the respondent. There  is
    nothing in  Samsam  that  suggests  that  the  burden  of  proof  in  a
    revocation case shifts back to an appellant. The respondent must  prove
    a change of circumstances and that  the  change  of  circumstances  has
    removed the right of residence.

11. In relation to the  second  ground,  Ms  Revill  submitted  that  under
    Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs: relevant  evidence)  [2013]  UKUT  00346
    (IAC), the relevant date for determination of the  right  of  residence
    was the date of hearing rather than the date of decision and  therefore
    the judge was wrong to conclude at paragraph 105 of the  decision  that
    the respondent was entitle to revoke the EEA residence card because  it
    had  not  been  shown  that  CC  was  then  exercising  treaty  rights.
    Regulation 13 permits residence for an EEA national for  three  months.
    CC re-entered the UK on 28 January 2015 and the appeal was heard on  23
    April 2015, less than three months later.

12. In relation to the third ground, Ms Revill submitted that the judge was
    obliged to consider whether the appellant's  private  and  family  life
    were adequately considered by the Rules or  whether  there  was  a  gap
    requiring a Razgar assessment. The conclusion at paragraphs 148-149  of
    the decision that there was  no  basis  for  further  consideration  of
    Article 8 was not sustainable. The judge accepted that the relationship
    was genuine and the Rules do not  cover  a  relationship  with  an  EEA
    partner who is not settled in the UK.

13. Mr Mangion submitted that the effect of paragraphs 26-27 of  Samsam  is
    that the burden of proof shifted back to the appellant because  of  the
    change in CC's circumstances. The burden of proof does transfer in some
    cases such as marriages of convenience. There were two elements to  the
    revocation decision - the marriage and the exercise of  treaty  rights.
    There was a dispute as to whether the  evidential  burden  existed  for
    both or only a single head.  Samsam  does  not  directly  address  that
    issue. The judge did consider the facts as at the date of  hearing,  as
    shown by paragraph 106 of the decision. The judge referred to obstacles
    at paragraph 144 of the decision and there was nothing to suggest  that
    there was an arguable Article 8 case. Removal was not imminent and  the
    appellant could make any future application  under  Article  8  or  the
    Regulations. The first ground was the nub of the issue.

14. Miss Revill submitted in response that  the  legal  burden  is  on  the
    respondent throughout in marriage of convenience cases. The  notice  of
    decision served on the appellant was based upon him not accompanying or
    joining the sponsor in the UK. It was not specifically alleged that  CC
    was not exercising treaty rights. The  removal  decision  requires  the
    appellant to leave the UK and Article 8  was  engaged.  The  Article  8
    question was whether removal as at the date  of  hearing  would  breach
    Article 8. Interference in protected  rights  must  be  justified.  The
    judge failed to recognise that CC and the  appellant  had  a  right  of
    residence under regulation 13. The judge failed to consider private and
    family life in the UK.

15. I have considered Samsam and Ewulo (effect  of  family  permit  -  OFM)
    [2012] UKUT 00238. From Samsam, loss of the right of  residence  during
    the currency of the EEA residence card would entitle the respondent  to
    revoke the card. Where the sole issue  in  an  appeal  is  whether  the
    respondent has lawfully revoked residence documentation on  the  ground
    of lack of qualification then the onus to justify such cancellation  is
    on the revoking authority. It  would  be  sufficient  to  justify  such
    revocation if there had been a change of circumstances since issue that
    removes the right of residence. The position was summarised in Ewulo as
    being that it is for the respondent to raise and substantiate a  ground
    that the permit was not  validly  or  properly  issued  and  should  be
    revoked. I accept Miss Revill's submission that there is nothing in the
    cited authorities to justify the proposition that the burden  of  proof
    shifts to the appellant at any point in a revocation case.

16. The relevant authorities were not cited to the judge. The judge  stated
    at paragraph 77 of the decision that the burden of proof in relation to
    the exercise of treaty rights was upon the appellant and  at  paragraph
    102 found that the appellant had to prove on balance  of  probabilities
    that CC was self-employed undertaking art and furniture restoration. At
    paragraph 106, the judge found that it had not been shown that since CC
    had returned to the UK she had  been  exercising  treaty  rights  as  a
    qualified person. I am satisfied  that  the  judge  thereby  materially
    erred in law by placing the burden of  proof  on  the  appellant  in  a
    revocation case.

17. The judge correctly found against the respondent  on  the  two  matters
    relied upon in the notice of decision dated 20 January 2015 (set out at
    paragraph 4 above). In my judgment, that should have been an end to the
    matter. The respondent did not state in the notice of decision that  CC
    was no longer exercising  treaty  rights  and  did  not  point  to  any
    evidence to support such a conclusion. There was no need  to  do  so  -
    either CC did not return to the UK by the date of hearing in which case
    the revocation would be justified on the ground that the appellant  was
    not seeking to join CC in the UK or she did return and could claim  the
    benefit of regulation 13.

18. It is of course open to the Secretary of State to make a fresh decision
    revoke the appellant's EEA residence card. Any such decision should  be
    fully explained in the notice of decision  and  evidence  based;  given
    that the burden of proof in any subsequent appeal would rest  upon  the
    Secretary of State. The appellant has submitted a 176  page  bundle  of
    evidence to the Upper Tribunal which should be carefully considered  by
    the Secretary of State before any fresh revocation decision is taken.

19. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law and its  decision  cannot
    stand. I have not found it necessary to consider the remaining  grounds
    of appeal.



Decision

20. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    remake the decision by;

               1) Allowing the appellant's appeal against the revocation  of
                  the appellant's EEA residence card.

               2) Declaring that the EEA residence card remains valid unless
                  and until revoked.



Signed   [pic]                      Date 20 April 2016


Judge Archer

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


