
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03685/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2019                  |On 12 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                 Saban Onar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not legally represented (Mr C Harding, the
                    appellant's former legal representative, observed the
                    proceedings)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a  decision  of  the  12  February  2016,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  SSHD's  decision  of  6
    January 2015 to remove him pursuant to section 10  of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999. As a consequence of the date (and nature)  of  the
    SSHD's  decision  this  is  an  appeal  made  pursuant  to  the  appeal
    provisions in place prior to amendment by Immigration Act 2014.

 2. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal took place in the absence  of
    both the appellant and his then legal representative  in  circumstances
    in which the SSHD accepted, both in her  rule  24  response  and  at  a
    hearing before DUTJ Lever on 7 October 2016, were procedurally  unfair.
    Consequently, the SSHD accepted that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing of 7 October 2016 DUTJ Lever indicated, pursuant to  the
    SSHD's concession, that he would set aside the decision of the FtT  and
    remit the appeal to the FtT for a de  novo  hearing.  Unfortunately,  a
    written decision to this effect did  not  follow  and  the  matter  has
    remained in the Upper Tribunal awaiting such decision.

 4. The matter was recently brought to  my  attention,  at  which  point  I
    issued a Transfer Order in my capacity as Principal  Resident  Judge  -
    the power to make such an order having been designated to the Office of
    the Principle Resident Judge by the President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (IAC). I additionally observed that the appellant's solicitor has  come
    off record and that the Tribunal  has  never  been  provided  with  the
    address of the appellant's residence. I listed the matter  for  hearing
    in order to establish whether it was still appropriate for  the  matter
    to be remitted to the FtT, given the effluxion of time and  the  events
    which are likely to have occurred subsequent to the hearing before DUTJ
    Lever.

 5. At the hearing of 10 December, Mr Clarke notified the Tribunal that two
    of the appellant's children had now been  granted  British  Citizenship
    (in March and October 2018 respectively). He  indicated  that  in  such
    circumstances the SSHD was content for the  appellant's  appeal  to  be
    allowed and he consented to the Upper Tribunal not giving  reasons  for
    its decision.

 6. Having considered all the circumstances of the case  and  having  taken
    account of the SSHD's position, I conclude that the decision to  remove
    the appellant  would  lead  to  a  breach  of  Article  8  ECHR  and  I
    accordingly allow his appeal on this basis.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside

Upon re-making, I allow the appellant's  appeal  for  the  reasons  set  out
above.



                    Signed: Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
                                    [pic]
                           Date: 10 December 2019


