

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03979/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 October 2013                            |On 24 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between


                         MR JINALKUMAR RAMBHAI PATEL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Atcha
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 15 October 1989.  He
    appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed dismissing his
    appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant him further leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant.  The
    respondent made the decision on 17 January 2013 and on the same date
    made a decision to remove the appellant by way of directions under
    section 47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   In a decision dated 13 September 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
    stated that there was no merit in the application for permission to
    appeal the judge's decision regarding the variation appeal: the
    appellant accepted he had received the letter requiring him to find an
    alternative college within 60 days but failed to do so.  He did not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  His explanation was
    not accepted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and his grounds seeking
    permission are a mere disagreement with a decision that was reasonably
    open to the judge.

3.   Insofar as the appeal against removal pursuant to s47 was concerned,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker found that the judge did not engage with the
    lawfulness of that decision.  The decision to remove the appeal under
    s47 was clearly unlawful and permission was granted to this limited
    extent only.

4.   The Upper Tribunal Judge issued directions requiring a response from
    the respondent under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 within 14 days of the receipt of her decision; and
    requesting a copy of the response to be sent to the appellant.  She
    added that in the event the respondent does not file a response or
    filed a response accepting there was an error of law in the terms as
    set out, it was the intention of the Tribunal to set aside the First-
    tier Tribunal decision insofar as s47 is concerned and remake the
    decision by allowing the appeal in so far as the decision to remove was
    unlawful.

5.   On 24 September 2013 the respondent submitted a rule 24 response
    indicating that the respondent did not oppose the appellant's s47
    application for permission to appeal and invited the Tribunal to allow
    the appeal to that extent and remit it to the Secretary of State for
    reconsideration.

6.   At the hearing today, Ms Holmes drew my attention to paragraph 6 of
    the determination where the First-tier Tribunal Judge recorded that the
    HOPO below at the outset of the hearing withdrew the s47 decision and
    therefore he did not need to deal with it.

7.   There was no objection by Miss Atcha.  In the circumstances I find
    there was no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.
    His decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.





Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
