
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03544/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 July 2014                                 |On 15th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         Mr Larry Osareniqharu Elema
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell
For the Respondent:    No Legal Representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Mr Larry Osareniqharu Elema, born on 15 February  1982,
    is a citizen of Nigeria.  I  shall  refer  to  the  respondent  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the  respondent  as  they  were
    respectively before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hague)
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse him a  residence
    card by reason of his marriage to a French citizen.  The  date  of  the
    refusal was 5 December 2013.

 3. In a determination which is dated 1 April 2014, the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge decided the matter on papers without a hearing in Manchester  and
    allowed the appeal.

 4. Today, 10 July 2014,  this  matter  comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    following a grant of permission by Judge Ievins dated 22 May 2014.   Mr
    Whitwell, a Senior Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  appears  for  the
    Secretary of State.  There is no appearance or representation on behalf
    of the appellant.  Enquiries were made by telephone by the Tribunal  of
    Chancery CS Solicitors this morning but they have informed us that they
    have had no instructions from their  client  and  will  be  writing  to
    confirm that in due course.

 5. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the notice of  hearing  was
    served by first class post on 30 May 2014 at the appellant at his  last
    known address in Forest Hill, London, and I am satisfied that I  should
    proceed with the hearing in his absence, which I have done.

 6. I find that the Secretary of State's appeal should be allowed.  I  make
    that finding for the following reason.  This is a case which concerns a
    marriage conducted by proxy according, as stated  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter, to the Ghanaian customary marriage laws.

 7. Put very simply, there has been a complete failure on the part  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to take account of the ratio of the case of  Kareem
    (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC).  Quotations from  that
    case appear in the grounds of appeal, and I note  at  paragraph  16  of
    Kareem and again at paragraph 14 that it is made clear  that  in  these
    cases the law that will apply will be the law of the  member  state  of
    nationality (and not the host member state) of the EU citizen; in  this
    case, the relevant member state is France as  the  appellant's  claimed
    family member is a French national; as noted in  Kareem, and  I  quote:
    "a lack of evidence of relevant foreign law will normally mean that the
    party with the burden of proving it will fail."

 8. As it is stated in the grounds of appeal, the First-tier Tribunal  made
    no finding that any evidence of relevant foreign law, that is  the  law
    of France, had been provided by the appellant. The judge  unfortunately
    appears to have proceeded on the basis of the  rather  misleading  head
    note of Kareem which suggests that there is a two-stage test  and  that
    the question of the validity of the marriage according to  the  law  of
    the EU nationals country of nationality arises  only  in  circumstances
    where the marriage certificate has doubt cast upon it. Here, the  judge
    has found that the marriage was  properly  registered  and  has  simply
    ceased his analysis at that point.  In fact, he writes at  paragraph  7
    of the determination:

         I find on the balance of probability that the marriage between  the
         appellant and his wife is a valid one according  to  Ghanaian  law.
         It is therefore valid in the law of England and Wales and  as  that
         is the only issue in the appeal I allow the appeal.

    That statement is wrong in law and, whilst it might conceivably  be  in
    line with what is said in the head note of Kareem, the  ratio  of  that
    case which I have summarised above is wholly  at  odds  with  what  the
    judge found.

 9. I therefore set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    remake the decision. Looking at the  evidence  that  the  Tribunal  has
    before it,  I say again that there is  no  evidence  at  all  that  the
    relevant foreign law, that is the law of France, allows for the form of
    marriage that the appellant and his French "spouse" have  entered  into
    to be considered valid, and in the absence of that evidence,  the  only
    proper course of action is to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision.

DECISION

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal dated 1 April 2014 is  set
    aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal against the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 5 December 2013 is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 10 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

