
IAC-AH-SC/CJ-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03670/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20th March 2015                       |On 26th May 2015                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           MR Gary Junior Pringle
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  9th  May  1991.   The
    Appellant last entered the UK on 30th August 2001, i.e. at the  age  of
    10.  He was granted discretionary leave on 3rd August 2007 valid  until
    9th November 2008 and further discretionary leave on 17th February 2010
    valid until 9th November 2013.  On 6th November  2013  the  Appellant's
    legal representatives applied for an  extension  of  his  discretionary
    leave in the United Kingdom.   That  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State by a Notice of Refusal dated 31st December 2013.  It
    was noted by the Secretary of State that the Appellant was now over  18
    and therefore classed as an adult in the United Kingdom and that during
    the Appellant's time in the UK he had persistently  committed  acts  of
    criminality.  His criminal convictions are set out at pages 1 and 2  of
    the Notice of Refusal.  The Appellant's most recent act of  criminality
    was that on 1st September 2011 he was convicted  at  the  Inner  London
    Crown Court for robbery and that since his last grant of  discretionary
    leave he has also been charged of an assault for which  he  received  a
    caution.   In  the  light   of   the   Appellant's   ongoing/persistent
    criminality the Secretary of State  was  satisfied  that  it  would  be
    undesirable to permit the Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom  as
    his presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good because his
    conduct and character made it undesirable to allow him to remain in the
    UK.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Malins sitting at Hatton Cross on 3rd November 2014.   In
    a determination promulgated  on  10th  December  2014  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed under Article 8 of the European Convention of  Human
    Rights.

 3. On 10th December 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State  in  those  ground
    contended:

      1) That the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding that the
         Appellant did not fall for refusal under S-LTR.1.6 of  Appendix  FM
         when  the  Appellant's  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  not
         conducive to the public good given his persistent  offending  since
         2008.

      2) That the circumstances identified by the judge cannot  be  said  to
         amount  to  "very  significant   obstacles   to   integration"   or
         exceptional/compelling circumstances.

      3) That by reference to Section 117B the judge erred in giving  weight
         to the Appellant's private life when at all times  the  Appellant's
         stay in the UK had been precarious.

      4) The judge had failed to apply Nasim [2014] UKUT 25  IAC:  that  the
         use of Article 8 has very limited use of a private life  which  did
         not interfere with a person's moral and physical integrity.

 4.  On  2nd  February  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ransley  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Ransley considered that it was arguable so
    far as Ground 1 is  concerned  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision that the Appellant's  application  for  further  discretionary
    leave did not fall for  refusal  under  S-LTR.1.6  was  not  adequately
    reasoned when the judge failed to take  into  account  the  Appellant's
    persistent offending since 2008 and that the judge might have  exceeded
    her jurisdiction by stating that the Respondent "should  probably  have
    granted"  further  discretionary  leave  to  remain.    Judge   Ransley
    considered that the second ground had little merit  and  in  accordance
    with normal principles allowed all grounds to be argued if  one  ground
    was to be argued.  Judge Ransley considered that the judge was entitled
    to find that the Appellant's profound deafness  and  his  inability  to
    communicate if returned to Jamaica where American Sign Language is used
    rather than British Sign Language as a "significant  obstacle".   Judge
    Ransley considered it was arguable further that the judge had erred  in
    law for failure to give consideration to the public interest factors as
    required by Section 117B of the 2002 Act  and  that  the  determination
    showed that the judge had given no consideration to  the  authority  in
    the Nasim.  In such circumstances she considered that the determination
    showed  arguable  errors  of  law  that  might  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal and she granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 5. On 18th February 2015 the Appellant's instructing solicitors  lodged  a
    reply on behalf of the Respondent pursuant to  Rule  24.   That  reply,
    which is settled by Counsel, and runs to five pages  is  effectively  a
    skeleton argument of submissions in response.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  For the  purpose  of  continuity  within  the  proceedings  the
    Secretary of State is referred to  herein  as  the  Respondent  and  Mr
    Pringle as the Appellant.  The  Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Toal.  Also in  attendance  is  the  Appellant  himself.   I
    acknowledged the Appellant's circumstances in  that  he  is  profoundly
    deaf and that he is assisted by a sign reader within these proceedings.
     I have  taken  care  throughout  this  decision  to  ensure  that  the
    Appellant understands all that  is  being  communicated  to  him.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Jarvis.

The Relevant Immigration Rule:

         "S-LTR.1.6. The  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
         conducive to the  public  good  because  their  conduct  (including
         convictions which do  not  fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to
         1.5.),  character,  associations,  or   other   reasons   make   it
         undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK."

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Jarvis starts  by  submitting  that  it  is  a  requirement  for  an
    applicant seeking leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the
    UK that his application does not fall for refusal  under  a  number  of
    grounds of which S-LTRP.1.6 is one of them.  It is his contention  that
    the Appellant's criminal record is poor and that whilst  the  Appellant
    may have provided  supporting  evidence  regarding  his  character  and
    expressed his remorse this does not change the  fact  he  has  shown  a
    blatant disregard for  the  laws  of  the  UK  through  his  persistent
    offending since 2008.  He points out that S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix  FM  is
    about past conduct and that therefore the focus of the judge  is  wrong
    and that the judge's approach to paragraph 15(2)(c) is wrong.  He  asks
    the Tribunal to find an error of law and that the Appellant cannot meet
    the Rules.  He submits it is necessary for the appeal to be  considered
    outside the Rules looking for  compelling  circumstances  and  that  it
    would therefore be appropriate for the judge to have applied  paragraph
    117B of the Immigration Act and that little weight should be given to a
    private  life  established  when  a  person's  immigration  status   is
    precarious - as he contends is the Appellant's.  Further,  he  contends
    that whilst the Tribunal has found  the  Appellant  has  established  a
    private life in the UK the  judge  failed  to  direct  herself  to  the
    authority of Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025  IAC  where
    it was found that the use of Article 8 had very limited use for private
    life cases which did not interfere with a person's moral  and  physical
    integrity.  He asked me to find that there is a material error  of  law
    and to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Mr Toal in response states that it is for the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    to make  a  decision  and  that  she  has  done  so  having  given  due
    consideration to both the offences and the history of  this  Appellant.
    The judge knew of the Appellant's offending history and was entitled to
    draw the conclusions that she did.  He takes me to  the  evidence  that
    was before the Tribunal namely  that  of  the  Appellant's  mentor,  Mr
    Palata, and the expert evidence of  Dr  O'Rourke,  consultant  clinical
    psychologist, specialising in work with the deaf community.  He  points
    out that none of the evidence of Mr Palata nor Dr O'Rourke is  impugned
    in the Grounds of Appeal  and  submits  that  that  provided  a  proper
    evidential basis for the judge's clear reasons for  not  upholding  the
    Secretary of State's decision on the basis of S-LTR.1.6.

 9. He acknowledges that there is no references by  the  judge  to  Section
    117B factors but submits that given the specific facts of this case  it
    would have made no material difference and thus her failure  to  do  so
    does not constitute a material error of law.  Further, so  far  as  the
    decision in Nasim is concerned firstly he points out that that was  not
    raised at the appeal hearing but in any event submits it would make  no
    material difference given that the Tribunal in Nasim was concerned with
    the Article 8 rights of students whose Article 8 arguments  arose  from
    the time they had spent in the United Kingdom with  student  leave  and
    that this is an entirely distinct factual matrix from the present  case
    since the Appellant has resided in the UK since  the  age  of  10,  was
    taken into care, and was granted discretionary leave on  the  six  year
    route to settlement.  He asked me to find there is no material error of
    law and to dismiss the appeal.

10. Mr Jarvis points out that Section  117B  relates  effectively  to  what
    happens next whereas S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM is not so restrictive and
    it is not shown that the Rules should be construed in the  manner  that
    the judge has done i.e. addressing the issue on present conduct at  the
    date of hearing.  He submits the argument is not about jurisdiction and
    that the emphasis of the judge is wrong.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. It is important to remember the  basis  upon  which  this  appeal  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal in that the factual history was set  out
    to the judge and it is against that factual history that the judge made
    her  findings.   The  Appellant  is  profoundly  deaf.   I  accept  his
    disability.  It is contended that  that  deafness  was  probably  as  a
    consequence of being dropped by his mother as a baby but  there  is  no
    evidence regarding this before me or, as far as I am aware,  was  there
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Thereafter the factual history is  not
    challenged by the Secretary of State.  It is extremely well set out  at
    paragraph 1 of the Appellant's previously instructed Counsel's reply to
    the grant of permission to appeal.  It is clear that the Appellant  has
    had a disadvantaged upbringing.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had  the
    benefit of a full and detailed analysis of the  Appellant's  upbringing
    and of the evidence of the Appellant's mentor  Pafe  Mike  Palata.   Mr
    Palata's evidence is set out in some  detail  at  paragraph  8  of  the
    determination.   Further,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  took  into
    account the written evidence of Dr Sue O'Rourke a  consultant  clinical
    psychologist who is registered as a sign language interpreter  and  has
    worked in the National Mental Health Service for Deaf People in  London
    and Birmingham and was manager of Deaf Services  at  Rampton  Hospital.
    Dr O'Rourke's doctoral research was in the area of deaf people  in  the
    criminal justice system and the First-tier Tribunal Judge quotes  quite
    extensively  from  that  report  at  paragraphs  10  and  11   of   her
    determination.

14. The judge thereafter made findings  on  credibility  finding  both  the
    Appellant and Mr Palata - who she describes as an excellent  and  rock-
    like mentor to be wholly credible witnesses and upon whose evidence she
    could rely.  The judge then went on to consider the scope of the appeal
    and made findings of fact which are set out  at  paragraph  15.1.   The
    approach adopted by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  this  point  is
    unchallenged by the Secretary of State and shows a proper  constructive
    and detailed analysis set out in a most thoughtful  and  well-presented
    style.

15. The thrust of the Secretary of State is that the judge has  effectively
    erred in law thereafter so far as her findings under the relevant legal
    provisions are  concerned.   However,  I  am  satisfied  that  she  has
    provided a proper and adequate reason in her consideration of paragraph
    S-LTR.1.6 of the Immigration Rules and has provided proper and adequate
    reasons for finding that the application did not fall to be refused  on
    this basis.  She has looked  at  the  matter  thoroughly  at  paragraph
    15.2.(c) and has gone so far as to cross-reference the matter  back  to
    the findings of fact she made at paragraph 15.1 on the  evidence  heard
    at the appeal supported by Dr O'Rourke's report.  I am  satisfied  that
    the judge having considered all the evidence  including  in  particular
    that or Mr Palata and Dr O'Rourke provides a  proper  evidential  basis
    for the judge's clear reasons not upholding the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision on the basis of S-LTR.1.6 and as such her  approach  does  not
    disclose any material error of law.

16. The contention that the circumstances identified by the judge could not
    be said to amount to a very  significant  obstacle  to  integration  or
    exceptional compelling circumstances is given scant  support  by  Judge
    Ransley when granting permission.  Judge Ransley is  correct  in  doing
    so.  I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to find the Appellant's
    profound deafness and his inability to communicate  if  returned  to  a
    Jamaica where American Sign Language is used rather than  British  Sign
    Language to be a significant obstacle.  Again these were  matters  that
    were aired fully before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   They  are  not
    aired fully before me.  The only reference  to  them  however  expanded
    upon is an explanation to be found at paragraph  5.1  of  the  Rule  24
    reply on behalf  of  the  Respondent  as  to  differences  between  the
    respective sign languages and the pervasive stigma in respect of people
    with disabilities, is to the fact that British  Sign  Language  is  not
    generally used in Jamaica.  It is clear that this aspect has been given
    full and proper consideration by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  the
    submission herein amounts to little  more  than  disagreement  and  the
    decision shows no material error of law.

17. Everybody accepts that there is within this determination no  reference
    to Section 117B.  There is a requirement to consider Section  117B  but
    in this instance bearing in mind the exceptional facts of this  case  I
    am satisfied that even had the judge done  so  the  decision  that  she
    would have come to would based on  the  very  exceptional  history  and
    health problems of this matter be such that there would be no  material
    difference to her decision.  It is just a factor to be considered.   In
    such circumstances failure to refer to it does not disclose a  material
    error of law.

18. Finally whilst the Secretary of State now seeks to rely  on  Nasim  and
    the fact that Article 8 has very limited use  for  private  life  cases
    which did not interfere with a person's moral and  physical  integrity.
    The case law on Article 8 is  constantly  evolving.   As  the  Rule  24
    response points out firstly Nasim was not  raised  or  brought  to  the
    attention of the court at the appeal  hearing  and  secondly  it  takes
    place on an entirely distinct factual matrix  from  the  present  case.
    This is an Appellant who has resided in the UK since the age of 10  and
    has been in care of the local authority.  He was granted  discretionary
    leave on a six year route to settlement.  It is clear  that  all  these
    factors were given due  and  proper  consideration  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  and  that  there  is  a  specific   consideration   of
    exceptional circumstances which the judge clearly found to  be  present
    on the facts of the case.

19. In such circumstances for all the above reasons I am satisfied that the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  discloses  no  material
    error of law and  that  the  submissions  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    effectively  amount  to  little  more  than  disagreement.    In   such
    circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained and
    the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
