
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03613/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAH RUKH IQBAL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Willock Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S F Khan, N R Legal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State.  It relates  to  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid that was promulgated  on  24
    August 2015.  It has been brought pursuant to  a  grant  of  permission
    from First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  dated  17  December  2015.   Put
    shortly, the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal was a citizen  of
    Pakistan born on 2 November 1986 who applied in July 2014 for leave  to
    remain as the partner of his wife under Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules.

2.   His application was refused by the Secretary of State  and  a  decision
    to remove was made.  The reasons given were that it was not  considered
    that the appellant and his  wife  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship which qualified under Appendix FM, and  particularly  that
    he had not taken an English language test in 2011 with the  Educational
    Testing Services (ETS).

3.   It is with this latter aspect that the appeal before me today has  been
    principally concerned.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge in examining  the
    matter and coming  to  certain  conclusions  had  before  her  material
    presented by the Secretary of State concerning English language  tests.
    It appears from the tenor of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    that that evidence was dismissed out of hand on the basis that  it  was
    generic. In paragraph 19 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    said the following:
         "I find that the respondent did not interview the appellant  before
         making this decision which was accepted to be  the  usual  practice
         when a test score issue is raised by ETS.  This was unfair  on  the
         appellant as it meant the decision relied entirely on  the  generic
         evidence regarding the claimed deception in the taking of tests and
         the printout only, without asking the appellant for his version  of
         events or any evidence he might have that it was in  fact  him  who
         took the test. It is noted that the statement of Mona  Shah  refers
         in paragraph 9 to the appellant as having made a Tier 4 application
         which was not the case  for  this  appellant.  It  also  refers  to
         enforcement action as a result (para 33 Rebecca Collings) which  is
         not what happened to this appellant."

4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge continued at paragraph 20:
         "I therefore conclude that  the  appellant  did  himself  take  the
         December 2011 ETS test and did not therefore employ any  deception,
         provide any false documents or  information  or  fail  to  disclose
         material matters to the respondent prior to this application  being
         made."

5.   In many ways I can understand the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  speaking
    slightly disparaging in relation simply to generic evidence but I  have
    had the opportunity today of considering the bundle of papers that were
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  which  include  the   witness
    statement of Mona  Shah,  a  further  witness  statement  from  Rebecca
    Collings and a detailed witness statement from  Peter  Millington.   In
    addition to that there is a computerised record which appears as  Annex
    A which indicates as invalid the score of Mr Iqbal in relation  to  the
    test which it is claimed was taken.

6.    What  troubles  me  significantly  is  that  in  reaching  so  firm  a
    conclusion in paragraph 20 that the appellant did take  the  test,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  gives  insufficient  regard  to  the  very
    detailed content of the three witness statements to which I  have  made
    reference.  She touches upon the matter with some brevity in  paragraph
    19 but does not descend properly to deal with the detailed  content  of
    those  statements  which  set  out  in  clear  terms   the   scientific
    methodology adopted in order to  enquire  through  listening  to  sound
    recordings whether there was duplicity  or  dishonesty  in  individuals
    putting themselves forward for those tests.

7.   The important test of  whether  a  judge  has  given  anxious  scrutiny
    applies just as much in relation to the case advanced by the  Secretary
    of State as it does in relation to the case which  is  advanced  by  an
    appellant.  So  cursory  is  the  judge's  comment  dealing  with  this
    significant and detailed evidence  that  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that
    appropriate anxious scrutiny was  given  to  the  powerful  and  cogent
    evidence that Mr Iqbal was not the individual who claimed to have taken
    the test on that occasion.  Whatever the decision may be, the judge did
    insufficient in analysing the evidence to lay the basic building blocks
    of the robust conclusion which she articulated in paragraph 20.

8.   I have had placed before me today  a  recent  bundle  of  documentation
    submitted to the Upper  Tribunal  under  cover  of  a  letter  dated  4
    February. This includes a  lengthy  witness  statement  from  Mr  Iqbal
    dealing with his confirmation that he did  indeed  take  the  test.  In
    addition,  clipped  to  that  witness  statement  are  other  items  of
    documentation, one of which I am  told  gives  evidence  of  a  parking
    ticket which was incurred in the vicinity of  the  location  where  the
    test would have taken place on the date in question, and which  has  Mr
    Iqbal's name on it.

9.   Clearly these  are  matters  which  merit  proper  investigation  by  a
    further First-tier Tribunal, when the judge  can  form  an  appropriate
    view  based  upon  the   oral  testimony  of  this  witness   and   the
    documentation provided in support  and  in  particular  can  give  such
    weight as he or she considers appropriate to the  documentary  evidence
    presented by the Secretary of State which gives rise to a prima  facie,
    albeit rebuttable, assertion that this individual was  not  the  person
    who claimed to have taken the English test on the day in question.

10.  Therefore I inevitably come to the conclusion that there  is  an  error
    of law as identified in the grounds of appeal in relation to the way in
    which the judge dealt with the evidence concerning the English language
    test. That error of law is undoubtedly material as it had a key bearing
    on the outcome of this matter and in consequence this  appeal  must  be
    allowed.

11.  It therefore follows that there needs to be a rehearing of this  matter
    before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  which  can  properly  investigate  the
    evidence on both sides of  the  argument  and  come  to  a  proper  and
    balanced conclusion having heard and read  all  pertinent  evidence  on
    whether the issue regarding the English language test is  made  out  or
    otherwise.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed. Matter remitted to First-tier Tribunal for a  rehearing.  No
findings preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 20 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

