
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03849/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2016                   |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                            mr Suman Kanagaratnam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego which was promulgated on 12 May 2016.  The First-
    tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision to refuse to issue a residence card under the European
    Economic Area Regulations 2006.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 16 March  1985.
    The appellant applied for a residence card under  Regulation  8(2)  and
    8(3) of the EEA Regulations as an extended  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United   Kingdom.    The
    respondent refused to issue a residence card. He appealed  against  the
    respondent's refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal  finding  that
    the evidence of the appellant and the sponsor  was  not  credible,  the
    medical evidence could not be relied upon to any  material  degree  and
    that there was no independent support for the evidence of the appellant
    and the sponsor about the care provided.  The First-tier Tribunal  also
    found that the sponsor did not support the appellant financially whilst
    the appellant was in Sri Lanka.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 20 September 2016 First-tier Tribunal Shimmin granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal.  Thus the appeal came before me.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the outset of the hearing Ms Benfield  indicated  that  she  and  Mr
    Tarlow had discussed the appeal.  Ms Benfield referred to the  recently
    released Upper Tribunal decision in the case of Sala  (EFMs:  right  of
    appeal) [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).  Ms Benfield accepted in  light  of  the
    decision in the case of Sala the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law
    because it had no jurisdiction  to  entertain  an  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a residence card to  an
    extended family member.  She indicated that it  was  accepted  that  no
    other application can be made  in  respect  of  this  appeal.   As  the
    appellant has no right of appeal this is the end of the natter for  the
    appellant.

 6. Mr Tarlow indicated that he could not add  anything  to  Ms  Benfield's
    submissions.

Discussion

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside  because  the
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain the appellant's  appeal.   As
    set out in Sala extended family members do not have an entitlement to a
    residence card and therefore the rights of  appeal  do  not  extend  to
    appeals against a decision not to issue a residence  card  to  extended
    family members falling within Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations 2006.



 8. The appellant had no right of appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal.   It  therefore  erred  in  law  in
    entertaining the appeal.

 9. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision and substitute a  decision
    that there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    decision of the Secretary of State stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 8 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

