
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03830/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2016                         |On 19th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               ms frida vukaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 27th September 1987.  The
    Appellant entered the UK on 14th August 2016 following a grant of leave
    as a student until 14th August 2007.  The Appellant was  most  recently
    granted discretionary leave to  remain  on  25th  November  2011  until
    November 2014 under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human
    Rights on  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  Rebani
    Mucobega.  On 21st November 2014  the  Appellant  applied  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  However the Appellant confirmed
    that her relationship with Mr Mucobega was no longer  subsisting.   The
    Appellant's application was refused by  Notice  of  Refusal  dated  8th
    January 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Grant sitting at Hatton Cross on 20th  May  2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  22nd  June  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules.   On  6th  July  2016
    Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds
    contended  firstly  that  the  judge  misdirected  herself  in  law  at
    paragraph 31 by refusing to undertake an Article 8  ECHR  consideration
    outside the Immigration Rules and secondly  that  the  judge  erred  in
    making irreconcilable findings with regard  to  the  Appellant's  claim
    that she was a victim of domestic violence.

 3. On 24th October First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Ford considered that it was arguable that the First-tier
    Tribunal may  have  erred  in  failing  to  conduct  a  proportionality
    assessment outside the Rules given the acceptance by the Tribunal  that
    the Appellant had left her husband due  to  domestic  violence.   Judge
    Ford did not consider that it was arguable that the  findings  made  on
    the issue of domestic violence were inconsistent as between  paragraphs
    24 and 29 in that at paragraph 24 it was accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had left her husband due to his violence towards her.  Judge Ford noted
    that at paragraph 29 Judge Grant had found that the Appellant could not
    succeed under the domestic violence concession because the marriage was
    short and because she did not report the matter to the police  and  did
    not seek an injunction.  Judge Ford considered that such findings might
    strengthen the argument that the First-tier Tribunal Judge should  have
    gone on to consider the proportionality of  the  decision  outside  the
    Rules.

 4. On 11th November 2016 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24 contending therein  that  the  judge  found  no
    compelling features within the appeal, rejected the  Appellant's  claim
    of fear from her family as  exaggerated,  had  found  that  whilst  the
    Appellant had a difficult marriage she had exited it  quickly  and  had
    given clear reasons why there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  her
    returning to Albania and made findings that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances that would warrant  consideration  of  the  circumstances
    outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  initially  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    her instructed Counsel Mr Blundell.  Mr Blundell is familiar with  this
    matter being the author of the Grounds of  Appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Bramble.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Bramble starts by reminding me that the Rule relating to a claim for
    indefinite leave to remain as a victim of domestic violence  which  was
    originally enshrined in paragraph 289(A) of the  Immigration  Rules  is
    now to be found in Appendix FM at E-DVILR.1.1 and that that  Rule  sets
    out a test of four requirements all of which must be met.  He  contends
    that the judge is not constrained by the IDIs and that it was necessary
    for the judge to consider the evidence holistically.  He  takes  me  to
    page 11 where the judge accepts that the  Appellant  was  a  victim  of
    domestic violence and refers me to Section E-DVILR which sets  out  the
    eligibility for indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a  domestic  violence
    victim in particular paragraph E-DVILR.1.2 and that the  initial  leave
    was granted outside the Rules and not as a partner and therefore it was
    not open to the  Appellant  to  benefit  from  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. Mr Blundell starts by addressing the history of the  case  set  out  at
    paragraph 4 of Judge Grant's decision and that  the  Appellant's  leave
    was lawful and continuous from August 2006.  He acknowledges  that  the
    Appellant cannot meet the ten year residence requirement required under
    the Immigration Rules failing by some three months at the date  of  the
    hearing.  He reminds me that the Appellant speaks  fluent  English  and
    refers me  to  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  and  the  skeleton
    argument  that  were  produced  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    particular he refers me to the features which relate to  the  expressed
    closeness of the Appellant to  her  sister  and  to  her  personal  and
    professional life within the United Kingdom.

 8. He asked the Tribunal to note, and give consideration which should have
    been addressed to paragraph 276ADE(vi) namely that the requirements  to
    be met by an applicant for leave to remain on grounds of  private  life
    in the UK are at the date of the application that the Appellant is aged
    18 years or over, has lived continuously in the UK for less than twenty
    years but there would be very significant obstacles to the  applicant's
    integration into the country to which he or she would  have  to  go  if
    required to leave the UK.  He submits that Rule requires  the  Tribunal
    to look at the Appellant's ability to reintegrate in Albania and not to
    look at her position within the UK and that  if  due  consideration  is
    given to paragraph 31 of the judge's decision it  is  clear  from  that
    paragraph that the approach adopted by the judge was  to  look  at  the
    wrench that would be upon the Appellant in leaving the UK  rather  than
    her inability to return and integrate in Albania.

 9. He takes me to the extensive judgment of Mr Justice  Edis  in  Sunassee
    [2015] EWHC 1604 (Admin) which sets out the proper approach to  Article
    8 outside the Rules and Judge Edis's proper  analysis  that  the  first
    stage in an Article 8 consideration is to  assess  how  completely  the
    Rules reflect Article 8.  He submits therefore if looking at  paragraph
    276ADE there would be punitive circumstances in removing the  Appellant
    to Albania and that there has been no consideration made by  the  judge
    of her ties to this country.  Consequently following  the  guidance  in
    Sunassee it is appropriate for the judge to consider this initially and
    she has failed to do so.  He submits that that position is accepted  by
    the Home Office but that the judge effectively applied the  wrong  test
    by applying Gulshan and therefore an error of law arises.

10. Mr Bramble accepts the submission made by  Mr  Blundell  but  disagrees
    with his conclusions pointing  out  that  a  lot  depends  on  how  you
    interpret paragraph 31 of the immigration decision.   He  accepts  that
    potentially the judge has fallen into error.  He submits it  is  not  a
    matter as to whether I would have come to a different decision and much
    of Mr Blundell's argument amounts to  disagreement.   He  takes  me  to
    paragraph 29 of the decision which he states  addresses  the  issue  of
    domestic violence as a freestanding exercise and that the thrust of the
    arguments are considered by the judge at paragraph 30.  He acknowledges
    that at paragraph 31 the Appellant's relationship with her  sister  has
    not been considered but queries whether this in itself would constitute
    an error of law.  He poses the  rhetorical  question  as  to  what  are
    weighty issues and whether or not  there  has  been  a  proportionality
    exercise carried out.  He asked me to sustain the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

11.  In  short  response  Mr  Blundell  submits  that  there  has  been  no
    proportionality assessment carried  out  and  that  there  has  been  a
    material error of law setting out that the judge has made no  balancing
    exercise and no reference to  paragraph  117B  of  the  2002  Act.   As
    specifically the  judge  has  failed  to  make  any  reference  to  the
    consequences that might apply to this Appellant on return.  He contends
    that the determination is not well set out,  that  there  has  been  no
    consideration of the Appellant's relationship with her  sister,  nor  a
    period of long residence and what is called in this  day  and  age  the
    "near miss point".  He submits  that  defectively  there  has  been  no
    evidence of an Article 8 exercise.  He asked  me  firstly  to  find  an
    error of law and then to go on and remake  the  decision  allowing  the
    appeal.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. The correct first approach  in  this  matter  is  as  Mr  Blundell  has
    submitted  to  me  for  the  judge  to  consider  how  completely   the
    Immigration Rules reflect the range of Article  8  considerations  upon
    which the Appellant relies.  Much guidance is given on this issue by Mr
    Justice Edis in Sunassee.  I agree with Mr Blundell that the judge  has
    failed to undertake that exercise.

15. There seems to  be  agreement  between  the  legal  representatives  as
    endorsed by the record  of  the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions  at
    paragraph 17 of Judge Grant's decision  that  this  was  a  case  where
    private life should be considered outside the  Immigration  Rules.   It
    appears to be agreed that there was no express mechanism by  which  the
    Appellant's relationship with her sister could be considered or  indeed
    that by which her ties to the UK and status as  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence could be factored in to an Article  8  assessment  within  the
    Rules.

16. In such circumstances I agree with the submissions made by Mr  Blundell
    that the judge has  failed  to  follow  the  general  guidance  and  in
    particular the useful structure set out within Sunassee albeit  that  I
    accept that it is not necessary merely to rely on Sunassee to  come  to
    such findings.  The question arises as to whether or not there is or is
    not a two stage approach i.e. where an applicant relies on his  or  her
    private or family life.  Firstly it should be considered whether  leave
    should be granted under the relevant provisions of the  new  Rules  and
    only if the answer is no  to  go  on  to  consider  Article  8  in  its
    unvarnished form.  As Mr Justice Edis states in  Sunassee  the  law  is
    that  there  is  always  a  second  stage  but   where   all   relevant
    considerations have been weighed under  the  Rules  and  there  are  no
    compelling circumstances that are  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    Rules it will be enough for the decision-maker simply to say  that.   I
    am satisfied that looking at this case that is not  the  approach  that
    has been adopted by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  that  it  was
    indeed recognised by the Secretary of State that  there  had  to  be  a
    second stage assessment under the Immigration Rules.  By  adopting  the
    intermediary step I agree that the judge has materially erred in law.

The Re-Hearing

17. I am urged by Mr Blundell to go on and remake the decision allowing the
    appeal.  Mr Bramble agrees that this is  a  case  that  if  I  found  a
    material error of law  it  is  appropriate  to  go  on  and  reconsider
    immediately.  I do not entirely agree with the submission  made  by  Mr
    Blundell that merely by addressing at  paragraph  31  the  wrench  that
    leaving the UK would have on the Appellant's life established in the UK
    that the judge has failed to address the issues  in  paragraph  276ADE.
    To a certain extent the position that the Appellant may find herself in
    Albania is addressed at paragraph 30 of the decision.

18. I accept that the decision is strangely set out.  Much of the  decision
    consists of quite simply scanning and inserting the Appellant's witness
    statement and Counsel's skeleton argument.  There is  no  consideration
    of an issue which both Mr Bramble and Mr  Blundell  acknowledge  is  of
    significance namely the relationship the Appellant has with her sister.
     Further it is clearly accepted that  the  Appellant  is  a  victim  of
    domestic violence.

19. This is an Appellant who has now lived in the UK for over ten years.  I
    am  satisfied  that  there  would  be  significant  obstacles  to   her
    reintegration into Albania.  She has an established relationship in the
    UK with her sister.  She speaks fluent English and has integrated  into
    UK society and  is  in  employment  within  the  UK.   Carrying  out  a
    proportionality exercise and looking  at  the  whole  history  of  this
    matter  and  applying  those  principles  I  am  satisfied   that   the
    submissions made by Mr  Blundell  are  correct  and  that  this  is  an
    Appellant whose claim  consequently  should  succeed  on  human  rights
    grounds.  I consequently go on to  remake  the  decision  allowing  the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

