
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/03938/2015
     IA/03939/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th August 2016                          |On 24th August 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                             rana waqas shamshad
                            mohammed sohail wajid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants and  each  of  them  are  nationals  of  Pakistan  whose
    respective dates of birth are recorded as 19th February 1988  and  13th
    March 1982.  On 8th August 2014 they  made  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrants  under
    the points-based scheme as well as for biometric residence  cards.   On
    13th January 2015 decisions were  made  in  each  case  to  refuse  the
    applications and the Appellants appealed.

 2. The appeals were heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andonian  on
    8th January 2016, sitting at Taylor House.  He  made  numerous  adverse
    findings of fact against  the  Appellants  and  found  parts  of  their
    evidence inconsistent with one another.  He was driven  to  finding  on
    the issue as to whether or not the Appellants were genuinely  intending
    and were able to establish a business in the United Kingdom,  that  the
    application was not genuine and he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.



 3. Not content with that decision, by notice dated  28  January  2016  the
    Appellants and each of them made application for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds run  to  eighteen  paragraphs.  The
    principal ground was that the judge wrongly required the Appellants  to
    adduce post-decision evidence in order that he  would  be  assisted  in
    determining  the  principal  issue   in   the   case,   notwithstanding
    representations made by Ms Jones, who appeared  below,  to  the  effect
    that not only ought such evidence not be admitted, given the provisions
    of Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, but
    that it would be unfair to hold against the Appellants their failure to
    adduce inadmissible evidence.  A further  point  which  the  judge  had
    taken against the Appellants related to grammatical errors  which  were
    said to be minor but  that  point  falls  away  in  the  light  of  the
    concession made quite properly by Ms Fijiwala.

 4. Section 85A of the 2002 Act provides as follows:

         "85 provides - matters to be considered:

         (1)  An appeal under Section 82(1) against the  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  Appellant  has  a  right  to
             appeal under Section 82(1).

         (2)  If an Appellant under Section 82(1) makes  a  statement  under
             Section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised  in
             the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of the kind
             listed in Section 84(1) against the decision appealed against.

         (3)  Sub-Section (2) applies to a statement made under Section  120
             whether the statement was made before or after the appeal  was
             commenced.

         (4)  On an appeal under Section 82(1), 83(2) or  83A(2)  against  a
             decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about  any  matter
             which it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,
             including evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the
             date of the decision.

         (5)  But in relation to an appeal under Section 82(1)  against  the
             refusal of entry clearance or  refusal  of  a  certificate  of
             entitlement under Section 10 -

             (a)  sub-Section (4) shall not apply, and

             (b)   the  Tribunal  may  consider  only   the   circumstances
                  appertaining at the date of the decision to refuse."

    Importantly Section 85(4) is qualified by Section 85A.   That  provides
    certain exceptions:

         "(1) This section sets out  the  exceptions  mentioned  in  section
             85(5).

         (2)  Exception 1 is that in relation to  an  appeal  under  Section
             82(1) against an immigration decision of a kind  specified  in
             Section 82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal  may  consider  only  the
             circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision.

         (3)  Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if-

             (a)  the appeal is against an immigration decision of  a  kind
                  specified in Section 82(2)(a) or (d),

             (b)  the immigration decision concerned an  application  of  a
                  kind identified in immigration rules as  requiring  to  be
                  considered under a points-based system", and

             (c)  the appeal relies wholly or partly on  grounds  specified
                  in section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).

         (4)  Where Exception 2 applies the Tribunal may  consider  evidence
             adduced by the Appellant only if it-

             (a)  was submitted in support of, and at the time  of  making,
                  the application to which the immigration decision related,



             (b)  relates to the appeal insofar as  it  relies  on  grounds
                  other than those specified in sub-Section (3)(c),

             (c)  is adduced to prove that a document is genuine or  valid,
                  or

             (d)  is adduced in connection with the  Secretary  of  State's
                  reliance on  a  discretion  under  immigration  rules,  or
                  compliance with a requirement  of  immigration  rules,  to
                  refuse an  application  on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                  acquisition of 'points' under the points-based system."

 5. This was an application made under  the  points-based  system  so  that
    Section 85A, Exception 2 applied.  I am grateful to Ms  Jones  who  was
    able to take me to parts of the judge's  Record  of  Proceedings  which
    accord with the notes of the Presenting Officer who appeared below.  It
    is clear that Judge Andonian asked the following question:

         "Do you have an up-to-date business plan?

    The response was:

         "Not at the moment".

    Thereafter the judge went on to say that he would have  liked  to  have
    seen an up-to-date business plan and a future plan for profit and loss.
     He went on to say that it was an important part of the  evidence  that
    was lacking and said that he required it in order to establish  whether
    or not  the  business  was  genuine.   He  went  on  to  criticise  the
    Appellant's solicitors for not having brought  the  business  plan  and
    profit and loss accounts up to date.

 6. Further, the judge went on to ask the first Appellant what work he  had
    been doing in the last six months, that is to say prior to the  hearing
    and asked for proof of it.  When Ms  Jones  objected  to  the  line  of
    questioning on the basis that it was not permitted given the provisions
    of Section 85A, it is common ground that the judge said  that  the  new
    evidence did not mean what Ms Jones thought it to mean and  that  since
    it was the same business it was not new evidence.

 7. I observe that  insofar  as  the  business  is  a  person  in  law  the
    Appellants are also the same persons but that does not mean  that  they
    can adduce fresh evidence.  It is excluded.

 8. The difficulty with the decision as it stands is  that  notwithstanding
    the numerous adverse findings made, it is perfectly  clear  that  Judge
    Andonian significantly held against the Appellants the lack  of  up-to-
    date evidence and it is not possible to say the extent to  which  those
    findings were affected by the absence of evidence which  ought  not  to
    have been adduced.

 9. I would add that even if the evidence had  been  admissible  there  was
    unfairness because the Judge, at the very least,  of  his  own  motion,
    ought to have granted an adjournment for it to be adduced.

10. I am, as I have already said, grateful to Ms Fijiwala who did not  seek
    to argue against the submissions made on behalf of the Appellants.   In
    my judgment there is a material error of law.   The  question  then  is
    whether I can remake the case or whether it needs to be remitted.

11. It is common ground that none of the findings can  stand.   There  will
    need to be a de novo hearing before a judge other than  Judge  Andonian
    and in those circumstances I take the view, having regard to the Senior
    President's Practice Direction, that  the  proper  course  is  for  the
    matter to be remitted to Taylor House where the matter  will  be  heard
    again by a judge other than Judge Andonian.  No interpreter is required
    and it will assist the Resident Judge at Taylor House to know that  the
    time estimate put on this case is three hours.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set  aside.   The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where the matter will be heard again with no findings of  fact
    preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 24 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
