
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03916/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th September 2013                          |On 9th October 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                               quoc tuan tran
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Grand
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Dickson made following a hearing at Bradford on 7th March 2013.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 19th  February  1982.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom illegally in August 2003, was arrested by
    immigration officials as a suspected illegal entrant in the UK in  2007
    and served with notice of his liability to detention and  removal.   On
    27th October 2011 he submitted an application for leave  to  remain  in
    the UK which was refused on 16th January 2012.  He then  submitted  two
    further applications for leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  settled
    person which were both refused on 5th December 2012.  Finally  he  made
    an application on the basis that his  removal  would  breach  the  UK's
    obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR,  which  was  refused  on  22nd
    January 2013, and the subject of the appeal before Judge Dickson.

 3. The claimant and his wife met each other in June 2004  and  have  lived
    together since September 2004.  She is a British citizen who  works  in
    the UK.  She suffers from a congenital disorder as a consequence of her
    father's exposure to the agent Orange.

 4. The judge made a number of detailed findings of  fact,  accepting  that
    the claimant was married and in a  genuine  relationship  and  that  he
    lived with his wife in Lincolnshire.  He concluded that  removal  would
    be disproportionate.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The Secretary of State appealed on the basis that the judge  had  given
    insufficient reasons for finding that the claimant was in a genuine and
    subsisting marriage.  In the alternative, even if the relationship  was
    genuine, the  claimant  was  aware  that  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious and whilst his partner states that she has medical  problems
    there is no evidence that she could not obtain  medical  assistance  in
    Vietnam. Had the judge placed more weight on the  negative  credibility
    points identified in  the  determination,  on  balance  he  would  have
    reached a different conclusion.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Landes on 16th April 2013.

 7. The claimant served a Rule 24 response defending the determination.

Submissions

 8. Mr Diwnycz did not pursue his grounds  with  any  vigour  at  all.   He
    accepted that they amounted to a disagreement with the decision.

Findings and Conclusions

 9. The reasons for refusal letter  accepts  that  the  claimant  is  in  a
    genuine subsisting relationship with his wife.

10. The two remaining grounds are merely trying to re-argue  the  Secretary
    of State's case.  The judge did make a number of  adverse  findings  in
    the context of his consideration of whether the claimant could meet the
    requirements of the Rules with respect to Article 8, and  his  findings
    are set out in a slightly confusing way.  However, on analysis, and  as
    Mr Diwnycz properly acknowledged, there is nothing in them.

11.  It  was  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  removal  would   be
    disproportionate for the reasons which he gave.

Decision

12. The judge did not err in law.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
    dismissed and the claimant's appeal allowed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

