
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03593/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Oral Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 June 2013                          |On 18 July 2013                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                              seybou assoumane
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who  was  born  on  13  September
    1962.  He made an application on 29 June 2012 for a residence  card  as
    an acknowledgment of his right to reside in the United Kingdom  as  the
    spouse of a Union citizen exercising Treaty  rights.   The  application
    was dismissed by the Secretary of State on 14 January 2013.  This  gave
    rise to  a  right  of  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  which  the  appellant
    exercised.  However, he indicated that he wished the appeal to be dealt
    with on the papers and that is indeed what occurred on  15  April  2013
    when the matter was heard at Sheldon Court  in  Birmingham,  without  a
    hearing, by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Snape  whose  determination  was
    promulgated on 24 April 2013.  He recorded that he had no oral evidence
    or submissions as the appellant had elected to have the case dealt with
    on papers pursuant to Rule 15(2) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005.

 2. Although the appellant had stated that his EEA  family  member  was  in
    employment he had only provided payslips covering  a  relatively  short
    period between 15 April 2012 and 3 June 2012.  Enquiries were  made  by
    the UK Border Agency  with  a  company  called  Sure  Staff  and  those
    revealed that the  sponsor's  employment  had  been  on  hold  since  8
    September 2012.  On 10 January 2013 an official from the UKBA spoke  to
    an employee of  Sure  Staff  working  in  the  payroll  department  who
    confirmed that the sponsor had remained on hold since 8 September 2012.
     On that basis the Secretary of State not unsurprisingly concluded that
    there was no sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the sponsor was  a
    qualified person,  namely  a  worker  exercising  Treaty  rights.   The
    associated Article 8 claim was therefore dismissed.

 3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge he  concluded
    that there was no further evidence.  In the notice of  the  grounds  of
    appeal the appellant, although contradicting the conclusion reached  by
    the UKBA concerning  his  wife's  employment,  failed  to  provide  any
    additional evidence such as up-to-date  payslips.   On  that  basis  he
    properly concluded that the concerns  raised  by  the  respondent  were
    justified and the appellant had failed to address the issues raised  as
    to the  appellant's  claim  to  be  the  husband  of  a  Union  citizen
    exercising Treaty rights.  There is no doubt that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal was correct on the basis of the material  that  was
    before him and discloses no error of law.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal however make two points.

 5. First, the draftsman asserts on the basis of instructions,  only,  that
    had been received from the client that a payslip and a contract  letter
    had been sent to the court and/or  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that
    those had been logged.  I have caused  a  search  to  be  made  of  the
    Tribunal's computer system and this has revealed no record  of  such  a
    payslip or contract letter.  However that is largely beside  the  point
    because for the purposes of this appeal in the Upper Tribunal,  it  was
    for the appellant to submit the  necessary  documents  and  if  such  a
    payslip had not been received as he alleged then  it  was  for  him  to
    obtain a copy and re-serve it in time for this hearing.   Consequently,
    the failure (if there was a failure on the part  of  the  Tribunal)  to
    deal properly with the payslip can have no bearing now as  far  as  the
    Upper Tribunal is concerned since there is no evidence about what  that
    payslip would have revealed.  In particular, a single payslip would not
    have  advanced  matters  and  the  contract  letter  would   not   have
    necessarily  established  that  the  appellant  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights.

 6. The second point made in the grounds of appeal is that an extension  of
    time was sought by the appellant  in  relation  to  ill-health  and  no
    acknowledgment was received to that effect.  Once  again  there  is  no
    record of that on the computer system but, even if it  had  been  made,
    then it was  for  the  appellant  to  establish,  by  adducing  medical
    evidence to me, that the appellant's ill-health was such that he  could
    not attend the further conduct of this appeal.

 7. At the hearing today, the appellant did not attend and his  solicitors,
    Moorhouse Solicitors, did not appear.  Each  had  been  served  with  a
    notice of hearing by first class post on 30 May  2013,  thereby  giving
    almost a month in which the appellant could seek an adjournment  if  he
    sought to do so.  However, by letter  dated  27  June  2013,  but  only
    received by the Tribunal on 28 June 2013 at 10:46, an  application  was
    made by the  appellant's  solicitors  which  was  entitled  "Letter  of
    withdrawal from the hearing of 28 June 2013".  It sought the Tribunal's
    urgent confirmation that the hearing would not proceed.  It  said  that
    the appellant was not able to attend the hearing due to ill-health  and
    that he is "very ill and depressed and cannot attend the hearing".   In
    support was a doctor's letter dated 25 June 2013 from The  Old  Surgery
    which says

         "This patient is currently under investigation for bladder symptoms
         and is waiting specialist review  for  further  investigation.   He
         frequently has to go to the toilet to pass urine, often  at  little
         notice.  Your understanding in this matter would be appreciated".

    In my judgment that does not even approach the issue which is before me
    and that is whether the appellant has  produced  satisfactory  evidence
    that he could not attend the hearing or that his  representative  could
    not attend the hearing and conduct the appeal on his behalf.

 8. This was a case which the appellant had known about for some weeks.  If
    he was in the condition that he was said to be in on 28 June it  almost
    inevitably means he was in that condition on 30 May  and  there  is  no
    explanation at all why such  a  late  application  for  an  adjournment
    should be made.  Furthermore, it is not simply the fact that  there  is
    an application for an  adjournment.   The  appellant's  representatives
    have withdrawn from the hearing thereby depriving  both  the  appellant
    and the Tribunal of hearing any submissions in relation to the error of
    law issue.  There was no need for  the  appellant  to  attend  on  that
    issue.  If it was to be  established  that  he  was  unable  to  attend
    because of problems with his bladder, then it would certainly  have  to
    be supported by medical evidence to say that he could no longer  attend
    and that he would  not  be  able  to  attend  any  future  hearings  or
    alternatively that his prognosis was such that it was expected that  he
    would be well enough within a reasonable time.

 9. Furthermore, the  letter  from  the  appellant's  solicitors  fails  to
    address the issues raised by the appellant himself in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  It is said in those grounds (as I have pointed out)  that  the
    appellant forwarded a payslip which indicated that the sponsor  was  in
    employment.  It is also said there was a contract  letter.   Given  the
    fact that the judge did not refer to it, it is apparent that this was a
    document which was needed and which the Tribunal had a right to receive
    at the first possible opportunity.  No attempt has been made to  supply
    the Tribunal with a copy of it.  In addition, although it was said on a
    previous occasion that an application was made for an extension of time
    due to ill-health, the only material  that  we  have  received  is  the
    letter from the general practitioner, belatedly  dated  25  June  2013,
    which was far too late to establish that there was  any  basis  for  an
    extension of time when the judge  dealt  with  the  matter.   In  these
    circumstances I am not satisfied that there was any error of law.

10. In considering whether I should have adjourned the matter not only do I
    look to the grounds in support of the application for adjournment but I
    also look to the merits of the appeal itself and I am  quite  satisfied
    that the judge reached a sustainable conclusion on the material  before
    him and that the appellant has failed to establish that there  was  any
    procedural unfairness by reason of the Tribunal's error in  failing  to
    provide him with documents upon which it is said he intended to rely in
    order to establish that his wife was a Union citizen exercising  Treaty
    rights at the date of decision.

DECISION

    The  Judge  made  no  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the   original
    determination of the appeal shall stand.








                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
