
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03274/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 November 2014                            |On 11 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                       MS CHRISTABEL NANA HEMAA DANSO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Blum of Counsel, instructed by Rahman & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This an appeal with permission against a decision by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Hunter dismissing an appeal  against  a  refusal  by  the
    respondent to issue the appellant with a residence card under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 2) The appellant was born on 28 October 1984 and is a national  of  Ghana.
    She  submitted  to  the  respondent  a  Ghanaian   customary   marriage
    certificate stating that she was married to her EEA national spouse  on
    25 July 2009 by proxy in  Ghana.   The  certificate  stated  that  this
    marriage was registered with the  District  Registrar  on  4  September
    2013.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3) The judge addressed  a  number  of  issues  raised  by  the  respondent
    relating to the validity of the proxy marriage, in accordance  with  NA
    (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009]  UKAIT  00009.
    The first of these was that the appellant's spouse was a Dutch national
    and a valid customary marriage can be contracted validly  only  between
    two Ghanaian citizens.  There was evidence before the  judge,  however,
    to show that the appellant's spouse had  Ghanaian  nationality  at  the
    time of the marriage ceremony.

 4) The second issue the judge was required to address was the relationship
    between the appellant  and  the  person  who  represented  her  at  the
    marriage  ceremony,  whom  she  claimed  was  her   father,   and   the
    relationship between her spouse and the person who represented him.  In
    accordance with NA, it was a  requirement  of  a  valid  marriage  that
    representatives of the two families were present as  witnesses  to  the
    event.

 5) The appellant was able to  produce  evidence,  in  the  form  of  birth
    certificate, to show that she was  represented  at  the  event  by  her
    father.  The birth certificate for the appellant's spouse was  accepted
    by the judge as showing that he was also represented by his father.

 6) The third issue the judge was required to address  in  respect  of  the
    proxy marriage was whether a statutory  declaration  which  accompanied
    the marriage certificate was valid.  The judge noted that on  the  face
    of the marriage  certificate  it  was  stated  that  the  parties  were
    residing in the UK and that  the  appellant  was  a  spinster  and  the
    bridegroom had no other existing marriage.   The  judge  accepted  that
    this information should be read along with  the  information  contained
    within the statutory declaration and that  the  certification  complied
    with the Ghanaian statutory requirements.

 7) To support this view the judge had regard to a letter dated 28  January
    2014 from the Ghanaian High Commissioner in London confirming that  the
    marriage was properly  registered  in  accordance  with  the  statutory
    provisions in Ghana.

 8) The respondent had accepted in terms of CB (Validity of marriage: proxy
    marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080 that  a  proxy  marriage  would  be
    recognised as valid in the UK where it was  legal  in  the  country  in
    which it took place.

 9) The next question the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was required  to
    address was whether, as the appellant's spouse was  a  Dutch  national,
    the proxy marriage would be recognised in the Netherlands, as  required
    by the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  Law)  Nigeria  [2014]
    UKUT 00024.  The judge heard a submission on behalf of the appellant to
    the effect that under Dutch law a  marriage  certificate  issued  by  a
    competent authority would be recognised but found there was no evidence
    to support this submission.  The judge noted in accordance with  Kareem
    that without independent and reliable evidence about the recognition of
    the marriage under the laws of the EEA country concerned,  as  well  as
    the country where the marriage took  place,  it  was  likely  that  the
    Tribunal would be unable to find  that  sufficient  evidence  had  been
    provided to discharge the burden of proof.  The  Tribunal  went  on  to
    state that mere production of legal  materials  from  the  EEA  country
    concerned would be insufficient evidence because this would rarely show
    how such law  is  understood  or  applied  in  that  country.   A  mere
    assertion as to the effect of such laws would for similar reasons carry
    no weight.

10) In accordance with Kareem the judge was not satisfied  that  the  proxy
    marriage in Ghana would be recognised under Dutch law.  Accordingly the
    appellant was unable to show that she was the family member of  an  EEA
    national in accordance with regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations.

11) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal then went on to  consider  whether
    the appellant could be considered a family member of her  spouse  under
    Regulation 8(5) on the basis  that  she  was  the  partner  of  an  EEA
    national and could show that she was in a durable relationship with the
    EEA national.  In relation to this, the judge noted that  although  the
    parties were married in July 2009 they did not  start  living  together
    until September 2012.  The reason for this was that the  appellant  was
    still studying and then looking for a job, although the judge  did  not
    find her explanation in this regard to be satisfactory.  There was very
    little in the way of documentary  evidence  to  show  the  couple  were
    cohabiting.  In consequence  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was in a durable relationship with her EEA national partner.

Application for permission to appeal

12) The application for permission to appeal was made  on  the  basis  that
    although the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal referred to the  case  of
    Kareem, the  judge  did  not  consider  what  the  Tribunal's  decision
    actually stated about Dutch law and the recognition of marriages.   The
    case of Kareem concerned a Dutch national who was married by  proxy  in
    Nigeria.  The Tribunal considered the relevant provisions of the  Dutch
    Civil Code at paragraphs 25 to 32 of the  decision.   This  included  a
    provision that where a marriage was contracted outside the  Netherlands
    and was valid under the law of the state where it took place or  became
    valid afterwards according to  the  law  of  that  state  it  would  be
    recognised in the Netherlands as a  valid  marriage.   In  addition,  a
    marriage was presumed to be valid if a marriage  certificate  had  been
    issued by a competent authority.

13) The application pointed out that in the case of  Kareem,  the  Tribunal
    was not satisfied that the  marriage  would  be  treated  as  valid  in
    Nigeria.  In the present appeal, however, the judge had found that  the
    marriage was valid in  Ghana and that the marriage certificate had been
    issued by a  competent  authority.   The  judge  then  stated  that  no
    evidence was provided to show that a marriage certificate issued  by  a
    competent authority would be recognised under  Dutch  law  and  so  the
    judge concluded that it had not  been  established  that  the  marriage
    would be recognised under Dutch law.  In so doing  the  judge  did  not
    consider key elements of Kareem,  as  referred  to  above.   The  judge
    should have realised that the marriage would be presumed to be valid in
    the Netherlands as the certificate was issued by a competent  authority
    and was valid under the law of Ghana.

14) Permission to appeal was granted on this basis.

15) A rule 24 notice dated 10 October 2014 was submitted on behalf  of  the
    respondent.  This stated that  the  grounds  of  the  application  were
    misconceived.  It was explicitly set  out  in  Kareem  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal was not capable of making any findings on  Dutch  law  without
    expert evidence.  Reference was made to  paragraph  29  of  Kareem,  in
    which it was stated that the passages from the Dutch Civil  Code  cited
    were  silent  on  whether  a  proxy  or  customary  marriage  would  be
    recognised in the Netherlands or  whether  such  a  marriage  would  be
    incompatible with Dutch public order.  It was recognised  that  Article
    1:66 permitted marriage by  representation  in  certain  circumstances,
    which would suggest that marriage in the absence of one of the  parties
    would not be contrary to Dutch public order.   The  Tribunal,  however,
    had no evidence on this complex issue and had been given no  assistance
    on how Dutch law might apply.

16) It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that there was  no  expert
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  present  appeal  and
    therefore there was nothing which identified  how  Dutch  law  applied.
    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not err.

Submissions

17) At the hearing before me, Mr Blum acknowledged that  the  issue  was  a
    narrow one.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  follow  the
    findings of the Tribunal in Kareem at paragraphs  25-31.   Under  Dutch
    law, according to paragraph 27 of  Kareem,  if  there  was  a  marriage
    certificate then the presumption was that it was valid.  In the rule 24
    notice the respondent relied on paragraph 30 of Kareem but at paragraph
    31  the  Tribunal  had  proceeded  to  consider  whether  the  marriage
    certificate in that case would be presumed valid.  The tribunal did not
    need to consider whether the  Nigerian  certificate  in  Kareem  was  a
    proper certificate unless it was satisfied  that  this  aspect  of  the
    Dutch Code was clear.  The Dutch Civil Code, as understood by the Upper
    Tribunal in Kareem, showed a presumption in favour  of  validity.   The
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in the present appeal said  there  was
    no evidence on recognition under Dutch law but did not have  regard  to
    the actual assessment  made  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Kareem.   At
    paragraph 68.c of Kareem the Tribunal  stated  that  a  document  which
    called itself a marriage certificate will not raise  a  presumption  of
    the marriage it purports to record unless it  has  been  issued  by  an
    authority with legal power to create or confirm the facts  it  attests.
    Reference was made to TA (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316.
    There was enough of the Dutch Code accepted in Kareem to show that  the
    marriage in the present appeal would be recognised as a valid marriage.



18) It was pointed out to Mr Blum that according to  the  quoted  provision
    from the Dutch Civil Code, the certificate would raise no more  than  a
    presumption of validity.  Mr Blum submitted that it would be up to  the
    Secretary of State to challenge this presumption.

19) For the respondent, Mr Armstrong submitted that there was  no  material
    error.  The judge had referred to the observations made  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal at paragraph 68 of Kareem and this showed that  they  were  in
    the judge's mind.  There was no evidence in the form of a  letter  from
    the Netherlands stating that the marriage  was  valid.   The  appellant
    bore  the  onus  of  proving  the  validity  of  the  marriage  in  the
    Netherlands and in the absence of documentary evidence she  had  failed
    to discharge this burden.

20) In response Mr Blum emphasised that the judge did not look at  all  the
    evidence.  The judge did not need to look at the evidence  in  relation
    to Dutch law if the judge was not satisfied that the proxy marriage was
    valid under the law of  Ghana,  as  in  Kareem  the  Tribunal  was  not
    satisfied that the proxy marriage under consideration in that case  was
    valid under the law of Nigeria.  In the present appeal  the  judge  had
    looked at the general points in the headnote to Kareem but neglected to
    look at the actual assessment carried out by the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    Upper Tribunal in Kareem was satisfied by the provisions of  the  Dutch
    Civil Code that it was  necessary  to  look  at  the  validity  of  the
    marriage certificate in Nigeria.

Discussion

21) As Mr Blum submitted, the issue in this appeal is a narrow one  and  in
    considering it I have been  ably  assisted  by  the  parties  in  their
    written and oral submissions.

22) On the face of it, the provisions of  Article  10:31(4)  of  the  Dutch
    Civil Code, as set out in Kareem, indicate  that  a  marriage  will  be
    presumed to be valid if the marriage certificate has been issued  by  a
    competent authority.   In  addition  Article  10:31(1)  states  that  a
    marriage which is valid under the law of the state where it took place,
    or has become valid afterwards according to the law of that state, will
    be recognised in the Netherlands as a valid marriage.

23) As the respondent pointed out, in terms  of  paragraph  29  of  Kareem,
    however, these provisions are silent on whether a  proxy  or  customary
    marriage will be recognised in the Netherlands.   Furthermore,  as  was
    pointed out at the hearing before me, the marriage  certificate  raises
    no more than a presumption of validity, according to  the  Dutch  Civil
    Code, and it is not clear how this presumption might be  challenged  or
    who would bear the onus of doing so.

24) I am satisfied that these issues  could  be  resolved  only  by  either
    expert evidence from a lawyer well-versed in the relevant Dutch law  or
    by some form of recognition by the appropriate statutory  authority  in
    the Netherlands.  I accept, as Mr Armstrong submitted, that the onus is
    on the appellant in this appeal to produce such evidence  and  she  has
    not done so.  In the absence  of  such  evidence,  the  judge  was  not
    required to speculate about the application of the  provisions  of  the
    Dutch Civil Code as set out in Kareem, even assuming  they  were  still
    applicable.

25) Mr Blum attempted to show  that  reliance  could  be  placed  upon  the
    provisions of the Dutch Civil Code referred to  in  Kareem  because  in
    Kareem the Tribunal went  on  to  consider  whether  a  proxy  marriage
    conducted in Nigeria would be recognised as valid in that country.  The
    validity of the marriage in Nigeria was a prerequisite for  recognition
    of the marriage in the Netherlands.  There would be no need to look  at
    the validity of the  proxy  marriage  under  Nigerian  law  if  such  a
    marriage would not be recognised in the Netherlands.

26) I do not consider that the Tribunal's efforts in Kareem in  seeking  to
    establish whether the marriage would be recognised in Nigeria show that
    the Tribunal accepted without qualification that if  the  marriage  was
    recognised in Nigeria  it  would  be  recognised  in  the  Netherlands.
    Recognition in Nigeria was an essential first step prior to considering
    whether the marriage would be recognised in the  Netherlands.   If  the
    Tribunal had  been  satisfied  that  the  marriage  was  recognised  in
    Nigeria, the Tribunal would then have had to return  to  the  issue  of
    whether the marriage would be recognised in the  Netherlands.   As  the
    Tribunal found, however,  that  the  marriage  was  not  recognised  in
    Nigeria, it did not need  to  return  to  this  issue,  which  remained
    without any final resolution in the decision in Kareem.

27) The position in this  appeal  is  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not have adequate or sufficient evidence to show that  the
    proxy marriage, although recognised in Ghana, would  be  recognised  in
    the Netherlands.  In the absence of such  evidence  the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not err in law in finding  that  the  appellant
    had not shown that a proxy marriage in Ghana would be recognised  under
    Dutch law.  Accordingly the decision by the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.

28) As the judge pointed out, relying upon Kareem, without independent  and
    reliable evidence about the recognition of the marriage in the relevant
    EEA country,  the  Tribunal  is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
    sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.
     Mere production of legal  materials  from  the  EEA  country  will  be
    insufficient evidence because they will rarely show  how  such  law  is
    understood or applied  in  those  countries.   This  is  precisely  the
    position in this appeal where legal materials from the Dutch Civil Code
    are cited without evidence to explain how proxy marriages are  regarded
    or how any presumption in relation to validity,  if  it  applies  to  a
    proxy marriage, would be treated.  These  are  obvious  issues  arising
    from a reading of the relevant provisions of the Dutch Civil  Code  but
    there may be others, which would only be known  to  an  expert  witness
    from that jurisdiction.

Conclusions

29) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

30) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

31) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason to do so.



Signed      Date 6 November 2014

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
