
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03218/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th October 2015                 |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SHAHID KHAN
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr P Bonavero, Counsel instructed by Arlington Crown
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal  on
    human  rights  grounds  with  reference  to  Article  8   outwith   the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. In a Refusal Letter dated 30 December  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the Claimant's application in relation to his human rights  and
    issued removal directions dated 30 December 2014  pursuant  to  section
    10A of Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971 set  for  the  Claimant's
    country of origin, Pakistan. The First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  its
    decision allowing the Claimant's appeal against that decision on 7  May
    2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed against that decision. The  grounds  upon  which
    permission was granted may be summarised as follows:
      i) It is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  considering  the  appeal
         outwith the Immigration Rules due to a near miss with reference  to
         paragraphs 8 and 12 of the determination;
     ii) It is arguable that the judge erred  in  considering  section  117B
         with reference to paragraph 11 of the determination;
    iii) It is arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  making  findings  upon
         276ADE(vi) which was not argued before the judge.

 4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nicholson.

 5. I was provided with a Rule  24  response  from  Claimant's  counsel  in
    advance of the hearing which I took into consideration in  reaching  my
    decision.

    No Error of Law

 6. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I do not find that there was an error
    of law in the decision such that it should be set aside. My reasons for
    so finding are as follows.

 7. In relation to the first ground, I find that the Secretary  of  State's
    appeal must fail in relation to the judge  having  allegedly  erred  in
    considering the appeal outwith the Immigration Rules due to a near miss
    with reference to paragraphs 8 and 12 of  the  determination.  This  is
    because the judge sets out his consideration of the exceptionality  and
    the need to perform an assessment  outwith  the  Immigration  Rules  at
    paragraph 9 of his determination and finds the Claimant's circumstances
    sufficiently compelling to move to the second stage.  The  judge  notes
    that the majority of the Claimant's  leave  was  lawful.  This  is  not
    incorrect, nor is it said to be factually flawed. The judge also  notes
    that the Claimant has a 'very good immigration history' and has made  a
    'valuable contribution to society through  studies,  social  activities
    (Children in Need)' and  'work  over  a  very  long  period  of  time'.
    Furthermore, at paragraph  7  of  his  determination,  the  judge  also
    records several factors other than the Claimant's excess of  10  years'
    residence,  which  warrant  his  venturing  to  the  second  stage   of
    consideration outwith the Rules.  These  factors  include  the  judge's
    concern at the Claimant's anxieties about his predicament including the
    'very serious negative effect on his  emotional  well  being'  and  his
    'particular  social  and  cultural  characteristics'  which  have  been
    'profoundly altered by his long years of residence'. Further still, the
    judge sets out further factors at the  close  of  paragraph  9  of  his
    determination. Although the judge utilises the phrase  'near  miss'  at
    paragraph 12 of his determination, this infelicitous use of phrase  was
    not  determinative  of  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  The  judge  was
    attempting to describe that the extent to which the  Immigration  Rules
    are met, or not met as the case may be, may have  a  bearing  upon  the
    proportionality assessment. Indeed, this much has been clear since  the
    judgment of Lord Carnwath in Patel & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 at [55]. If any reminder were  necessary
    of my Lord's finding in Patel, it may be found in the  recent  decision
    of Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387 at [56]. Therefore, this is a factor that  the  judge  was
    lawfully  entitled  to   take   into   account   in   considering   the
    proportionality of  the  Claimant's  removal  outwith  the  Immigration
    Rules. The judge was therefore  right  to  consider  the  circumstances
    beyond the Claimant's control, which included a fraud perpetrated  upon
    him by his  previous  representatives.  The  judge  rightly  considered
    whether  the  appeal  should  be  considered  under  Article   8   ECHR
    simpliciter and gave more than sufficient reasoning for his decision to
    perform a proportionality assessment.

 8. In relation to the second ground, I find that  this  ground  must  also
    fail. Whilst the judge observes that the Claimant's status  was  lawful
    and therefore not precarious, an understandable error to make before  a
    pronouncement of how that term might  be  interpreted  in  AM  (S.117B)
    [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC),  as  Mr  Whitwell  fairly  observed,  the  judge
    considered  the  alternative  position   to   his   interpretation   of
    precariousness, much to the fortune of the  Claimant  and  consequently
    any error she may have  made  is  wholly  immaterial,  the  alternative
    position having been considered.

 9. Finally, in relation to the third ground,  as  noted  above  concerning
    ground one, a judge is entitled to consider the  extent  to  which  the
    Immigration Rules are met in his view, which may have  a  bearing  upon
    the proportionality of a person's  removal  in  consequence.  In  those
    circumstances, a judge is entitled to express their view as to  whether
    there are 'very significant obstacles'  to  a  person's  relocation  to
    their country of origin when considering  the  proportionality  of  the
    Secretary of State's  interference  with  that  person's  private  life
    outwith the Rules. Indeed, it seems permissible that a  judge  have  in
    mind the Secretary of State's measure of private  life  and  take  that
    threshold into account when making an assessment on the proportionality
    of a person's mooted removal. That assessment can  then  of  course  be
    informed by the extent to which  such  a  threshold  is  met.  In  this
    instance, the judge was therefore entitled to gauge her proportionality
    assessment by reference to paragraph 276ADE(vi) and it was  permissible
    for her to do so in light of Patel and SS (Congo).

10. Consequently, the grounds do not reveal an error of law such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

    Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

