
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03123/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2014                             |On 5 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                           ezinwanyi ulunma ikeji
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid, Counsel for David A Grand, London
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Officer Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Citizen of Nigeria born  on  22  August  1968.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 16 December  2013
    refusing to grant her leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
    context of Article 8 of ECHR.  Her appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal Wiseman on 6 May 2014.  The appeal was dismissed in
    a Determination promulgated on 30 May 2014.

2.   An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Brunnen on  19  June  2014.
    There are five grounds of appeal.  The permission states that the Judge
    may  have  erred  in  law  in  assessing   whether   there   were   any
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant carrying on her  family  life
    in Nigeria, as he failed to take  material  matters  into  account  and
    failed to apply the principles in  Izuazu  (2013)  UK  00045  and  when
    considering Article 8 he failed to apply the  principles  in  Chikwamba
    and Hayat (2012) UKUT 00444 IAC.   The  permission  states  that  these
    grounds are arguable but permission  to  argue  the  remainder  of  the
    grounds is not refused.

3.   A Rule 24 response was made by the Respondent.  The  Respondent  states
    that Judge Wiseman directed himself appropriately and there is  nothing
    in this case that amounts to an  insurmountable  obstacle.  She  states
    that there is nothing that would amount to more than a mere hardship or
    hindrance in the Appellant and her partner returning to  Nigeria.   The
    response goes on to state that the  New Rules post date  Chikwamba  and
    the case of VW (Uganda)(2009) EWCA Civ5 and that as held in Nagre there
    was never a test of  reasonableness.   The  response  states  that  the
    Judge, in identifying that the  Appellant  and  her  partner  can  live
    together in Nigeria, has taken into account all  the  relevant  factors
    and decided that the removal decision was lawful and that the principle
    of Chikwamba clarified in Hayat does  not  apply  in  this  case.   The
    response states that there is no error of law in the determination.

The Hearing

4.   Counsel for the Appellant submitted that he will be  dealing  with  all
    five grounds in the application.

5.   The first issue is the case of Alvi (2012) UK SC33.  He submitted  that
    the Appellant`s history from 2001 until 2009 is common ground.  She was
    legally able to remain in the United Kingdom until 2009 and in 2009 she
    applied in time for a Visa as a Tier  4  (General)  Migrant.  This  was
    refused as the application was held to be invalid  as  the  photographs
    supplied by her were not in the correct format.  Counsel submitted that
    she then made more applications, all of which were out of time and  all
    of which were refused.  He submitted that at this time she had no legal
    representation.

6.   Counsel submitted that the format in which the photographs have  to  be
    submitted does not form part of the Rules but is purely  guidance.   He
    submitted that based on the said case of Alvi as this is  not  part  of
    the Rules the refusal must have been unlawful.  Counsel  accepted  that
    this may not have been argued before the Judge  as  the  Appellant  was
    represented by  another  Barrister  at  that  Hearing.   He  submitted,
    however, that he is not conceding that point.  He submitted  that  this
    is a jurisdictional point and has nothing to do with the evidence.

7.   He submitted that the Respondent`s decision was unlawful ab initio,  as
    the Appellant was never an overstayer.  He submitted that she was never
    illegally in the United Kingdom so there can be no  removal  directions
    set.

8.   Counsel submitted that this can now be put right by the Upper  Tribunal
    and I was referred to the case  of  Kareem.   He  submitted  that  this
    point, based on Kareem (2014) UKUT 24, can be argued even if it was not
    raised before the Judge.

9.   The next issue is "insurmountable obstacles".  Counsel  submitted  that
    the proper approach is Izuazu (2013) UK 00045, paragraphs 53 to  59.  I
    was referred to MF (Nigeria) (2013) EWCA Civ 1192.   Counsel  submitted
    that at paragraph 55, the Respondent and the Judge accepted there is  a
    durable relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  her  partner.    He
    submitted that the Judge has not taken into account the fact  that  the
    Appellant`s mother, sister and sister`s children are all in the  United
    Kingdom, although he has mentioned this in passing at paragraph  54  of
    the Determination.  At paragraph 56 the Judge refers to  the  Appellant
    having created an enormous difficulty for herself  by  overstaying  and
    making unsuccessful applications.  He submitted  that  the  Appellant`s
    difficulties have been created by the Respondent because  of  the  Alvi
    situation.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge  states   there   are   no
    insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant returning to Nigeria but this
    is not a reasoned conclusion.  What has to be tested is the  degree  of
    difficulty for the Appellant and her partner going to live in  Nigeria.
    He submitted that the Judge  has  not  made  any  assessment  here  and
    although he has referred  to  the  Appellant's  family  life  with  her
    partner he has not taken into account her relationship with  her  other
    family members in the United Kingdom so the Judge failed to  take  into
    account material matters.  The Appellant was  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom up until 2009 and this is significant. He  submitted  that  her
    relationship was established  when  she  was  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom not when her status was precarious.

10.  The Judge states at paragraph 56 of  the  Determination  "There  is  an
    inevitable tendency on the part of an Appellant in a case such as this,
    to emphasise a lack of family or close friends or even a good chance of
    employment in  the  country  of  origin,  because  there  has  been  an
    adjustment to a way of life in  this  country  which  would  seem  very
    difficult to give up even temporarily".  He submitted  that  the  Judge
    appears to have prejudged this Appellant before the Hearing took place.
     He submitted that her only relative in Nigeria  is  a  roving  Pastor.
    The Appellant's partner is British and came to the United Kingdom on  a
    prestigious scholarship granted by the Foreign and Commonwealth  Office
    in the United Kingdom.  He was  encouraged  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom and did so.  He has been granted ILR and at  the  date  of  the
    Hearing he was a British Citizen.   He  submitted  therefore  that  two
    different sections of the Government are at odds with each  other.   In
    spite of the Appellant`s partner being encouraged to remain,  the  Home
    Office is now trying to take that away from him.

11.  Counsel submitted  that  the  Appellant's  partner  has  no  family  in
    Nigeria, they are all in America.  He has cut his  ties  with  Nigeria.
    Neither the sponsor  nor  the  Appellant  has  assets  in  Nigeria.  He
    submitted that when all of the circumstances of this claim are is taken
    together, there are insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant returning
    to Nigeria with her partner.

12.  The third ground of appeal  relates  to  the  Chikwamba  point.  I  was
    referred to paragraph 58 of the Determination.  In this paragraph it is
    suggested that the Appellant  can  go  back  to  Nigeria  and  make  an
    application for entry clearance as a partner in the usual way.  Counsel
    submitted that Lord Justice Sedley in the case of Chikwamba stated that
    this would be false logic.  I was also  referred  to  the  case  of  VW
    (Uganda) at paragraph 43.  He submitted that what the Judge  states  in
    his Determination is the opposite of  what  the  Court  of  Appeal  has
    decided.  I was referred to the case of  Hayat  and  Counsel  submitted
    that there would require to be a sensible reason for the  Appellant  to
    have to return to Nigeria and then apply to come  back  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

13.  I was referred to paragraph 62 of the  Determination  which  refers  to
    people who overstay.  He submitted that this is a  generalised  comment
    and appears to have been influenced  by  a  general  antipathy  towards
    people who overstay.  He submitted that  the  case  of  Chikwamba  does
    apply in this case.

14.  The fourth ground refers to paragraph 276 ADE  of  the  Rules  and  the
    Appellant`s lack of ties in Nigeria.

15.  I was referred to the Determination at paragraph 59, Counsel  submitted
    that it is true that the Appellant has not been in the  United  Kingdom
    for 20 years. The Judge states that she has not lost her cultural  ties
    to Nigeria.  He states that that statement is based on reasons  he  has
    previously referred to, but Counsel submitted that there  are  no  such
    reasons in the Determination.

16.  I was referred to the case of Ogundimo (2013) UKUT  00060  which  deals
    with a continued connection to life in Nigeria.  Counsel submitted that
    this Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2001 and  has  made
    three short visits to Nigeria, one of  which  was  to  dispose  of  her
    assets there.  He submitted that she has no continuing connection  with
    Nigeria.  He submitted that the Judge  has  made  a  flawed  assessment
    relating to paragraph 276 ADE and has applied the wrong test.

17.  Counsel then referred to the fifth ground of application which  is  the
    Appellant`s long residence in the United Kingdom.   He  submitted  that
    for lawful residence only 10 years is  required.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 276ADE and it was submitted that the Appellant has had lawful
    residence from 2001 and the 10 years was up in 2011.  He submitted that
    because of the Alvi point the Appellant is still lawfully in the United
    Kingdom but the Judge did not consider this.

18.  Counsel then referred to  the  material  factual  errors  made  by  the
    Respondent in the Refusal letter.  In paragraph 3 it is stated that the
    Appellant was granted entry clearance from 1 September  2001  until  31
    December 2004.  He submitted that this is wrong.  He referred to  other
    errors, for example, that her partner has been an asylum  seeker  since
    2001.  That is not true. Her partner has never been an asylum seeker.

19.  I was asked to find on all five grounds, that the  Judge  has  made  an
    error of law.

20.  The Presenting Officer made  her  submissions  referring  to  the  Alvi
    point. She submitted that it is almost  certain  that  this  was  never
    raised before  the  Judge  and  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  a
    Barrister. She submitted that the Judge did not make an  error  by  not
    picking up on this.

21.  I was referred to paragraph 18 of the  Determination  in  which  it  is
    stated that the Appellant accepted that she had remained without  leave
    in the United Kingdom for a number of years following  the  refusal  of
    her application to stay as a student.  I was referred to  paragraph  22
    of the Determination which states that the Appellant has accepted  that
    she acted wrongly and overstayed after the refusal of her  application.
    She submitted that the fact that the Appellant has  accepted  that  she
    has been unlawfully in the United Kingdom for a number of  years  takes
    away from any error of law by the Judge  relating  to  the  Alvi  point
    which was not raised before him.

22.  With regard to insurmountable obstacles she submitted  that  the  Judge
    has taken into account everything he required to take into account.  He
    refers to the Appellant`s mother, sister and sister`s children who  are
    in the United Kingdom, although he does not take them into  account  in
    particular, when he makes his decision about insurmountable  obstacles.
    She submitted that the Judge does not  require  to  take  into  account
    whether the Appellant has property in Nigeria or not.  In paragraph  56
    of the determination the Judge refers to the Appellant`s partner having
    good financial resources and being a man of means. The  fact  that  the
    Judge did not take into account assets and property in Nigeria  in  his
    assessment is not an error of law.  She submitted that  the  Judge  was
    aware that the Appellant`s partner  was  a  British  Citizen.   He  was
    granted British Citizenship on 14 March 2014 and the appeal  was  heard
    on 6 May 2014.  She submitted that it is clear that the Judge read  the
    Appellant's partner's statement in which this is stated. The Presenting
    Officer submitted that the Judge`s  decision  was  based  on  what  the
    Barrister put to him on the day of the hearing and because of  this  it
    was open to the Judge to make these findings.  The  Appellant  admitted
    before the Judge that she has been in the  United  Kingdom  since  2009
    without leave.

23.  With regard to the Appellant`s ties to Nigeria the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the Judge was wrong to state that the Appellant  has  no
    ties there.  Her brother is there and she was brought  up  there.   She
    was in Nigeria for a long time before she came to the  United  Kingdom.
    I was referred to paragraphs  30  and  31  of  the  Determination.  The
    Appellant states that she had no intention of staying  in  Nigeria  and
    she admits she has a brother there.   In  paragraph  31  the  Appellant
    states that she does not want to go back to Nigeria but the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that this is not a good enough reason.  She submitted
    that I need to take the Appellant`s own evidence before the First  Tier
    Judge into account  when  considering  the  arguments  put  forward  by
    Counsel.  She further submitted that things have  moved  on  since  the
    case of Chikwamba and the Judge was aware of that.  The Judge refers to
    Nagre and Gulshan (2013)  UKUT  00640  and  considers  the  Appellant`s
    family and private life.

24.   The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  Judge  has  considered
    everything he had to consider. He took into account all the issues  and
    it was open to the Judge to make the decision he  did.   She  submitted
    that the points made by Counsel at this Hearing were not raised  before
    the Judge and the application should be dismissed.

25.  Counsel for the Appellant  submitted  that  the  Appellant`s  partner`s
    intention was to settle in the United Kingdom.  He submitted  that  the
    Judge was aware that he was a British Citizen.  This is stated  clearly
    in the Appellant`s partner`s statement which was dated  21  April  2014
    but he submitted that the Judge did not take  everything  into  account
    when he made his decision.

26.  He submitted that even if Alvi was not raised  before  the  Judge  this
    argument still stands.  The decision made by the Respondent in 2009 was
    unlawful.  He again submitted that this is not an evidential point  but
    a jurisdictional point and requires to be rectified. He submitted  that
    with regard to insurmountable obstacles the Judge did not undertake the
    assessment which is required.  The fact that the Appellant was  in  the
    United  Kingdom  lawfully  from  2001  until  2009  should   be   given
    considerable weight.

29.  He submitted that when making an assessment about life  in  the  United
    Kingdom versus life in Nigeria the  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  no
    assets in Nigeria must be taken into account.

30.  With regard to ties to Nigeria he submitted that because the  Appellant
    is a Nigerian Citizen does not  mean  that  she  has  ties  there.   He
    submitted that Nagre and Gulshan indicate that you can consider matters
    outside the Rules and when the judge assessed proportionality  he  made
    an error, as these matters were not taken into account.

31.  He asked me to consider all five points raised and  find  an  error  of
    law in the Judge`s Determination.

Determination

32.  With regard to the said case of Alvi, it has been put  to  me  that  in
    2009 the decision by the Respondent was unlawful.  This was not  raised
    before the First Tier Judge.  The Appellant told the First  Tier  Judge
    that she was here illegally and knew that she was here illegally  after
    her application was refused in 2009.  This is a historical issue. There
    is no error of law in the Determination based on this point.

33.  With regard to insurmountable obstacles and the  said  case  of  Izuazu
    the Judge has taken into account the evidence which he had before  him.
    At no time was it argued before him that the Appellant had a continuous
    lawful presence in the United Kingdom.  He was clearly aware  that  her
    mother and sister and her sister`s family are in  the  United  Kingdom.
    This is shown at paragraph  54  of  the  Determination.   He  does  not
    require to take into  account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  no
    property in Nigeria and  it  is  clear  that  he  was  aware  that  the
    Appellant`s partner is a British Citizen of some means.  The Judge  had
    a statement before him made by the Appellant's partner. The  fact  that
    the Appellant's Barrister did not  make  an  issue  of  this  does  not
    matter.  The Judge was aware of it when he made his decision  and  took
    this into account.

34.  With regard to the Appellant`s ties to Nigeria she has a brother  there
    and she was brought up there.  She states she did not intend to stay in
    Nigeria but most of her life was lived there  and  she  is  a  Nigerian
    Citizen.  At paragraph 31 she states that she does not want  to  go  to
    stay in Nigeria. The Judge noted this and found that this is not a good
    enough reason for allowing her appeal.  Matters have moved on since the
    case of Chikwamba and the Immigration Rules have changed.  The Judge is
    clearly aware of the cases of Nagre and Gulshan and has properly looked
    at the Appellant`s family and private life in the United Kingdom.

35.  I find that the  Judge  has  considered  all  the  facts  and  all  the
    evidence before him.  Of course the Appellant has ties to  her  country
    of origin. She will have friends there.  The fact that her only  family
    member there is a brother does not mean she has no ties.   All  social,
    cultural and family circumstances should be taken into account.

36.  With regard to long residence it is true that the Appellant's  time  in
    the United Kingdom was lawful from 2001. She used visit visas  to  come
    and go to and from the United Kingdom from 2001 until  first  September
    2004 when she came to the United Kingdom as a student  until  thirtieth
    September 2009 but since 25 October 2009 she has been  here  illegally,
    as admitted by her.  Public interest has to be considered. The terms of
    the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied. This is stated by the  judge
    at paragraph 56 of the determination. At paragraph  58  a  solution  is
    suggested by the judge. At paragraph 63 he states  that  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances which might lead to a  decision  being  taken
    outside the Rules. He clearly finds that based on the circumstances  of
    this case it would be sensible for the Appellant to return  to  Nigeria
    and apply to come back to the United Kingdom.

37.  With regard to the errors of fact in the  Refusal  letter,  these  were
    before the Judge but he has not based his decision on any of them.

38.  I find that the Judge was entitled to come to the  conclusion  he  did,
    based on what was before him at the  Hearing.   There  is  no  material
    error of law in the Determination.

Decision

39.  As there is no material error of law in the Judge`s  Determination  the
    First Tier Tribunal's decision must stand.

40.  The Appellant`s appeal is dismissed.

41.  No Anonymity direction has been made.



Signed                                  Date


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


