
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03938/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 14 January 2014                            |On 3 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                               LUWANG TERRONES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms D Lashley-Bobb of the Afro-Asian Advisory Service
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This was an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Callender-Smith  promulgated on 16 September 2014  which
    allowed the appeal although the  basis  of  the  Judge's  decision  was
    unclear and became the subject of an appeal to the Upper Tribunal  that
    came before me on 3 December 2014.

 3. The appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Callender
    - Smith was allowed by me on the basis that he had failed to make clear
    that he was addressing the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 4
    of ECHR rather than the decision of the National Referral Mechanism  as
    he suggested at paragraph 2 of his decision because this decision  does
    not carry a right of appeal.

 4. The Judges factual findings that the Appellant was in fact a victim  of
    trafficking contrary to the NRM decision I found was open to him. Those
    findings were preserved and  were  set  out  in  paragraph  40  of  his
    determination:

         "I make the following findings of fact- based  on  my  findings  of
         fact in relation to the Appellant's credibility-in relation to  the
         2000 Palermo Protocol and Article 4 (h) of the  Council  of  Europe
         Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings:

          1) The Appellant has been an individual who has been  subject  to
             an act of recruitment, transportation, transfer  ,  harbouring
             or receipt her original Saudi  Arabian  employer  recruited  ,
             transported and transferred the Appellant's  services  to  her
             brother and his wife who had a property in London.

          2) The means used for that was the coercion by way  of  abuse  of
             power and  position  of  vulnerability  used  to  achieve  the
             consent of the Appellant in respect of the new employment.

          3) The purposes of 1 and 2 above was for the exploitation of  the
             Appellant in terms of forced labour or services or slavery  or
             practices similar to slavery and servitude."

 5. The Judge also made findings at paragraph 43 and  44  of  his  decision
    that I found no reason to disturb that  there  was  an  ongoing  police
    investigation by the Metropolitan Police  Trafficking  and  Trafficking
    Kidnap Unit.

 6. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Duffy  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that :

      a) Article 4 is forward looking. There  may  be  a  finding  that  the
         Appellant had been a victim of trafficking but there  was  no  risk
         going forward. The Appellant had not suggested that she was in fear
         of traffickers on her return to the Philippines.

      b) There was only a breach of Article 4 if the decision  made  engages
         with the Convention on Trafficking and the Respondent had failed to
         carry  the  responsibilities  and  in   those   circumstances   the
         Respondent had a duty to issue leave.

      c) The Respondent's obligation to issue leave  in  such  circumstances
         was set out in the policy document 'Victims of  Human  Trafficking-
         competent authority guidance October 2013 at pages 98-100.

      d) There were two circumstances set  out  in  the  policy  that  would
         warrant a grant of leave. The first was in relation to the personal
         circumstances of the Appellant: the Appellant in relation  to  this
         was relying on the fact that the Appellant had an  appointment  for
         assessment for counselling. This was too early in  the  process  to
         suggest that the Respondent's responsibility  to  grant  leave  was
         triggered. The second situation  was  where  the  police  requested
         leave be granted because the applicant  was  assisting  with  their
         enquiries. The police in this case had indicated  that  no  further
         action was to be taken.

      e) The Appellant therefore did  not  engage  the  obligations  of  the
         Convention as she did not engage either limb of the policy.

      f) In relation to EK (Article 4 ECHR : Anti Trafficking  Convention  )
         Tanzania [2013] UKUT 00313 (IAC) he suggested that this case  could
         be distinguished as the Appellant's medical condition in that  case
         was more clearly one that required ongoing treatment.

 7. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Lashley Bobb submitted that :

      a) The Appellant was a victim of trafficking as defined by the Palermo
         Protocol and thus Article 4 was engaged.

      b) The issue then became what  were  the  obligations  of  the  United
         Kingdom by virtue of her status as  a  victim  of  trafficking.  In
         relation to this she referred to  a  number  of  documents  in  her
         bundle but in particular the  Palermo  Protocol  2  (b)  where  the
         emphasis was on assisting and protecting the victim.

      c) There were two elements to the  responsibility  of  the  Respondent
         which might give rise to the grant of discretionary leave.

      d) The first was that a criminal investigation was underway.  She  did
         not accept that the police had decided no further action was to  be
         taken and indeed she herself had been present at a meeting  between
         a DC Rachidi and the  Appellant  on  17  December  2014  where  the
         ongoing investigation was discussed. She accepted that a  file  had
         not gone forward  to  the  CPS  as  of  yet  but  argued  that  the
         Respondent's policy made no distinction between  investigation  and
         prosecution.

      e) The second situation was in relation to the  Appellant's  'personal
         circumstances'.  The  efforts  that  had  been  made   to   arrange
         counselling for the Appellant were set out at pages 138-152 of  the
         Appellant's bundle. These began in July 2014 and it was regrettable
         that it had taken so long to arrange.

      f) In the light of the matters that were outstanding, both the  police
         investigation  and  the  Appellant's  need  for   counselling   she
         submitted that this was an appropriate case for  the  Secretary  of
         State  to  exercise  her  discretion  by  granting  a   period   of
         discretionary leave: failure to do so amounted to a breach  of  her
         international obligations.

Findings

 8. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round before  reaching
    any findings.  I have done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
    compartmentalised my findings in some respects below, I must  emphasise
    the findings have only been made having taken account of  the  evidence
    as a whole.

 9.  The Appellant is a national of the Philippines who made an application
    on 4 July 2013 for Leave to Remain as an Overseas Domestic Worker under
    paragraph 159 of the Immigration Rules. Her application was refused  in
    a decision dated 7 January 2014 and  the  Appellant  accepts  that  she
    cannot meet the requirements of the Rules.

10. I am satisfied however that the Appellant is,  as  the  previous  Judge
    found, a victim of human trafficking for Domestic  Servitude.  While  I
    note that the National Referral Mechanism made a  negative  decision  I
    accept as the previous Judge did that this tribunal was  not  bound  by
    that decision and thus the previous Judge  made  the  factual  findings
    that I upheld.

11. I also note that it has never been the Appellant's case that there is a
    risk for her on return to her country of origin nor that she  has  been
    so affected by her trafficking that she is unable to work. She  herself
    changed her employer (which was one of the reasons she could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules) and had expressed a desire  to  continue
    working in the United Kingdom.

12. The Appellant argues  that  against  the  finding  that  she  has  been
    trafficked her rights in terms of Article 4 of the Convention  and  the
    Protocol to  Prevent,  Suppress  and  Punish  Trafficking  in  Persons,
    especially Women  and  Children  ("the  Palermo  Protocol")   had  been
    breached on account both  of  her  being  trafficked  into  the  United
    Kingdom and then subsequently trafficked within the country and she was
    entitled to a grant of discretionary leave to  take  advantage  of  the
    operational measures to protect both victims and potential  victims  of
    trafficking whose guidelines have been set out in the document produced
    to me 'Victims of Human Trafficking'.

13. I accept that the Guidelines set out two circumstances in which a grant
    of discretionary leave should normally be made and I will examine these
    below.

Personal Circumstances

14. In relation to personal circumstances (page 98 of the  Guidance)  there
    is little evidence before  me  suggest  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    identified as someone  who  will  benefit  from  any  kind  of  medical
    treatment as the process is at such an early stage. There is  an  email
    dated 31 July 2014 responding to a query about counselling stating that
    those contacted were unable to respond due to a high referral rate  and
    there is no more recent evidence to suggest that such  counselling  has
    taken place or what any future requirements would be. The case of EK is
    distinguishable in that it relates to a  victim  with  well  documented
    ongoing significant medical needs.

Police Investigation.

15. Mr Duffy asserted that the police had taken the decision that there was
    to be no further action in respect of the investigation as  to  whether
    the Appellant had been the victim of a crime. There is  no  documentary
    evidence before me originating from the police  to  suggest  that  this
    decision has been made.

16. What is clear is that as of the date of the last  hearing  8  September
    2014 a DC Karen Anstiss of  the  Metropolitan  Police  Trafficking  and
    Kidnap Unit was investigating the criminal elements of the  trafficking
    allegation against Prince Faizal  Bin  Turki  al-Faizal  and  this  was
    confirmed by the officer in  a  letter  dated  5  September  2014.  The
    officer had confirmed that the Prince did not have diplomatic  immunity
    and there was a meeting with him to progress the  investigation  on  22
    February 2014.

17. The Appellant through Ms  Lashley  Bobb  confirmed  that  she  had  not
    received anything from the police to suggest that the decision had been
    made not to prosecute and indeed Ms Lashley Bobb explained to  me  that
    she had been present with the Appellant at a meeting with the police as
    recently as 17 December 2014  to  discuss  the  ongoing  investigation.
    While I have nothing from the police to confirm this I have  no  reason
    not to accept what Ms Lashley Bobb tells me.

18. I am therefore satisfied that there is an  ongoing  investigation  into
    the commission of criminal offences arising out of the Appellant  being
    trafficked. That is not however the end of  the  matter  and  does  not
    result  in  an  automatic  entitlement  to  a  grant  of   leave.   The
    Respondent's Guidance document envisages that the Respondent may  grant
    a period of 12 months discretionary leave where a victim has agreed  to
    co operate with police enquiries in the United Kingdom  but  adds  'the
    police must make a formal request for  them  to  be  granted  leave  to
    remain on this basis.' (page 101 of 115) the rationale of this  may  be
    that the policy envisages later on the same  page  that  there  is  the
    possibility of victims assisting with police enquiries from  abroad  as
    criminal investigations and even trials allow for  the  possibility  of
    evidence from victims being given remotely.

19. There is no evidence before me from the police or any other  agency  to
    suggest that the police require the Appellant  to  be  present  in  the
    United Kingdom either to pursue their investigation or indeed  even  to
    prosecute any perpetrator.

20. I am therefore  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  under
    Article 4 as although I accept that it is engaged by the  finding  that
    the Appellant was a victim of trafficking there has been  no  violation
    as it cannot be demonstrated that there is any ongoing obligation which
    the Respondent has failed to fulfil. There is no clear  evidence  about
    ongoing medical requirements arising out of her  being  trafficked  and
    while I accept that there is an ongoing police investigation the Police
    have not indicated that they require her presence in the United Kingdom
    in order for that investigation to progress.

DECISION

21. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.




Signed      Date 30.1.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
