









                               UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th June 2013                                |On 13th June 2013          |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                        MR rana muhammad hisham yasir


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Henderson made following a consideration of the evidence
    on the papers.

 2. The Appellant had appealed a decision by the  Respondent  made  on  8th
    March 2013 refusing him leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4  (General
    Student) Migrant under the  Points  Based  System.  There  was  also  a
    paragraph 322(3) with reference to paragraph 245W(C)(iv) issue.

 3. In a determination promulgated on 12th April 2013 the  Judge  dismissed
    the appeal under  paragraph  245ZX(c)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but
    allowed it under paragraph 322(3).

 4. Both the Appellant and the Respondent sought permission to appeal.  The
    Appellant challenged the Judge's findings on the basis that  the  Judge
    erred in her finding that the Appellant had not achieved  the  required
    English language qualification. The Respondent challenged  the  Judge's
    findings in respect of paragraphs 245ZW(c)(iv) and 322(3) on the  basis
    that the Judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  allowing  the
    appeal under those provisions.

 5. I am satisfied that after hearing submissions from both representatives
    and a copy letter dated 23rd January 2013  being  submitted,  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  an  error  of
    law on this basis. It was accepted by Mr Avery that the Judge had  been
    mistaken to conclude as she did in paragraph 15  of  her  determination
    that Communicator Level B2 is below that  of  Level  B1.  In  fact  the
    reverse is true. I am satisfied therefore that this error on  the  part
    of the Judge is a material one and one which taints the  whole  of  her
    determination.

 6. Equally apart from that at  paragraph  16  of  the  determination,  the
    reasons given for  allowing  the  appeal  under  paragraph  322(3)  are
    inadequate. They amount to one sentence.

 7. The case was originally dealt with on the papers.  The  Appellant  will
    attend he told me, a resumed oral hearing.

Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside and will be remade.

 9. Both parties accepted that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge must be set aside and a fresh hearing take place. The matter will
    therefore be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing to
    take place and for full findings of fact to be made.  It  will  be  set
    down for an oral hearing as the Appellant intends to attend.









Directions

10. This appeal will be heard at Taylor House on 29th August 2013  so  that
    the decision can be remade by a Judge other than Judge Henderson, under
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements dated 25th  September
    2012.

11. Any time estimates and further directions at the discretion of  the  RJ
    at Taylor House.





Signed:                                      Date:
