
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03411/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th March 2016                            |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                imran rasool
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel instructed by Ison Harrison
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born  on  30th  July  1970.
    The Appellant married his wife, Rabia Waraich,  a  German  citizen  and
    therefore an EEA national, when they were resident in Germany in  2002.
    They both moved to live in the UK from 29th November 2008, and on  20th
    October 2009 the Appellant obtained a residence card valid for a period
    of five years.  On 14th  October  2014  the  Appellant  applied  for  a
    permanent residence card under the provisions of Regulation 15  of  the
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006    (the
    Regulations).  That application was refused on 12th  January  2015  for
    the reasons set out in the  Respondent's  letter  of  that  date.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boardman (the Judge) sitting at Taylor House on 3rd August  2015.
    The Judge allowed the appeal for the reasons set out  in  his  Decision
    dated 5th August 2015.  The Respondent  sought  leave  to  appeal  that
    decision, and on 7th January 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant made his application on the basis that  his  wife  was  a
    self-sufficient person for the purposes of Regulation  6(1)(d)  of  the
    Regulations.  The  application  for  a  permanent  residence  card  was
    refused on the basis that the Appellant's  wife  was  at  least  partly
    dependent financially on the Appellant and therefore did not qualify as
    a self-sufficient person under Regulation 4(4) of the Regulations.  The
    Judge allowed the appeal because following the decision in Singh [2015]
    EUECJ C-218/14 (16th  July  2015)  a  self-sufficient  person  for  the
    purpose of Regulation  6(1)(d)  of  the  Regulations  could  be  wholly
    financially dependent on the earnings of  another,  in  this  case  her
    spouse, the Appellant.

 4. In the grounds of application, it was argued that the Judge  had  erred
    in law in this respect.  Following the decision in AG and  others  (EEA
    job seeker self-sufficient person - proof) Germany [2007] UKAIT  00075,
    under Regulation 4(4) of the Regulations,  it  was  decided  that  "the
    resources of a family member cannot be aggregated with those of the EEA
    national where those resources are derived from past employment of that
    family member".

 5. At the hearing, Mr Mills  said  that  having  considered  the  Rule  24
    response of the Appellant, he accepted that there was no error  of  law
    in the decision of the Judge.  It was accepted that the  Appellant  and
    his wife had never been reliant upon public funds in the UK,  and  held
    comprehensive health insurance.  The circumstances of the Appellant and
    his wife came squarely within those  considered  in  Singh  and  others
    which post-dated the decision in AG and others and therefore was to  be
    preferred.  Mr Mills  accepted  that  the  Appellant  qualified  for  a
    permanent residence card as he satisfied all the  requirements  of  the
    appropriate Regulations.

 6. Having heard from Mr Mills, I indicated that I did  not  need  to  hear
    from Mr Eaton.  I find that there was no error in law of  the  decision
    of the Judge for the reasons explained by Mr Mills, and therefore I  do
    not set aside the decision of the Judge.


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and  I  find  no
reason to do so.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

