
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03428/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 24th July 2015                     |                   On 14th August 2015|
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                          FESOJAIYE OLANIRAN ADIKA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere of Melrose Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal C Burns (the judge) promulgated on 30th March 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a Nigerian  national  born  21st  October  1976  whose
    application for a residence card was refused on 15th January 2015.  The
    application was based upon the Appellant's marriage to an EEA  national
    which ended in divorce, and a decree absolute was issued on 11th August
    2014.

 3. The application was refused with reference to regulation 10(5)  of  The
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    Regulations).  The Respondent did not accept that it  had  been  proved
    that the Appellant's former spouse was exercising treaty rights at  the
    time of the divorce.

 4. The Appellant appealed, and requested that his appeal be decided on the
    papers without an oral hearing.

 5. The Tribunal acknowledged that the Appellant wished his  appeal  to  be
    decided on the papers, and issued directions to both  parties,  to  the
    effect that any further written evidence or submissions must be  lodged
    with the Tribunal and the other party no later than 17th March 2015.

 6. The appeal was allocated to the judge on 18th March  2015.   The  judge
    noted that no further evidence had been provided, and  found  that  the
    Appellant had failed to prove that his former spouse  was  a  qualified
    person.  The appeal  was  therefore  dismissed  pursuant  to  the  2006
    Regulations.  The judge also considered Article 8 of the 1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention)  and  found  that  the
    Appellant had not established that he enjoyed family or private life in
    the United Kingdom and therefore  concluded  that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to the Upper Tribunal.  In summary
    it was contended that the judge had acted unfairly  in  dismissing  the
    appeal on the papers, without taking into  consideration  a  bundle  of
    further documents, submitted by the Appellant's solicitors on behalf of
    the Appellant.  It was contended that the  documents  had  been  served
    upon the Tribunal on 18th March 2015, before the decision was prepared.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Zucker on 3rd June 2015.

 9. The Respondent issued a response pursuant to rule 24  of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending in  summary  that  the
    Appellant had failed to comply with directions, and had  submitted  the
    documentary evidence after the deadline  had  expired.   Therefore  the
    judge had not erred in law in failing to  consider  evidence  that  was
    not before her.

10. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

The Appellant's Submissions

11. Mr Aghayere relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal.  He submitted that  because  the  documentary
    evidence had been served on the Tribunal  before  the  judge  made  her
    decision, the documents  should  have  been  taken  into  account.   Mr
    Aghayere argued that the fact that the documents were not submitted  by
    the deadline  was  not  the  Appellant's  fault  as  he  had  sent  the
    documentary evidence to his solicitors a week before  the  deadline  of
    17th March 2015.  The documents were relevant, as they proved that  the
    EEA national was exercising treaty rights.

The Respondent's Submissions

12. Mr Wilding relied upon the  rule  24  response  but  accepted  that  if
    documents had been submitted to the Tribunal,  prior  to  the  decision
    being made, then it may be the case that those  documents  should  have
    been considered, but the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
    only be set aside if the documents contained material evidence.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. I indicated at the hearing that in my view the First-tier Tribunal  had
    erred in law  and  therefore  the  decision  would  be  set  aside.   I
    indicated that I would issue a written decision.

14. In considering this appeal I have taken into account the principles  in
    MM Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC), the head note  of  which  I  set  out
    below;

         (1)  Where there is a defect or impropriety of a procedural  nature
             in the proceedings at first instance, this  may  amount  to  a
             material error of law requiring the decision of the First-tier
             Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside.
         (2)  A successful appeal is not dependent on the  demonstration  of
             some failing on the part of the FtT.  Thus an error of law may
             be found to have occurred in circumstances where some material
             evidence, through no fault of the  FtT,  was  not  considered,
             with resulting unfairness (E & R v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49).

15. I find that the Appellant's evidence was not received by  the  Tribunal
    by the deadline date of 17th  March  2015,  but  was  received  by  the
    Tribunal on 20th March 2015.  The appeal  had  been  allocated  to  the
    judge on 18th March 2015.

16. The appeal was prepared on 26th March 2015,  and  promulgated  on  30th
    March 2015.

17. Therefore the evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant should have
    been brought to the judge's attention, and the judge should have made a
    decision as to whether or not the documentary evidence was to be  taken
    into account.  This decision should have  been  recorded,  and  reasons
    given, whether the decision was to admit or exclude the evidence.

18. Such a decision was not taken by the judge, who proceeded to  determine
    the appeal without reference to the Appellant's  documentary  evidence,
    even though that evidence had been in the Tribunal's possession for six
    days prior to the judge's decision being made, and ten  days  prior  to
    the decision being promulgated.

19. If considered, the evidence may  have  caused  the  judge  to  reach  a
    different conclusion, as the evidence related to the Appellant's former
    EEA national spouse exercising treaty rights.  That evidence needed  to
    be considered and assessed.

20. I find that the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal was  therefore
    unfair,  because  the  Appellant's   documentary   evidence   was   not
    considered, and I am satisfied that this amounts to a material error of
    law.

21. It is appropriate for this appeal to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I make this decision having taken into account paragraph  26
    of MM in which the Tribunal indicate inter alia;

         "We consider that, as a fairly strong general rule, where  a  first
         instance decision is set aside on the basis  of  an  error  of  law
         involving the deprivation  of  the  Appellant's  right  to  a  fair
         hearing, the appropriate  course  will  be  to  remit  to  a  newly
         constituted First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing".

22. I also take into account the Senior President's Practice  Statement  of
    25th September 2012 and in particular paragraph 7.2 which states;

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

23. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided on  the
    papers by a First-tier Tribunal Judge, other than Judge C Burns.

24. If the Appellant wishes his appeal to be decided at an oral hearing, he
    must pay the appropriate fee to the Tribunal, and advise  the  Tribunal
    that he requires an oral hearing.

25. If either party seeks to rely upon documentary evidence  that  has  not
    already been served, such evidence must be served upon the Tribunal and
    the other party within 28 days of the date when this decision  is  sent
    to the parties.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

There has been no request for anonymity and no anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date         3rd August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This must be considered by  the
First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date         3rd August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

