
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03844/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st April 2016                        |On 11th July 2016                 |

                         upper tribunal judge DEANS

                                   Between

                         mrs folasade bello-ayodeji
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells of Counsel, instructed by Malik & Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Phull dismissing an appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant was born on 2nd September  1978  and  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria.  She appeals against the decision dated 5th  January  2015  to
    refuse to vary leave and to remove her from the UK.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the UK in August 2011 with  leave  until  25th
    November 2014.  In October 2014 she applied for leave on  compassionate
    grounds outside the Immigration Rules.  Her application  was  based  in
    part on a fear of returning to Nigeria  and  in  part  on  private  and
    family life she claimed to have established in the UK.   Before  coming
    to the UK the Appellant had lived with her husband in Nigeria.  He died
    on 6th January 2013.  According to the Appellant, her  husband's  death
    triggered a property dispute with her husband's family.  A month  after
    her husband's death  she  received  an  affidavit  from  her  husband's
    brother stating that he had possession of all her  husband's  property.
    She telephoned him and told him that this property  was  hers  and  her
    daughters'.  It seems that because the Appellant did not  have  a  son,
    her husband's family did not want her to inherit.

 4. According to the Appellant she has received threats from her  husband's
    family.  She reported these to the police but was  informed  that  this
    was a family issue.  Her mother, with whom two of her  daughters  live,
    was also threatened.  Two men came to see her and  said  the  Appellant
    should not return from  the  UK  because  she  would  be  killed.   The
    Appellant acknowledged that she could contest  the  allocation  of  the
    property and had a legal right to do so but was fearful of the  threats
    and feared for her life.

 5. The Appellant's circumstances in the UK are that she is living with her
    youngest daughter, who was 4 at the time  of  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This child was due to start school  in  September
    2015.  The Appellant is allowed to work twenty  hours  a  week  and  by
    doing this she supports herself and her daughter.   She  also  receives
    help from family, friends and church members.  The Appellant works in a
    care home and while she is at work friends  look  after  her  daughter.
    Her two daughters in Nigeria were aged 9 and  7  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. So far as private and family life is concerned, the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant has family and  private  life
    in the UK such as to engage Article 8.  The Judge went on  to  consider
    the Appellant's fear of returning to Nigeria.  The Judge observed  that
    even if the Appellant feared her husband's family as she  claimed,  she
    had not sought to institute any legal proceedings in  Nigeria  for  the
    return of her husband's property and this reduced the  weight  attached
    to her evidence.  The Appellant's daughters remained in Nigeria and the
    evidence did not suggest  that  the  girls  were  at  risk  from  their
    paternal uncles.  The Judge referred to the Appellant's  evidence  that
    two men went to her mother's house and threatened her should she return
    from the UK.  For reasons given in  the  decision  the  Judge  did  not
    accept the Appellant's evidence on this point.  The  Judge  noted  that
    the Appellant had chosen not to claim asylum and make herself available
    for an interview.  The Judge was not satisfied that the  Appellant  was
    at risk in Nigeria from her husband's family.  His finding was made  on
    the basis that there was a lack of evidence to support the  Appellant's
    claims.

 7. So far as the Appellant's daughter in the UK was concerned,  the  Judge
    found that it was in her best interest to  stay  with  her  mother  and
    return with her and be reunited with her  sisters.   The  Secretary  of
    State's decision was not disproportionate.

 8. The Appellant drafted the application for permission to appeal herself.
     She was unrepresented at the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted on one ground  only.   The  Judge,  in
    granting permission to appeal observed that the  Appellant  was  served
    with a Section 120 notice and arguably, in the course  of  her  appeal,
    she raised protection issues claiming that she was at real risk of harm
    from non-state agents in the event of her return to Nigeria.   Arguably
    it was not clear from the Tribunal's decision that the  lower  standard
    of proof was applied to her evidence in this respect.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr Wells, for the Appellant, pointed out that
    the Judge had addressed the Appellant's humanitarian  protection  claim
    at paragraph 23 of the decision in  the  terms  summarised  above.   At
    paragraph 3, however, the Judge set out the standard of  proof  as  the
    balance of probabilities,  which  was  not  relevant  to  a  claim  for
    humanitarian protection.  There was no reference at paragraph 23 to the
    correct standard of proof.

10. Mr Wells further pointed out that although at paragraph  23  the  Judge
    said that a police report of 15th  January  2015  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant did not have a reference number, in fact the report did  bear
    a reference number.

11. For the Respondent, Mr Wilding agreed that paragraph 23 was the part of
    the decision which was under scrutiny.  It was not correct to  say  the
    Judge had not considered the humanitarian protection point.  The  Judge
    gave sound reasons for rejecting the Appellant's alleged fear.  Even if
    the police report had a reference number, it  was  still  unsigned  and
    undated.  There was no evidence from the Appellant's mother  about  the
    threats she had received, or what she had said to the police,  or  what
    other action she took.  No asylum claim had been made by the Appellant.
     The Judge had not accepted the evidence, which  did  not  establish  a
    risk on return.

12. There was some discussion about  whether  the  humanitarian  protection
    claim constituted a new matter under an amendment to the 2002 Act.   Mr
    Wilding acknowledged that the Appellant's original  grounds  of  appeal
    had been lodged before April 2015 and were therefore not subject to the
    new legislative provision.

Discussion

13. In considering this appeal I bear in mind that the  Appellant  was  not
    represented at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  and  it  was
    therefore the duty of the Judge to render her such  assistance  as  was
    necessary to ensure that she obtained a fair hearing.  It was not clear
    from the decision that  the  Judge  had  considered  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 at all.  The Judge's decision appeared to  be  entirely  made
    under Article 8.

14. At paragraph 3 of the decision the Judge set out a  standard  paragraph
    on the standard of proof,  which  was  stated  to  be  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  When dealing with  the  Appellant's  fear  of  harm  in
    Nigeria, at paragraph 23, there was nothing to suggest  the  Judge  had
    applied any different standard.

15.  I  consider  that  the  Judge's  failure  to  consider  properly   the
    Appellant's claim under Article 3 and to apply the appropriate standard
    of proof of a real risk of serious harm is an error of law.  Mr Wilding
    submitted that  the  Judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    evidence in relation to her fear were nevertheless sound.  In my  view,
    although the reasons may appear sound, they do not rest upon  a  proper
    foundation.  That foundation would have been to assess the  Appellant's
    evidence as an Article 3 claim applying the proper standard  of  proof.
    As that has not been done, the reasons given by  the  Judge  cannot  be
    accepted as adequate.

16. The proper course in these circumstances is for  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be set aside and for the appeal to  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing before a different Judge  with
    no findings preserved.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  before  a
different Judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

Although the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal recorded on the first page  of
the decision that an anonymity  direction  was  made,  at  the  end  of  the
decision it is stated that no anonymity direction is  made.   I  proceed  on
the basis that no anonymity order has been made.  I have not been  asked  to
make such an order and I see no reason of substance to make one.



Signed                              Date: 11th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

