

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                Appeal Number: IA/03015/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2016                          |On 9 March 2016               |

                                   Before
                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                         MRS NAVEEDA IQBAL Plus one

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellants:    Mr Syed Qazi Anisuddin of S Z Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  where  she  was  born  on  10
  January 1982. She came to the United Kingdom on 26 April  2012  following
  her marriage to Mr Zafar Iqbal, as a  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
  settled in the United Kingdom. When she arrived she  was  accompanied  by
  their daughter [S] whose date of birth is [ ] 2011. While in  the  United
  Kingdom she gave birth to her second daughter [A] on [ ] 2014 and on [  ]
  2015 the couple had the third child, a son named [AZ]. On 30 April  2014,
  the appellant sought Indefinite leave to  remain.  That  application  was
  refused on 22 December 2014 and appeal against the decision was heard and
  dismissed by Judge Chapman, a  Judge  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal  for
  reasons given in his determination dated 25 August 2015.

2.    The appellants were granted permission to appeal  by  Judge  Kelly,  a
  Judge of the First tier Tribunal on 18 January.  In  granting  permission
  Judge Kelly inter alia said, " It is  however  at  least  arguable  (  as
  hinted at paragraphs 11 and V111 of the application)  that  the  Tribunal
  failed to conduct the  assessment  of  best  interests  of  the  children
  against the background of their father's entitlement  to  remain  in  the
  United Kingdom and thus to assess the risk  of  them  becoming  separated
  from one or the other of their parents as a  result  of  the  appellant's
  removal [EV (Philippines] and Others [2014] EWCA  Civ  874  at  paragraph
  60]. It is arguable  that  had  the  Tribunal  conducted  the  assessment
  against this background it would have  decided  the  appeal  differently.
  Permission to appeal is accordingly granted."

3.    I heard submissions from the representatives. Syed Qazi Anisuddin  for
  the appellants took me through the grounds of appeal and  contended  that
  the Judges' conclusions were based upon material errors of facts as  well
  as law drawing particular attention  to  Paragraphs  49  and  53  of  the
  determination and the fat that the appellant  has  lived  in  the  United
  Kingdom lawfully and without blemish since her entry  as  a  spouse.  The
  judge, he argued had failed to give due  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
  impugned decision would mean removal or  constructive  removal  of  three
  British citizens - the spouse of the appellant, their  two  children  who
  are both British having been born in the United Kingdom. It  could  break
  up a genuine and subsisting marriage  and  a  family  unit  in  that  the
  respondent could only enforce removal of  the  appellant  and  the  first
  child of the couple but not the father and the two British born children.
  This would effectively mean that British born children would be  left  to
  cope without the presence or support of their mother. He asked me to find
  that the conclusion of the First tier Tribunal was in material  error  of
  law and should be set aside and remade.

4.    In response Mr Jarvis argued that there was no material error  of  law
  in the determination of the First Tier Tribunal. He reminded me that  the
  grant of permission was limited and did not  include  alleged  errors  of
  fact. He contended that Judge  Chapman  was  correct  in  describing  the
  immigration status as "precarious" in the assessment of  proportionality.
  There was a clear difference between a status being precarious and  being
  unlawful. He submitted that the British citizenship of the  two  children
  could not be used as the "trump card" as had been  held  by  the  Supreme
  Court in a case of which I was not provided a copy. Mr Jarvis  said  that
  all the findings made by Judge Chapman were correct and lawful and that I
  should find accordingly and dismiss this appeal.

5.    I have given most careful consideration to the facts of this case  and
  the legal framework applicable to those facts, reminding myself that  the
  decision of the First tier to dismiss the appeal can only  be  interfered
  with if I find a material error of law  in  the  determination  of  Judge
  Chapman. Before I go any further I  should  like  to  record  that  Judge
  Chapman's determination cannot be faulted  for  the  detailed  manner  in
  which he has set out the facts as he found them and the  legal  framework
  that he  thought  applied  to  them.  It  is  a  14  paged  type  written
  determination consisting of 67 paragraphs. As all claims under Article  8
  are more fact specific rather than law specific,  this  case  had  to  be
  decided on its own facts but within correct legal boundaries.

6.    Having taken account of all the  relevant  papers  and  the  arguments
  made by Mr Syed Qazi Anisuddin and Mr Jarvis for the respondent,  I  find
  that the decision of Judge Chapman was in material error of law  in  that
  he failed to recognise and give weight to the particular  facts  of  this
  case as well as the consequences of upholding the  impugned  decision  of
  the respondent on family and  private  life  of  the  appellant  and  her
  British citizen two children and spouse.

7.    I note that the Judge quite properly raised factors  that  go  against
  the appellant in the proportionality  exercise  but  he  failed  to  give
  appropriate weight to factors that go in favour of  the  appellant  being
  allowed to remain. In granting permission  to  appeal  Judge  Kelly  drew
  attention to the principles set out in  paragraph  60  of  the  Court  of
  Appeal decision in EV Philippines and others [2014] EWCA Civ 874  stating
  that "had the Tribunal conducted the assessment against  this  background
  it would have decided the appeal differently." I respectfully agree  with
  that view.


8.   Judge Chapman did not conduct the assessment of the best  interests  of
  the children against the background of their father's  entitlement  as  a
  British citizen to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Additionally,  his
  assessment of proportionality gave wholly insufficient weight to the long
  residence of the father of children in the UK and to the argument,  which
  I  find  valid  and  compelling,  that  it  would  be  unreasonable   and
  disproportionate to expect him to uproot himself from the country that he
  is a citizen of and that he may or may not have the right of residence in
  Pakistan.


9.    Judge Chapman did not remind himself,  having  quite  correctly  found
  that family and private life between the appellant, their child  [S]  and
  her husband/ father had been established, it was  for  the  Secretary  of
  State to show compliance with Article 8 (2) of  the  ECHR.  Also  in  his
  assessment about the father being in receipt  of  public  funds  for  two
  years, the Judge has paid no regard that he has worked and paid taxes for
  many years (18 years) when he worked as  a  taxi  driver.  As  a  British
  citizen he has an entitlement to draw on public funds  and  evidence  the
  Judge had received showed that the father was pursuing employment options
  and had secured job with Amazon. The scepticism of Judge Chapman in  this
  regard contaminated his assessment as did his failure to appreciate  that
  the marital relationship of the couple and the children  was  strong  and
  long lasting.


10.   The conduct and character of the  family  needed  to  be  put  in  the
  proportionality assessment but it  was  not.  Here  we  do  not  have  an
  appellant who has entered or remained in the UK unlawfully or engaged  in
  any act against public interest or given birth to children to secure  her
  own stay. Quite the contrary.


11.    Judge  Chapman  also  erred  in  mixing  up  the  requirements  under
  immigration rules (117B) with Article 8 eligibility. (See  Paragraphs  29
  onwards). He was also wrong to state as he dies in paragraph 35  that  he
  is "not satisfied that the Appellant speaks English" when the  Judge  had
  before him a document certifying that she does.  The  appellant's  appeal
  had been conceded under the Immigration Rules.


12.    For the reasons given above the determination  of  Judge  Chapman  is
  set aside and in remaking the decision I find that the best interests  of
  the two children who are British by birth and whose father is British and
  whose mother (the appellant) has been in the UK lawfully,  will  be  best
  served by allowing the appeals.



 K Drabu CBE
 Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
 29 February 2016
