

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03280/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 2 September 2014                           |on 3 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                            CHIMEZIE JAMES ANENE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr B Criggie, of Hamilton Burns WS
For the Respondent:    Mr K Young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Debra Clapham, promulgated on 25 April  2014,  dismissing  his
       appeal against refusal of an application based on family life.


    2. The first ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is that  the  judge
       failed to explain why the appellant did not meet the  terms  of  the
       Immigration Rules, including paragraph EX of Appendix FM  (which  is
       not a free-standing provision).  As the ground says, the  Rules  are
       quite complex, but it was for the appellant (especially  as  he  was
       legally represented) to demonstrate that he succeeded  by  reference
       to those requirements and to the evidence, not for the judge to take
       the initiative.  He did not show in the First-tier Tribunal any flaw
       in the analysis in the respondent's decision that he  did  not  meet
       the requirements as to eligibility, as to his marital  relationship,
       and as to any relationship with his partner's child.


    3. The  second  ground  is  that  paragraph  64  of  the  determination
       incorrectly applies the test  of  "insurmountable  obstacles".   The
       phrase is used, but as it is  the  wording  of  the  Rule  there  is
       nothing wrong in that, as long as it is correctly  understood.   The
       discussion is in terms of practical difficulties rather than literal
       impossibility.  More to the point, the finding is an alternative  to
       the judge's conclusion that  there  is  no  genuine  and  subsisting
       marriage, in which no legal error has been  suggested  and  none  is
       apparent.

    4. The third ground is lack of consideration of the best  interests  of
       the  child  of  the  appellant's  partner.   This  is  not  a   fair
       representation of the determination, in particular at paragraphs 58,
       60, 63 and 64.   The  child  is  being  brought  up  mainly  by  her
       grandparents.  There was no evidence  that  the  appellant  has  any
       meaningful relationship with her, and none that his  departure  from
       the UK would be adverse to her interests.


    5. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the  making  of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law,  and  its
       determination shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                2 September 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


