

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      APPEAL NO: IA/03012/2014





Heard at Field House on    Determination promulgated on
6 October 2014    23 October 2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY



                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         SHERLENE PALERO ORTIZ (MS)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant: Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Ms Hall




                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. On 10 October 2012 the respondent, a citizen of the  Philippines,  was
      granted leave to remain in this country as Tier 4  (General)  Student.
      That leave was cancelled  because  the  respondent  (it  was  claimed)
      admitted that she had taken paid work as a cleaner, something that she
      was not entitled to do. Her leave was cancelled on 29 December 2013 as
      she had not complied with the  conditions  of  her  leave.  An  appeal
      against that decision was allowed after a hearing on 1 July 2014.

   2. Permission to appeal was sought. That document is far from clear as it
      refers to a Mr Hassan and a sham marriage, a matter  not  subsequently
      referred to, but it is fair to say that the gist of the application is
      that the determination  was  not  properly  reasoned.  The  judge  who
      granted permission to appeal said:


             In this appeal careful  findings  of  fact  were  required  in
             relation to the period when, according to the  appellant,  she
             had permission to work and also in relation to the  hours  and
             type of work she actually did and over what  period.  Arguably
             the judge did  not  make  adequate  findings  to  support  the
             decision.


   3. The  judge's  conclusion  is  to  be  found  in  paragraph  6  of  the
      determination. He says:


             In June 2014 London School of technology was stripped  of  its
             sponsorship. Before that it had been a highly trusted sponsor.
             As such [it] was able to authorise work placements within  the
             rules. I accept the evidence of the  appellant  that  she  was
             misquoted in the report of the immigration  officer.  I  found
             her to be a reliable witness and her story to be true.


   4. It is not in dispute that  the  passage  that  I  have  italicised  is
      correct and the grant of leave, at page 16 of the respondent's bundle,
      makes it clear that she may undertake "a work  placement  as  part  of
      your course study if you are studying with a highly trusted  sponsor".
      Page 15 of the bundle is a letter from the London School of Technology
      dated 3 March 2013 authorising the  respondent  to  undertake  a  work
      placement. Her evidence was that she had permission  to  do  the  work
      that she undertook and this latter supports that claim.


   5. It follows that there was evidence before the judge that underlay  all
      his conclusions. It might have been more helpful if he had referred to
      each piece of evidence, but it was all before him, and subject to  one
      matter which I must further deal with, he was indubitably entitled  to
      rely on it.


   6. The one matter is the claim by the appellant that the  respondent  had
      said, when interviewed,  that  she  had  worked  as  a  cleaner.  That
      interview has not been directly produced and only  appears  indirectly
      in the Notice of Refusal.  The  respondent  said  that  she  had  been
      misquoted and she actually said what she had said to the Tribunal. The
      judge was entitled to accept her version, particularly as no notes  of
      the interview had been produced.
   7. It follows that the judge was entitled to reach the  conclusions  that
      he did and there was evidence to justify all his conclusions and where
      he chose to prefer one piece of evidence over another he was  entitled
      so to do. It follows that he made no error of law.


   8.  It follows that the original determination did not contain  an  error
      of law and the original decision shall stand.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal     8 October 2014


