
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/03065/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


| Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8th May 2015                        |On 15th May 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                           Richmond Gabriel Abredu
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Owusu of BWF solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mr Richmond Gabriel Abredu date of birth 12th July  1979
    is a citizen of Ghana.  Having considered all the  circumstances  I  do
    not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Tiffen promulgated on 8th January 2015 whereby the judge dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  9th
    January 2014.  The  decision  by  the  Respondent  was  to  refuse  the
    Appellant a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in  the
    UK as the spouse of an EEA qualified person under the 2006  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations an the 2013 EEA Regulations.

 3. By decision made on the 25th February 2015 leave to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the appeal appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The case relates to  the  relationship  of  the  appellant  and  a  Mrs
    Florence Ofori. It is claimed that Mrs Ofori and the appellant  married
    in a ceremony conducted by proxy on the 8th December 2012. The marriage
    was being performed in Ghana with  the  parties  being  represented  by
    family members. Mrs Ofori is a Belgian national, who  it  is  accepted,
    was and is exercising treaty rights in the UK as an EEA citizen.

 5.  Issues arose in the case as to whether the marriage was valid in  law.
    The cases of Kareem (EEA proxy marriages) [2014] UKUT 00024  and  TA  &
    Another (Kareem explained) [2014] UKUT 00316 have established that  not
    only must the marriage be lawful according to the law of the  place  of
    celebration of marriage but must also be lawful according to the law of
    the EEA country of nationality of the qualified person.

 6. It appears that evidence was adduced that the Belgian authorities would
    recognise this marriage as lawful.  The  issue  before  the  First-tier
    Judge was whether the marriage was  lawful  according  to  the  law  of
    Ghana.

 7. In paragraph 6 of the decision the judge has ruled  that  the  Tribunal
    has to deal with this appeal on the basis of the evidence at  the  date
    of decision.

 8. By  Regulation  25  and  Schedule  1  of  the  2006  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 an appeal under the Regulations is to  be  treated  in
    the same way as an immigration appeal under the 2002 Act.

 9. Section 85 and 85A of the 2002 Act stipulates that in respect of  entry
    clearance and refusal of a certificate of entitlement the relevant date
    for considering the evidence is the date of the decision, in which only
    the facts pertaining to the date of the decision can be considered.  In
    respect of all other decisions Section 85(4) specifically provides that
    the Tribunal can consider evidence of matters arising after the date of
    the decision save for the types of decision set out in Section 85A. The
    decision to refuse an EEA residence card is not limited to  considering
    the facts at the date of the decision. To that extent there is an error
    of law in the approach that the judge has taken to the case.

10. Further the judge in paragraph 10 has stated  that  because  there  was
    only one issue in the case she stopped the appellant and the  witnesses
    from giving evidence in the case. The judge has identified the issue as
    being whether the marriage was legally valid according to Ghanaian law.



11. The judge has however gone on otherwise to deal with a secondary  issue
    as to whether there was a durable relationship  between  the  appellant
    and Mrs Ofori. In  order  to  assess  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and Mrs Ofori the oral  evidence  of
    the appellant and Mrs Ofori would have been of importance to answer any
    issues raised by the respondent. However without hearing  the  evidence
    and because the judge has stopped the evidence being given,  the  judge
    has decided whether there is a durable relationship on the basis of the
    matters raised by the respondent. The appellant's  and  his  witnesses'
    evidence would have been material in deciding that issue.  The  failure
    to hear the witnesses and stopping them giving evidence  was  again  an
    error.

12. As a final issue it is argued that the judge in  the  approach  to  the
    lawfulness of the Ghanaian proxy  marriage  has  decided  that  as  the
    marriage was not between two Ghanaian nationals  the  marriage  is  not
    lawful according to the place of celebration. There was a  report  from
    Professor Woodman before the judge. The judge indicates that  Professor
    Woodman relies upon case law that pre-dates the cases of  CB  (validity
    of  proxy  marriages)  Brazil  [2008]  UKAIT  00080  and  the  case  NA
    (Customary Marriage and Divorce) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009.   The  judge
    was provided with a copy of an unreported case of Amoako. That decision
    refers to the current understanding of the  legal  position  in  Ghana,
    whereby proxy marriages  may  involve  persons,  where  one  is  not  a
    Ghanaian national.   Similarly  there  is  reference  in  Amoako  to  a
    document in the possession of the respondent titled "Customary Marriage
    and Divorce / Proxy Marriages contracted in Ghana" dated  17th  January
    2012. It is unclear whether that document  was  produced  before  Judge
    Tiffen. That  document  however  seems  to  confirm  that  non-Ghanaian
    nationals can enter into a legal marriage by proxy celebrated in Ghana.
    The document was a policy statement by the SSHD

13. The failure of the judge to deal with the issues raised in  respect  of
    the proxy marriage and the other issues raised  leads  me  to  conclude
    that there are errors in the approach of the  judge  and  the  decision
    cannot stand. The decision has to be set aside.

14. I have considered how best to deal with this appeal and the appropriate
    course is for the appeal to be heard afresh and for fresh  findings  of
    fact to be made.

15. There are material errors of law in the original decision.  I set aside
    the decision to dismiss this matter on all grounds. I direct  that  the
    appeal be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
