
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/03702/2015
                                                IA/04592/2015, IA/03669/2015
                                                IA/04598/2015, IA/04597/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 September 2016                       |On 13 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [E O]
                                    [R A]
                                    [P A]
                                   [J F A]
                                    [J A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Nwaekwu,  Moorehouse Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
          (Decision delivered at the hearing of 19 September 2016)

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the  Home  Department.   I  shall  refer  herein  to   the   abovenamed
    respondents as 'the claimants'. The first claimant is the mother of the
    second to fifth claimants.

 2. By way of a decision of 14 January 2015 the  Secretary of State refused
    to grant each of the claimants leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    There is no dispute that on the same date the Secretary  of  State  set
    directions for each of the claimants' removal, pursuant to  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   It  is  also  of
    relevance that each of the claimants were granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain from 21 June 2011 until 20 June 2014.

 3. The claimants appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill on 8 March 2016 and each  was
    allowed on "human rights grounds (Article 8)" in a decision promulgated
    on 24 March 2016.  Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    subsequently granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 17
    August 2016 and thus the matter came before me.

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal there  was  agreement  between
    the parties that the First-tier Tribunal's decision contained an  error
    of law requiring it to be set aside  and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    reemitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be reconsidered  on  a  de
    novo basis.  I concur with the views of the parties in this regard.

 5. It is readily apparent from reading the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    that it approached the consideration  of  the  Article  8  claim  on  a
    legally unsustainable basis. That this is  so  is  highlighted  by  the
    following passages in the decision :

         "32. ... What appears to be the case therefore, is that there is an
             assessment that is to be carried out by the decision maker  as
             to whether the appellants' continue  to  qualify  for  further
             leave on the same basis as their original discretionary  leave
             was granted. ...

         ...

         34.  ... It seems to me that, therefore, the family unit is still a
             close  one  and  the  circumstances  have  not   fundamentally
             altered.  it  seems  to  me  therefore,  that  each  of  these
             appellants really ought to have been  granted  the  period  of
             further discretionary leave that is set out in that guidance."

 6. It is clear from these passages, and  even  clearer  from  reading  the
    FtT's decision as a whole, that the FtT undertook  its  considering  of
    the  claimants'  Article  8  ground  on  the  basis   that   if   their
    circumstances had not changed since the grant of  leave  in  2011  then
    they  ought  to  be  successful  in  their  appeal.   This  though   is
    fundamentally flawed because even if the circumstances of the claimants
    had not themselves changed since  2011,  the  legal  landscape  against
    which Article 8 claims must be  considered  has  substantially  changed
    since  that  time;  in  particular  the  intervening  period  saw   the
    introduction of new Immigration  Rules  (2012)  dealing  directly  with
    private and family life. These Rules now set out with some clarity  the
    SSHD's view of the public interest in Article 8 cases. In  short,  even
    if the claimants' circumstances had not changed since 2011 this  cannot
    be seen as being determinative of their current Article 8 claim.

 7. For this reason the First-tier Tribunal's decision is flawed by a legal
    error capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal. Given the  degree
    of fact finding which is necessary  to  re-make  the  decision,  it  is
    appropriate that the appeal be remitted. I observe when doing so,  that
    the FtT will now also be reqired to  engage  with  the  application  of
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains  an  error  of  law  capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and it is set aside.

The remaking of the decision will be undertaken by the  First-tier  Tribunal
on a de novo basis.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


