
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03292/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 27 January 2016                     |                   On 02 February 2016|
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                             MR MD HASNAT AZADI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

  1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
     tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's  decision
     taken on 20 December 2013 to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the
     United Kingdom.







  Background Facts

   2. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was  born  on  1  January
      1988.  He applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis  of  his
      private life under the Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended)  (the
      'Immigration  Rules').  That  application  was  refused  because  the
      respondent did not accept that, having spent 20 years in  Bangladesh,
      in the period of time that the appellant has been in the UK  that  he
      had lost ties to his home country. The respondent was  not  satisfied
      that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of
      appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

   3. The respondent considered whether there were particular circumstances
      which would warrant consideration of the grant  of  leave  to  remain
      outside of the immigration rules under  Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR ') finding that there were none.

   4.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
      determination promulgated on 15 January 2016, Judge Metzer  dismissed
      the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal considered paragraph
      276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The tribunal took into  account  the
      qualifications  obtained  by  the  appellant  and  his  admission  to
      Lincoln's  Inn.  The  judge  found  that  the  appellant   has   just
      established a private life in the UK under Article 8(1) of the  ECHR.
      The judge found, however, that the legitimate interest in immigration
      control outweighed the appellant's Article 8 interests and  therefore
      that it would  not  be  disproportionate  for  the  appellant  to  be
      returned to Bangladesh.

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   On
      23 March 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Martin (sitting  as  a  First-tier
      Tribunal judge) refused permission to appeal.  On 29 June 2015  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Holmes granted the appellant permission to appeal.  In
      granting permission, it was stated that the appellant produces now in
      support of the application a document said to be an email sent on the
      day of the hearing at 10:41 hours in which he says he did request  an
      adjournment, although it will be for the appellant to establish  that
      it was sent. Thus, the appeal came before me.

   The hearing on 27 January 2016

   6. An application was made by  the  appellant  on  25  January  2016  to
      adjourn the hearing on the basis that he was suffering from back pain
      and had been advised to take full bed rest for 4  weeks  and  advised
      not  to  travel  or  work  by  his  homeopathic  practitioner.   That
      application was refused. The reasons  given  were  that  it  was  not
      apparent that the person writing the letter was qualified to  give  a
      medical opinion  on  whether  the  appellant  can  attend  court  and
      additionally the appeal has already been adjourned once by the  Upper
      Tribunal and without  better  medical  evidence  it  is  not  in  the
      interests of justice for the matter to be delayed further. A  further
      letter was faxed to the Upper Tribunal by the appellant on 26 January
      providing  details  of  the  appellant's  homeopathic  practitioner's
      qualifications and renewing his request for an adjournment.

   7. I have considered the renewed adjournment request. I  note  that  the
      appellant has in fact  had  his  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
      adjourned on two previous occasions. The appellant is suffering  from
      back pain from which he has been suffering since October 2015. One of
      the grounds of his appeal is that an adjournment request to the First-
      tier Tribunal was not considered by the judge.

   8. There have therefore been  in  this  case  a  number  of  adjournment
      requests. I will deal with the adjournment request to the  First-tier
      Tribunal below. I have considered the case of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
      fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and the principles and test set out
      by the Upper Tribunal when considering the adjournment request. I  am
      not persuaded that there would be any unfairness to the appellant  or
      that he would be deprived of a fair  hearing  if  I  proceed  in  his
      absence. I have considered the overriding objective (Rule  2  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) and Rule 38 of  those
      Rules particularly the requirement in the  overriding  objective  for
      fairness. This is an appeal on a point of law. The appellant has  had
      sufficient  opportunity  to  provide  his  submissions  in   writing,
      permission being granted in June 2015. Directions were given that the
      parties shall prepare for the hearing on the basis that  any  further
      evidence  including  supplementary  oral  evidence  that  the   Upper
      Tribunal may need to consider can be considered at the  hearing.  The
      parties were reminded of the need for  any  further  evidence  to  be
      served in accordance with Rule 15(2A).  The  appellant  was  notified
      that his application for an adjournment was refused. This  is  not  a
      case where credibility is in issue. The issues in  dispute  can  very
      easily be dealt with by written submissions. The appellant has a  law
      degree and has successfully completed the bar course. He  is  clearly
      able to present his case in writing but has  not  submitted  anything
      further in support of his appeal.  Further,  for  the  reasons  given
      below, I consider that this appeal was doomed to fail. The attendance
      of the appellant would not make a difference. Having considered  that
      there is no unfairness I consider that it  is  in  the  interests  of
      justice to proceed in the absence of the appellant.

  Summary of the Submissions

   9. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred by considering that
      the appellant had contacted the First-tier Tribunal to indicate  that
      he would not be attending and that the case  should  proceed  in  his
      absence. It is asserted that the appellant in fact requested that the
      tribunal adjourn the date of hearing and rescheduled dates  that  the
      appellant and his representatives could attend.

  10. The First-tier tribunal erred in determining that the  appellant  did
      not produce any other evidence of his private life  in  the  UK.  The
      first-tier Tribunal judge agreed the fact that the appellant has been
      in the UK since 2008 and  obtained  a  degree  in  June  2012  and  a
      postgraduate diploma in the bar professional studies on 9 July  2013.
      It is submitted that following the tribunal determination in case CDS
      (PBS "available" Article 8) Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  305  (IAC)  ('CDS')
      completion of these academic degrees is adequate enough to  establish
      the appellant's private  life  in  the  UK  and  therefore  no  other
      evidence is necessary.

  11. The first tier Tribunal judge further erred by  determining  that  it
      would not be disproportionate for the appellant  to  be  returned  to
      Bangladesh bearing in mind that he spent his first 20 years  although
      he has a bar qualification and a law degree and it  would  not  be  a
      disproportionate interference  with  his  Article  8  rights.  It  is
      submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  has  fallen  into  error  by
      reaching this contradictory conclusion.

  12. It is asserted that the appellant has  established  a  solid  private
      life in the UK by staying in the UK  for  more  than  six  years  and
      successfully completing his academic qualifications. The judge should
      have considered the fact that the appellant was called to the bar  by
      the  Honourable  Society   of   Lincoln's   Inn   while   considering
      proportionality. If the judge had considered it  carefully  he  could
      have reached a different conclusion. The  appellant  has  established
      private life in the UK and that deserves respect.

  13. Reliance is placed on Paragraph 8 of Razgar, R (on the application of
      v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  27
      ('Razgar') submitting that in line with Razgar the  appellant's  best
      interest will be served by  allowing  his  appeal  so  that  the  can
      continue his practical work experience  in  the  UK  and  prepare  to
      practice as a lawyer in Bangladesh.

  14. Reliance is placed on the case of Patel and  Others  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC  72  ('Patel')  where  Lord
      Canwath confirms that the balance drawn by the rules may be  relevant
      to  the  consideration  of  proportionality  but   only   where   the
      appellant's circumstances engage Article 8 of the European Convention
      on Human Rights. It is submitted that refusal to allow the  appellant
      further leave to remain will seriously harm the  appellant's  ability
      to obtain practical knowledge and work experience in the UK and is an
      error of law. It is also submitted that the first-tier Tribunal judge
      erred by determining it would not be disproportionate to  return  the
      appellant to Bangladesh whereas it would be a clear interference with
      the appellant's right to private life which deserves respect.

  15. The Secretary of State submitted a rule 24 (of the Tribunal Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008)  response.  It  is  asserted  that  the
      respondent has not  been  provided  with  the  alleged  email  cannot
      therefore comment. The respondent asserts that whether or not it  was
      received is not material. There was no evidence  that  supported  any
      possible decision  that  the  refusal  could  be  a  disproportionate
      interference with the appellant's private life. The appellant's  stay
      in the UK was always precarious and the application of Section 117 at
      the 2002 Act would have inevitably resulted in an  adverse  decision.
      No properly directed tribunal would have found otherwise.

  16. Ms Fijiwala relied on the Rule 24 response.  She  submitted  that  if
      there was any error it was not material. The  appeal  was  doomed  to
      fail. It is clear  that  the  judge  addressed  paragraph  276ADE  at
      paragraph 4 of the decision. Although the judge does not refer to the
      appellant failing to satisfy the 'no ties' test it is clear that  the
      appellant cannot satisfy this. The judge considered Article 8 outside
      of the Immigration Rules finding that the  appellant  had  only  just
      established private life. She submitted that the case of CDS has been
      superseded by the cases of Patel and Nasim  and  others  (Article  8)
      [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) ('Nasim'). She  relied  on  paragraph  57  of
      Patel submitting that it is clear that education cannot be sufficient
      to found a claim under Article 8. She relied on paragraph 20  of  the
      case of Nasim which reminds the court to  refocus  attention  on  the
      purpose of article 8 and that the public  interest  will  prevail  in
      such cases as this.

  17. She submitted that the judge did not consider s117B but if he had  it
      would have made  the  respondent's  case  stronger.  The  appellant's
      status in the UK has always been precarious. It was open to the judge
      to conclude that the interference on the appellant's private life was
      proportionate.

  Legislative Provisions

      Nationality and Immigration Act 2002 ('2002 Act')

  18. As from 28 July 2014 statutory provisions in a new  Part  5A  of  the
      2002 Act (inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014) requires,  in
      legislative form for the first time, the  Tribunal  to  take  certain
      factors into account when determining whether a decision  made  under
      the Immigration Acts breaches respect for private  and  family  life.
      The decision in the  instant  case  is  a  decision  made  under  the
      Immigration Acts. The relevant provisions provide:

  19. Section 117A sets out the scope of the new Part 5A headed "Article  8
      of the ECHR; Public Interest Considerations" as follows:
         117A Application of this Part


         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine
         whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and  family
         life
         under Article 8, and
         (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
         Rights Act 1998.


         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must
         (in particular) have regard-
         (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and
         (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  to
         the
         considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of
         whether an interference  with  a  person's  right  to  respect  for
         private and
         family life is justified under Article 8(2).




  20. The considerations listed in s.117B are applicable to all  cases  and
      are:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public
         interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
         because persons who can speak English-
         (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the
         economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
         because such persons-
         (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         ...
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person
         at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.
         ...



  21. The requirement in s.117A to "have regard" to the  considerations  in
      s.117B  means  a  court  or  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to   those
      considerations in substance even if no explicit reference is made  to
      the statutory provisions (see Dube (ss.117A - 117D)  [2015]  UKUT  90
      (IAC)).

  22. As a consequence, the court or Tribunal is required to give  the  new
      Rules (at [47]): "greater weight than as merely a starting point  for
      the consideration of the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
      Article 8 rights" (see also SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA
      Civ 387).

  23. Article 8 of the ECHR states:

         (i). Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
         life, his home and his correspondence.

         (ii) There shall be no interference by a public authority with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.

   The Immigration Rules

  24. The relevant part of Paragraph 276ADE (in force from 9 July  2012  to
      27 July 2014)  sets out:

         The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         ...

          (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the  UK
         for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
         to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."




Discussion

The adjournment request to the First-tier Tribunal

  25. The appellant has produced a copy of an email  that  he  asserts  was
      sent to the First-tier Tribunal  requesting  an  adjournment  of  the
      hearing. There was no evidence  on  the  court  file  of  that  being
      received. The appellant has not provided evidence of a read  receipt.
      However, giving the appellant the benefit of the doubt  I  find  that
      there was an error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  failure  to
      consider that adjournment request. In so finding  I  do  not  suggest
      that the First-tier Tribunal would have been bound to accede  to  the
      request or that it would have necessarily resulted in any  unfairness
      to the appellant if the adjournment was refused. This  is  an  appeal
      that does not involve  credibility  issues.  The  appellant  has  not
      suggested that he had other evidence but rather that  he  would  have
      made submissions to the First-tier Tribunal. The issue is whether  or
      not that error of law is material.

   The Article 8 claim under the Immigration Rules

  26. The appellant asserts that he has established a private life  in  the
      UK. The relevant provision under the Immigration Rules  is  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi). The judge considered paragraph 276ADE(1). However, the
      judge refers only to the first part of sub-paragraph (vi). The  judge
      merely states that at the time of the application the  appellant  was
      aged 25 years old and had spent twenty  years  in  Bangladesh  before
      arriving in the UK (paragraph 4). He does not consider whether or not
      the appellant has no ties with Bangladesh. The failure of  the  judge
      to consider whether or not  the  appellant  has  no  ties  (including
      social, cultural or family) to Bangladesh is an error of law.

  27. The test is whether  or  not  the  claimant  has  lost  his  ties  to
      Bangladesh. In  YM  (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 the  court  of  appeal  approved  the
      construction of the concept set out by the Upper Tribunal in the case
      of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)(Nigeria) v SSHD. In that case the
      Upper Tribunal stated, at  paragraph , that:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the words 'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation and  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless".

  28. There has been no evidence submitted as to why the appellant who  has
      lived in Bangladesh for 20 years and in the UK for 7 years  has  lost
      his ties to  Bangladesh.   The  evidence  is  to  the  contrary.  The
      appellant intends to return to Bangladesh to practice  as  a  lawyer.
      Any error on the part of the judge in this regard  is  therefore  not
      material.

   The Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules

  29. The appellant relies upon the case of CDS as authority that completion
      of degrees is enough to establish the appellant's private life in  the
      UK. I have considered the obiter remarks of the Upper Tribunal in that
      case which set out:

        17. It is apparent from these principles that Article  8  does  not
        provide  a  general  discretion  in  the  IJ   to   dispense   with
        requirements of the Immigration Rules merely because the  way  that
        they impact in an individual case may appear to  be  unduly  harsh.
        The present context is not respect for  family  life  that  can  in
        certain circumstances require admission to  or  extension  of  stay
        within the United Kingdom of those  who  do  not  comply  with  the
        general Immigration Rules. It  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  the
        private life of someone with no prior nexus to the  United  Kingdom
        would require admission outside the rules for the purpose of study.
        There is no human right to come to the United Kingdom for education
        or other purposes of truly voluntary migration.
        18. However, the appellant has been admitted  to  the  UK  for  the
        purpose  of  higher  education  and  has  made  progress   enabling
        extension of stay in that capacity since her admission in 2007.  We
        acknowledge that that gives no right or expectation of extension of
        stay irrespective of the provisions of the Immigration Rules at the
        time of the relevant decision on extension.
        19. Nevertheless people who have been admitted on a course of study
        at a recognised UK institution for higher education, are likely  to
        build up a relevant connection with the course, the institution, an
        educational sequence for the  ultimate  professional  qualification
        sought, as  well  as  social  ties  during  the  period  of  study.
        Cumulatively this may amount to private life that deserves  respect
        because the person has been admitted for this purpose, the  purpose
        remains  unfilled,  and  discretionary   factors   such   as   mis-
        representation or criminal conduct have not  provided  grounds  for
        refusal of extension or curtailment of stay.
        20. In the present case a change in the  sponsorship  rules  during
        the course of a period of study has had a  serious  effect  on  the
        ability of the appellant to conclude  her  course  of  study.  Some
        requirements of the Immigration Rules or applicable  public  policy
        scheme may be of such importance that a miss is as good as a  mile,
        but this is not always the case.

  30. It is clear from these passages that the Upper Tribunal  acknowledged
      that it is possible for a private life, built up as  a  result  of  a
      combination of factors in connection  with  a  course  of  study,  to
      engage Article 8. It is not clear where this submission and  reliance
      on CDS takes the appellant as the judge found (at paragraph  5)  that
      the appellant has just established his private life in the  UK.    In
      any event, this case must be considered in light of  subsequent  case
      law. That is not to say that it can no longer be considered good  law
      as found by the Upper Tribunal in Nasim (Para 41).

  31. The Supreme Court in Patel clearly set out that  the  opportunity  to
      complete a course of education is not in  itself  a  right  protected
      under Article 8.  The  appellant  has  finished  his  studies  so  if
      anything his claim is even less compelling. In the judgment  of  Lord
      Carnwath at Para 57:

         57.     It is important to remember that article 8 is not a general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise  with  Sedley  LJ's  call
         in Pankina for "common sense" in the application of the rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see Para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under article 8.

  32. In Nasim the Upper Tribunal recognised  that  Article  8  has  limited
      utility  in  private  life  cases  that  are  far  removed   from   an
      individual's moral and physical integrity. At paragraph 20  the  Upper
      Tribunal considered that:

         '... Patel and Others is a significant exhortation from the Supreme
         Court to re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of Article  8
         and,  in  particular,  to  recognise  its  limited  utility  to  an
         individual where one has  moved  along  the  continuum,  from  that
         Article's core area of operation towards what might be described as
         its fuzzy penumbra. The limitation arises, both from what  will  at
         that point normally be the tangential effect on the  individual  of
         the proposed interference and from the fact that, unless there  are
         particular reasons to  reduce  the  public  interest  of  enforcing
         immigration controls, that interest will  consequently  prevail  in
         striking the proportionality balance (even assuming that  stage  is
         reached)'

  33.  As summarised in the headnote in Nasim:

         'The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve  to  re-focus
         attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the  ECHR  and,
         in particular, to  recognise  that  Article's  limited  utility  in
         private life cases that are far removed from the protection  of  an
         individual's moral and physical integrity'.

  34.  The appellant's reliance on CDS is misplaced. The  circumstances  of
      the appellant are not analogous to those of  the  appellant  in  CDS.
      There has been no change in the sponsorship rules and  the  appellant
      in this case has completed his studies. The appellant's claim is,  in
      essence, that  the  ability  to  gain  work  experience  is  a  right
      protected by Article 8. In Nasim the Upper Tribunal held:

         41...But what is clear is that, on the state of  the  present  law,
         there is no justification for extending the obiter findings in CDS,
         so as to equate a person whose course of study has  not  yet  ended
         with a person who, having finished their course,  is  precluded  by
         the Immigration Rules from staying on to do something else.

         42.     We  conclude  our  general  Article  8  findings  with  the
         following observation. Each of the appellants'  representatives  on
         19th December confirmed to us that the  extent  of  their  clients'
         Article 8 ambitions was to be granted two years' leave  to  remain,
         with permission to work (the case for the dependants of  Mr  Mughal
         being based on his desire to obtain such leave). Their  cases  are,
         accordingly, not put on the basis that the Article  8  rights  upon
         which they  rely  are  necessarily  such  as  to  facilitate  their
         indefinite presence in the United Kingdom. Whilst not resiling from
         what we have said about the case of CDS, this  confirmation  serves
         to underline the general problems facing the appellants in  seeking
         to use human rights law to give effect to their short  term  socio-
         economic aspirations.

  35. In the light of the above cases as applied to the facts of this  case
      it is clear that the appellant's Article 8 claim was bound  to  fail.
      It is doubtful that the judge was correct to find that Article 8  was
      even engaged in this case.

  36. The appellant relies on the case of Razgar. Although very briefly the
      judge (in paragraph 5) did consider Razgar. He moved straight to  the
      fifth question in Razgar namely, whether any  interference  would  be
      proportionate. Any error in not considering the first four  questions
      would not assist the appellant on the facts of his  case.  The  judge
      did  conduct  a  balancing  exercise  weighing  in  the  balance  the
      respondent's legitimate  interest  in  immigration  control  and  the
      appellant's Article 8 claim that he had a private life  finding  that
      it would not be a disproportionate interference with  his  Article  8
      rights for him to return to  Bangladesh.  As  set  out  above  it  is
      doubtful that Article 8 was even engaged in this case.

  37. In any event, the appellant has not provided any  or  any  convincing
      reasons as to why the interference  in  his  private  life  would  be
      disproportionate. He merely asserts essentially that he has a private
      life in the UK by staying in the UK  for  more  than  six  years  and
      successfully completing  his  academic  qualifications  and  that  of
      itself deserves respect. The  right  protected  by  Article  8  is  a
      qualified right. The right can be interfered with  as  long  as  that
      interference is as is in accordance with the law and is necessary  in
      pursuit of a legitimate aim. The judge has identified the  legitimate
      aim as the respondent's legitimate interest  in  immigration  control
      (paragraph 5) which is acknowledged to be an aspect of  the  economic
      well-being  of  the  country.  He  found  that  the  public  interest
      outweighed the appellant's interests. This was a conclusion that  any
      properly directed Tribunal would inevitably have come to on the facts
      of this case.

  38. The judge has erred in failing to take into consideration all  of  the
      relevant statutory requirements under s117A-B of  the  2002  Act.  The
      judge clearly weighed in the balance s117B (1) as he referred  to  the
      public interest in immigration control. He did  not  however  consider
      the other factors in s117B. This error, however, does not  assist  the
      appellant. Had the judge considered all the factors set out  in  s117B
      he would have been required to place little weight on the  appellant's
      private life because it was formed whilst he was in the  UK  when  his
      immigration status was precarious - s117B(5).

  39. Although the judge of the First-tier Tribunal made errors of law,  for
      the reasons  set  out  above,  these  was  not  material  errors.  The
      appellant's  appeal  is  therefore  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
      respondent stands.

  40. I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
      anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
      Having considered all the circumstances and evidence I do not consider
      it necessary to make an anonymity direction.







   Decision

  41. The appellant has not discharged the burden upon him of  showing  that
      there is  any  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision, without which that decision is not susceptible to being  set
      aside.  The  appeal  is  therefore  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
      respondent stands.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 30 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw


















