
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA031022015
      IA015432015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2016                               |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                               Ms ERJOLA VIJA
                             Mr ANTONIO VALENTE
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms A Jones, Counsel instructed by Malik and Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    In this matter First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford had heard these  appeals
    together. Two decisions were prepared. She had allowed the appeal of Mr
    Valente and had dismissed the appeal of Ms Vija. Both parties  appealed
    against the decision which had gone against them. Permission to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie to both parties.

2.    To ease following this decision I  shall  continue  to  refer  to  the
    claimants  as  the  Appellants  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

3.    The relevant background to this matter is that Ms Vija, a  citizen  of
    Albania, had applied for a residence card as the partner of Mr  Valente
    an EEA citizen of Italy. The Respondent had contended that this  was  a
    sham marriage. It was alleged that Mr Valente was not exercising treaty
    rights. The couple had been detained by  Home  Office  officials  at  a
    Registry Office as they were attempting to go  through  a  ceremony  of
    marriage.

4.    The Judge heard evidence from  both  Appellants.  She  concluded  that
    there were various inconsistencies that were not adequately dealt  with
    and that the marriage between the Appellants was not a genuine one.  As
    a consequence the  requirements  to  show  that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship was not met either. The Judge went on to conclude that the
    Mr Valente was not exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom
    because of issues in respect of his documents and evidence.

5.    The Judge thereby went on to dismiss Ms  Vija's  appeal.  However  she
    allowed Mr Valente's appeal. That was because she concluded that as the
    burden of proof was on the Secretary of State to prove that this was  a
    sham marriage case then the IS151A document had to be produced. It  had
    not been filed and the Presenting Officer did not have a  copy  either.
    The Judge therefore allowed the appeal.

6.    The Respondent's appeal against the Judge's decision in  Mr  Valente's
    case raises grounds which can be summarised as  contending  that  there
    was a material misdirection in law because  the  Mr  Valente  had  been
    served with an IS151A informing him of his liability to  detention  and
    removal.  Having  concluded  that  the  marriage  was  a  marriage   of
    convenience in Mrs Vija's appeal then the Judge  made  a  contradictory
    decision in Mr Valente's appeal. It was submitted that Mr  Valente  was
    as responsible for the missing IS151A as the Secretary of State was.

7.    The Appellant's appeal against the  Judge's  decision  in  Mrs  Vija's
    case raised numerous grounds which  can  be  summarised  as  contending
    firstly that there was an inconsistent decision because the  appeal  of
    Mr Valente had been allowed. Secondly, the Judge  said  she  would  not
    take into account the intrusive line of questioning referred to in  the
    Immigration Office's pocket notebook entries but then proceeded  to  do
    so in her adverse findings.  Thirdly  there  were  other  unsustainable
    findings.

8.    At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell provided me with a  copy  of  the
    IS151A.

9.    I heard submissions from both representatives. Ms  Jones  pointed  out
    that both parties noted that the Judge had made contradictory  findings
    in the two different decisions. She said that it  was  the  Appellants'
    case that both appeals should therefore have been  allowed  whereas  it
    was the Respondent's case that both appeals should have been dismissed.
    Mr Whitwell also made  submissions  which  I  noted  in  my  Record  of
    Proceedings.

10.   I had reserved my decision.

11.   It is quite clear to me that the Judge was perfectly correct to  state
    that when allegations as serious as the claim that  there  has  been  a
    sham marriage are made and when there has  been  the  disruption  of  a
    marriage ceremony at a Registry Office, then the Respondent retains the
    burden of prove in respect of such a serious allegation.  It also means
    that the Respondent has to ensure that all of  the  relevant  documents
    are produced and the allegation is proved. The Tribunal is  independent
    of the Respondent and cannot be expected to  plug  gaps  left  in  that
    exercise. Therefore it was wholly improper for the  Presenting  Officer
    who appeared before the Judge to fail to produce the IS151A document at
    the hearing.

12.   However the Judge well into error  in  her  decisions.  She  has  made
    contradictory findings in the two decisions. She had found  that  there
    was a sham marriage in Ms Vija's decision but did not use that  finding
    in Mr Valente's decision, yet the evidence for both cases was the same.
    The Respondent's appeal therefore has to succeed.

13.   There is also a material error of law in the  decision  in  Ms  Vija's
    case. The Judge was clearly  concerned  about  the  evidence  contained
    within the Immigration Offices pocket  notebooks.  The  Judge  said  at
    paragraph 16 of her decision in Ms Vija's case that she was not  taking
    into account the "very intrusive line of questioning  included  in  the
    Immigration Officer's notebook" as she thought  it  was  inappropriate.
    However at paragraph 20 the Judge said that she had taken into  account
    the evidence, including the evidence in the notebooks. It also  appears
    from the findings made in respect of minutiae of the details  that  the
    matters raised in the notebook were used to come  to  adverse  findings
    against Ms Vija.

14.   Therefore there is a material error of law in the decision reached  in
    respect of Ms Vija's appeal too. The Judge said she was  not  going  to
    take into account the evidence in  the  notebooks  of  the  Immigration
    Officers, yet proceeded to do so.

15.   It is not possible for me to make a decision in respect of the  appeal
    as evidence will have to be reheard. None of the findings of the  Judge
    shall stand.

16.   Ms Vija's  appeal  against  the  decision  dismissing  her  appeal  is
    allowed and the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  which
    had allowed Mr Valente's appeal is also allowed.


Notice of Decision

The decisions of the First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of
material errors of law and are both set aside.

The Appellants' appeals shall be reheard at the First Tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 16 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


