
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03795/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18 November 2014             |On 21 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Dada Adeboye Meshioye
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by DF Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by Mr Adeboye whose date  of  birth  is  3  September
    1983 and who is a citizen of Nigeria.  He appealed against  a  decision
    made by the Secretary  of  State  on  20  September  2013  refusing  an
    application made by him, his wife and children  under  the  Immigration
    Rules (App FM & 276ADE) and under Article 8  ECHR.   The  matter  comes
    before me for consideration as to whether or not there is an  error  of
    law in the decision made by the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Shanahan)
    promulgated on 4 September 2014 in which the  appeal  was  allowed.  In
    these proceedings the Secretary of State for the Home Department is the
    Appellant  and  therefore  Mr  Adeboye  is  the  respondent,  but   for
    convenience in these proceedings I shall refer to the parties  as  "the
    Claimant" and to "the Secretary of State."


Background

2.   At the time the application was  made  the  family  were  a  unit,  but
    before the refusal was made and by the time of the hearing the Claimant
    and his wife had  separated.   The  Claimant's  wife  made  a  separate
    application for her and the children to remain in the UK and leave  was
    granted for a period of 2 and a half years'. The Secretary of State had
    not had the opportunity to  reconsider  the  situation  following  that
    grant of leave to the Claimant's wife and children.

3.   In the determination the Tribunal concluded that the Immigration  Rules
    were not met and found it could go on to consider Article 8 outside  of
    the Rules, on the grounds that the appellant's wife and  children  had,
    since the matter was considered by the Home Office,  been  granted  two
    and a half years' leave[18].  The  Tribunal  heard  evidence  from  the
    Claimant and his wife and found [22] that the Claimant played an active
    role in looking after his children on  a  daily  basis,  in  particular
    taking and collecting them from school. Both children were born in  the
    UK in 2006 and 2008 and the  Tribunal  found  that  the  eldest  was  a
    "qualifying" child, who had lived in the UK for over 7 years [13].  The
    Tribunal considered the best interests of the children and found family
    life established in the UK.  It concluded that it was not reasonable to
    expect the children to return to Nigeria in light of the fact that they
    and  their  mother  had  been  granted  further  leave.  The   Tribunal
    considered factors under Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  (as  amended)
    [34].

4.   In grounds of appeal the Secretary of State argued  that  the  Tribunal
    erred in its assessment under Article  8;  failing  to  follow  Gulshan
    [2013]UKUT 00640 and Nagre [2013]EWHC  720  because  it  did  not  find
    exceptional and compelling circumstances,  and gave no adequate reasons
    for finding that the refusal  would  lead  to  an  unjustifiably  harsh
    outcome.

Permission

5.   Permission was granted by First-tier Judge Bird on 13 October  2014  on
    the grounds that it was arguable that the judge had failed to  consider
    Gulshan and Nagre as regards exceptional and compelling circumstances.

The hearing

6.   This afternoon I heard submissions from Mr Walker and from  Ms  Daykin.
    A significant issue in this appeal is that the  decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State was in respect of the family as a whole and  by  the
    time of the Tribunal hearing the Claimant's wife and children had  made
    a fresh application and been granted discretionary leave on  the  basis
    that the eldest child was a qualifying child having lived in the UK and
    was settled at school in excess of  seven  years.   At  this  time  the
    Claimant and his wife had separated, but  the  evidence  was  that  the
    Claimant played a continuing active role in the lives of  the  children
    on a daily basis. There was no challenge to  the  current  relationship
    and role as between the Claimant and his children. The Claimant's  wife
    was employed and he was able to look after the children by  taking  and
    collecting them from school every day and seeing them at weekends.

7.   It was accepted that the Claimant could not meet the Immigration  rules
    as neither his wife nor children were British citizens  or  settled  in
    the UK [16 & 17].  The Claimant relied on Article 8 arguing before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that there were exceptional  circumstances  outside
    of the Rules in line with Gulshan as the best interest of the  children
    had not been considered since they had been granted leave to remain. At
    [18] the Tribunal found arguably good grounds existed to go on  to  the
    next stage under Article 8. It then carried  out  a  proper  assessment
    following Razgar [19] and having regard to factors under section 117 of
    the 2002 Act (as amended), and in particular  S.117B(6)  regarding  the
    public interest [20 & 26]. In so doing the Tribunal  placed  weight  on
    the changed circumstances for the family, the fact that the mother  and
    children had leave, and found that the best interests of  the  children
    (one of whom was a qualifying child) did not lie in having to uproot to
    Nigeria, a country where they had never lived, in  circumstances  where
    their parents had separated and their family  life  with  their  father
    remained strong and established.  In the event that the  Claimant  were
    removed that family life with  their  father  would  cease  [27].   The
    Tribunal considered that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    "qualifying" child to live in Nigeria having been granted leave in  the
    UK and  be  separated  from  their  father.   Reliance  was  placed  on
    Omotunde(best   interest-Zambrano   applied-   Razgar)    Nigeria[2011]
    00247(IAC) as to unjustifiably harsh outcome [33].

8.   Although the Tribunal  did  not  refer  in  terms  to  exceptional  and
    compelling circumstances, I am satisfied that  there  was  no  material
    error of law. The Tribunal had in mind  all  the  relevant  issues  and
    evidence in reaching its conclusion. The Tribunal clearly had  in  mind
    the two stage approach for family and private life in  and  outside  of
    the Rules and in considering proportionality under  Article  8  made  a
    sustainable decision based on exceptional and compelling circumstances.



9.   Accordingly I am satisfied that the Tribunal  did  follow  the  correct
    approach with regard to Article 8 and that  any  apparent  error  under
    Gulshan and Nagre would have made no difference to the outcome and  was
    not therefore material.

10.  Accordingly I find that there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination which shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under human rights.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 20 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 20 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


