
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03996/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th June 2014                               |On 22nd July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr kwame asare
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Henderson promulgated on 24th March 2014, following a hearing "on
    the papers " on 19th March 2014 whereby the judge allowed the appeal of
    Mr Kwame Asare.  The Respondent Secretary of State subsequently applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Ghana,  who  was  born  on  25th
    November 1975.  He appealed against the Respondent's decision to refuse
    his application for a residence card on the basis of his marriage to an
    EEA national, such refusal being on the basis that  the  Appellant  had
    undergone a proxy marriage  with  his  EEA  national  spouse,  and  the
    marriage did not meet the requirements of the law of Ghana, and was not
    valid in Ghana,  and  therefore  could  not  have  been  valid  for  UK
    immigration purposes either.  The reason  why  it  was  not  valid  was
    because it had not been registered according to the Regulations.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant's case is that he has a marriage certificate to show that
    his marriage was properly undertaken by way of proxy in Ghana  and  the
    authenticity of the document has not been challenged.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge determined that it was no  longer  necessary  to  register  a
    marriage in Ghana  for  it  to  be  valid.   Given  that  the  Ghanaian
    authorities had issued a marriage certificate, they had obviously  been
    satisfied about the authenticity of the marriage.

 5. This was especially so given that the marriage certificate had not been
    challenged, "and I am satisfied, on the basis of  that  document,  that
    the couple validly married in Ghana and  that  they  therefore  have  a
    marriage that  is  valid  for  the  purposes  of  UK  immigration  law"
    (paragraph 11).

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  have  regard
    to the Tribunal judgment in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  Law)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 24, because this important case considers whether marriages
    by proxy are such that they are recognised in the EEA state of the  EEA
    national involved, before the marriage can be said to be valid for  the
    purposes of UK immigration law.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was not  in  attendance.   Nor,
    was any explanation given for  his  non-attendance.   Nor  indeed,  was
    anyone there on his behalf to represent his case.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Whitwell, relied upon  the  grounds  of
    application.  He submitted that a reliance upon paragraphs 11,  16  and
    18 of Kareem were decisive in the conduct of this appeal.   He  pointed
    to the grant of permission on 30th April 2014 by the  Tribunal  to  the
    effect  that  a  failure  to  place  sufficient  regard  to  the  legal
    authorities cited in the refusal letter was an error of law.

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I  should  set  aside  this  decision  and  remake  the
    decision (see Section 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  There are two  reasons  for
    this.

10. First, the determination was promulgated on 24th March 2014.  The judge
    was in a position to know about the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Kareem
    [2014] UKUT 24.  The case of Kareem establishes (at paragraph 16)  that
    the starting point with respect to proxy marriages is that  the  rights
    of free movement and residence stem directly from the concept of  union
    citizenship.

11. A person is a union citizen if that person is a national  of  a  member
    state.  This is because nationality remains within  the  competence  of
    individual member states.  This being so, the law that applies will  be
    the law of the member state of nationality, and  not  the  host  member
    state, and certainly not the law of Ghana,  as  is  the  case  in  this
    instant appeal.

12. Given that this is the case, the Appellant had to refer to the relevant
    foreign law, which in this case would be the law in France, this  being
    the nationality of the EEA citizen.  The Tribunal  made  it  clear  (at
    paragraph 14) that "a lack of evidence of  relevant  foreign  law  will
    normally mean that the party with the burden of proving it will  fail".
    There was no evidence of the "relevant foreign law" before  the  judge.
    The only evidence was that of the  law  in  Ghana.   That  is  not  the
    relevant criterion.

13. It was for the Appellant to show that the rights of  free  movement  of
    the EEA national spouse were impeded by a rejection of his  application
    in the UK.  Those rights of the EEA national could only be  impeded  if
    the EEA national was allowed to marry in the manner  suggested  by  the
    Appellant.  There was no evidence to this effect.

14. Second, it is clear from Article 146 of  the  French  Civil  Code  that
    France does not in fact allow for proxy marriages for the  purposes  of
    French law of marriage.  Therefore, the Appellant  was  bound  to  have
    failed in any event.  Accordingly, a failure to refer to  the  case  of
    Kareem plainly amounted to an error of law.

Remaking the Decision

15. I have remade the decision on the basis of what I have set  out  above.
    This appeal is dismissed for two reasons.  First, the Appellant has not
    attended this hearing and has not provided  evidence  of  the  relevant
    foreign law, such law being the law of  France.   That  being  so  this
    "will normally mean that the party with the burden of proving  it  will
    fail" (see paragraph 14 of Kareem).

16. Second, and in any event, Article 146 of the French Civil Code does not
    allow for proxy marriages  for  the  purposes  of  the  French  law  of
    marriage.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    dismissed.

18. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st July 2014

