






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03804/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                                         |
|                                  |Determination Promulgated                |
|On: 22 December 2014              |                               On: 7     |
|                                  |January 2015                             |
|                                  |                                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                              Mr Martin Kalule
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr J Mabwai, Legal Representative, Jackson
Immigration   Advisory Service
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a Ugandan national, born  on  24  February  1985.  He
      appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  respondent's  refusal
      dated 17 January 2013 to grant  him  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant under the immigration rules.  His appeal was
      dismissed by the First-tier tribunal on 22 January  2014.  He  appeals
      with permission against that decision.


   2. In the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, it is  recorded
      at paragraph 10 that it was submitted by  the  appellant  that  Hadlow
      College had the necessary status to provide the English language  test
      certificate  in  question,  as  the  validating  authority   for   the
      appellant's proposed course.


   3. The respondent contended that Hadlow College was not a recognised body
      pursuant to paragraph 6  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  respondent
      refused his application on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  did  not
      satisfy paragraph 245ZX and Appendix A, paragraph 118(b)(i)  to  (iii)
      of the Rules.


   4. The Judge recorded at  paragraph  15  that  "the  appellant's  counsel
      accepted that it was not possible to rebut the submissions made by the
      respondent." He held that in those circumstances, the  appeal  against
      the decision "based upon the failure to secure 30 points for  the  CAS
      letter" must be dismissed [16].


   5. On 13 June 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge  Renton  granted  the  appellant
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. He referred to the grounds
      of appeal  in  which  it  was  contended  that  far  from  making  the
      concession referred to by the Judge at paragraph 15, the contrary  was
      true: it is contended that  the  respondent's  representative  at  the
      hearing had made a concession on the basis of which the Judge  had  in
      fact allowed the appeal.


   6. At the hearing on 2 October 2014, it was agreed by Mr C Okech and Mr S
      Whitwell (the respective representatives on that occasion) that  there
      remained substantial disputes of fact between the parties arising from
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination. Directions had  already
      been issued by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey  on  8  August  2014,
      which had not been complied with.


   7. I directed at the hearing on 2 October that the appellant should  file
      and serve evidence from counsel who represented him before the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge, namely Mr R Arkhurst. The directions requested Mr
      Arkhurst to provide a written statement relating to the  "concessions"
      recorded by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 14-16  of  the
      determination dated 21 January 2014. That statement, together with the
      grounds  of  reconsideration  in  support  of  the   application   for
      permission to appeal, was to be filed on the Tribunal  and  served  on
      the respondent by 17 October 2014.


   8. It was further  directed  that  once  the  statement  and  grounds  of
      reconsideration have been received, the matter should be  referred  to
      the Principal Resident Judge for further instructions.


   9. It was thus  anticipated  at  the  hearing  on  2  October  2014  that
      counsel's statement as well as  the  application  for  reconsideration
      would be served upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge for his response to
      the allegations made in the grounds for reconsideration.


  10. At the resumed hearing on 22 December 2014,  Mr  Mabwai  informed  the
      Tribunal that Mr Okech, who had represented the appellant on 2 October
      2014, 'had gone to Uganda a few days before the 22 December 2014'.


  11. Mr Okech produced on 26 October 2014 further documentation, consisting
      of seven pages. In the covering letter, Mr Okech stated  that  it  had
      not been possible to submit the document prior to that date.


  12. The document relied on was a fax sent to Mr Okech from the clerk to Mr
      Reginald Arkhurst, of counsel, 4 King's Bench Walk, dated  23  October
      2014. The message from the clerk was "please find notes from  Reginald
      Arkhurst."


  13. The document in fact annexed was the "grounds for reconsideration" - a
      document that was already before the Tribunal - and which  constituted
      the basis upon which Judge Renton granted the appellant permission  to
      appeal.


  14. Mr Mabwai  accepted  that  there  had  been  no  compliance  with  the
      directions, to which  I  have  referred,  dated  2  October  2014.  Mr
      Arkhurst had been requested to provide a written statement setting out
      the disputed contentions which were then to be placed before the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge for his written  response,  if  any.  However,  Mr
      Mabwai could not provide any explanation as to why there had  been  no
      proper compliance with that direction.


  15. Mr Okech had been in attendance when  the  direction  was  made  on  2
      October 2014. The directions were in fact attached to  the  notice  of
      resumed hearing;  they  were  sent  to  both  the  appellant  and  his
      representatives at the addresses on record.


  16. Mr  Mabwai  stated  that  he  had  been  informed  by  Mr  Okech  that
      "everything had been complied with." However,  as  already  indicated,
      there has been no proper compliance with the directions. All that  has
      been done is to re-serve the  grounds  of  consideration  without  any
      notes, explanation or statement from Mr Arkhurst.


  17. Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant  had  been  given  an  adequate
      opportunity to present the documentation and statements required. This
      had not been done. There has been  no  explanation  given  as  to  the
      failure to comply with the directions. Nor was there  any  application
      to adjourn the hearing to begin the process again.


  18. Mr Mabwai did not make any submissions.


     Assessment


  19. I am satisfied that the directions dated 2 October 2014 were  received
      by the appellant's representatives. That is confirmed  in  Mr  Okech's
      covering letter to the Tribunal dated 26 October 2014.


  20. However, the fax sent to Mr Okech by  Mr  Arkhurst's  clerk  dated  23
      October 2014  simply  resubmitted  the  grounds  for  reconsideration.
      Although the message on the cover sheet states "please find notes from
      Reginald Arkhurst", no such notes have  been  produced.  Nor  has  any
      statement been prepared and presented by Mr Arkhurst.


  21. I am satisfied that the appellant has been granted a full  opportunity
      to substantiate the contention that  the  respondent's  representative
      made the alleged concession, on the  basis  of  which  the  Judge  had
      supposedly allowed the appeal. There has been a failure to comply with
      the directions. No further adjournment has been sought.


  22. In the circumstances, I find that it has not been shown that the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in dismissing the appeal.


         Notice of Decision


         The appeal is dismissed under the immigration rules


         No anonymity direction is made.


         Signed                              Date 6/1/2015

     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
