
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03162/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 October 2016                   |On 10 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    F A S
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr R Jesurum, instructed by Makka Solicitors Ltd
For the appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Abebrese  promulgated  1.3.16,  allowing  on
    human rights grounds the claimant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State, date 4.12.14, to refuse his application  for  leave
    to remain in the UK as the spouse of a British citizen  and  to  remove
    him from the UK pursuant to section 47 of the  Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. The Judge heard the appeal on 5.2.16.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on
    5.9.16.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 24.10.16 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Abebrese should be set aside.

 5. The relevant background can  be  briefly  summarised  as  follows.  The
    claimant first entered the UK in 2012 as the spouse of [AB] with  leave
    valid until 14.4.14. On the day of expiry of  his  leave,  pursuant  to
    paragraph 287, he applied for indefinite leave to remain (ILR)  as  the
    souse of Ms [B], who at that time supported the  application.  However,
    whilst a decision on the application was pending, in September 2014 the
    claimant and Ms [B] separated and she notified the Home Office that she
    no longer supported his application. He was  called  for  interview  on
    28.11.14, where he stated that he was no longer living with  his  wife.
    The application was thus refused on 23.12.14, as the marriage  was  not
    subsisting and they did not intend to live  together  permanently.  The
    application was also refused because he failed to meet the knowledge of
    life in the UK requirement of paragraph 287(a)(vi), having  failed  the
    test on a number of occasions. In the circumstances described, he could
    not meet the alternative requirements under Appendix FM in  respect  of
    family life and paragraph 276ADE in respect of private life.

 6. By the time of the appeal hearing in the First-tier Tribunal,  after  a
    period of separation of some 10 months, the claimant and his  wife  had
    reconciled, and she was expecting a child in  February  2016.  She  now
    supported his application and thus appeal.

 7. At [14] the First-tier Tribunal concluded that the claimant  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of the Rules. But it appears  that  the  judge
    only considered paragraph 287 and 276ADE.  There  is  no  reference  to
    Appendix FM, which was considered by the Secretary of State. It may  be
    that there is something missing from [14] of the decision, as the final
    sentence does not reach a conclusion.

 8. However, at [16] of the decision, the judge concluded that the claimant
    and his wife were then in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.  At
    that point the judge identified the issue being  as  to  whether  there
    were  any  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  sufficient  to
    justify allowing the appeal outside the Rules on private and/or  family
    life pursuant to article 8 ECHR. The judge immediately  concluded  that
    there were were such compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances  and
    thus went on to conduct a Razgar stepped approach, concluding  at  [18]
    that the removal of the claimant would interfere with his  private  and
    family life and at [21] that removal  would  be  disproportionate.  The
    Tribunal thus allowed the appeal.

 9. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Hollingworth  found  it  to  be
    arguable as to the sufficiency of the First-tier  Tribunal's  reasoning
    before concluding that  compelling  circumstances  existed  to  justify
    consideration under article 8 ECHR outside the Rules; it being arguable
    that the Tribunal misdirected itself.

10.  Whilst  finding  at  [16]  that  there  were  compelling/compassionate
    circumstances in this  case,  no  reasoning  is  provided  for  such  a
    conclusion. At [17] the statement  is  made  that  "The  appellant  has
    however relied on Article 8 in this appeal and therefore  the  Tribunal
    finds that it is appropriate to consider the merits of this appeal."  I
    do not understand why  the  judge  considered  that  mere  reliance  on
    article 8 justified a consideration outside the Rules. It is clear that
    the judge has failed to apply SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, where  at
    [33] the Court of  Appeal  held  that  the  general  position  is  that
    compelling circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim
    for LTR outside the Rules.

11. The existence of a genuine and subsisting relationship is  insufficient
    to amount to compelling circumstances. The Rules make  ample  provision
    for  LTR,  under  paragraphs  287,  276ADE,  or  Appendix  FM  of   the
    Immigration Rules. There should have been consideration of Appendix  FM
    before considering article 8, and there  should  have  been  clear  and
    cogent reasoning before going on to  consider  article  8  outside  the
    Rules. Appendix FM sets out  the  Secretary  of  State's  proportionate
    response to article 8 family life claims.

12.  Further,  I  find  that  the  Razgar  proportionality  assessment  was
    inadequately reasoned. There is no more than a list of factors, said to
    be in the claimant's favour and there is no evidence of  any  balancing
    exercise between on the one hand the rights of  the  claimant  and  his
    family members, and on the other the legitimate and  necessary  aim  to
    protect the economic well-being of the UK through immigration  control.
    There was no, or no adequate consideration of section 117B of the  2002
    Act, including that immigration control is in the public interest.

13. In all the circumstances, it is clear that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was flawed for error of law and cannot stand.

14. Mr Jesurum accepted that the reasoning of the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    deficient, but maintains that the judge should have considered  in  the
    alternative paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules for further leave to
    remain,  contending  that  the  claimant  meets   those   requirements,
    including that of an English language test. However, there  was  cross-
    appeal and the claimant made no application to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal's  dismissal  of  the
    appeal on immigration  grounds.  EG  &  NG  (Upper  Tribunal  rule  17:
    withdrawal; rule 24: scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143 (IAC), held that
    a party seeking to persuade the Upper Tribunal to replace a decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal with a decision  that  would  make  a  material
    difference to one of the parties needs permission to appeal. The  Upper
    Tribunal cannot entertain an application purporting to  be  made  under
    rule 24 for permission to appeal until the First-tier Tribunal has been
    asked in writing for permission to appeal and has either refused it  or
    declined to admit the application.

15. I reject Mr Jesurum's submission that I can determine the  issue  under
    paragraph 284, as no application was made to the First-tier Tribunal. I
    do not accept that  it  would  be  appropriate  to,  as  he  suggested,
    reconstitute myself as the First-tier Tribunal to  consider  and  grant
    permission to appeal.

16. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of  those  issues.
    The errors of the First-tier Tribunal vitiates all  other  findings  of
    fact and the conclusions from those facts so that there has not been  a
    valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

17. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, I do so on the basis that this is a case which
    falls squarely within the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2. The  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellant of a fair hearing and  that  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal
    to be re-made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
    in rule 2 to deal with cases fairly  and  justly,  including  with  the
    avoidance of delay, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal afresh.

Conclusions:

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
                    made afresh with no findings of fact preserved.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        31 July 2020


Consequential Directions

19. The appeal is remitted to be reheard afresh in the First-tier  Tribunal
    sitting at Taylor House, on a date to be fixed;

20. The appeal may be heard by any First-tier Tribunal Judge, except  Judge
    Abebrese;

21. No findings of fact are preserved;

22. The estimated length of hearing is 2 hours;

23. Not later than 14 working days before the relisted appeal  hearing  the
    claimant must lodge with the Tribunal and serve  on  the  Secretary  of
    State a revised single, consolidated, paginated and indexed  bundle  of
    all subjective and objective materials relied  on,  together  with  any
    skeleton argument and copies of any case  law  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will not accept documents submitted on the day of hearing.

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons:      The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        31 July 2020

