

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03194/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |    Decision & Reasons         |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 20 October 2015                         |    On 22 October 2015         |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                 RASHID ALI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

    1. The respondent notified the appellant on 20  November  2014  of  her
       decision to revoke his EEA residence card and refuse to issue an EEA
       residence card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of  residence  under
       European Community law as the former spouse of Dagmara  Balogova,  a
       Slovakian national exercising treat rights in  the  United  Kingdom.
       His  appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Caswell ("the Judge") following a hearing on 14 April
       2015. This is an appeal against that decision.

    2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta refused permission to appeal on 30
       June 2015. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein  granted  permission  to
       appeal on 22 August 2015 only on the ground that;

          "...there is arguable  merit  to  the  challenge  to  the  Judge's
          approach to the Article 8 of the ECHR issue raised..."

    3. The respondent  contended  (10  September  2015)  that  the  Judge's
       approach to  the  appellant's  Article  8  issue  at  [15]  reflects
       correctly the conclusion of Amirteymour & others (EEA appeals; human
       rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 which states that;


          "Where no notice under section 120  of  the  2002  Act  has  been
          served and where no EEA decision to  remove  has  been  made,  an
          appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in  an
          appeal under the EEA Regulations."

    4. Mr Schwenk conceded that the appeal could not succeed on the  ground
       by which permission to appeal had  been  granted  given  Amirteymour
       which was promulgated shortly before that grant.


    5. Mr Schwenk applied for  permission  to  amend  the  basis  on  which
       permission to appeal had been granted to replace  that  ground  with
       one that had been rejected by  Judge Pirotta and Judge Goldstein.

Discussion

    6. The Judge found;

           "12. The  Respondent  is  correct  that  there  is  no  reliable
           evidence to show that the Appellant's ex-wife was working  as  a
           self employed person after 2011. The documents  from  HMRC  only
           show economic activity up until then by her. The letter from  19
           November 2014 only shows earnings from the tax  year  2009-2010.
           After that time there is evidence  of  benefits  being  claimed.
           There was working tax credit and child tax credit  paid  in  the
           year 2009/2010 and some  child  tax  credit  paid  in  the  year
           2010/2011, but after that there is reference to  a  joint  claim
           for working tax credit and child tax credit, with  the  payments
           being made to her  partner.  This  covers  a  period  after  the
           Appellant and his wife separated and presumably  refers  to  her
           new partner.


           13. The Appellant argues that the records do not show  that  she
           was not claiming JSA. However, the  only  precise  reference  to
           benefits  is  to  working  and  child  tax  credits,   and   the
           Appellant's ex-wife  could  only  have  been  exercising  Treaty
           rights as a jobseeker if  she  could  show  she  had  reasonable
           prospects of obtaining work. Given  the  gap  in  working,  this
           would appear hard for her to do. What is more, the burden is  on
           the Appellant to prove the case, and on the evidence  before  me
           he cannot show his ex-wife was exercising  Treaty  rights  as  a
           self employed person, a self sufficient person or a jobseeker."

    7. Mr Schwenk submitted that the Judge  had  too  narrow  a  focus  and
       concentrated on whether she was working rather  than  whether  there
       was a permissible reason for her not to. In doing so he noted [6  of
       the grounds] regulation 5(7) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
       Area) Regulations 2006 which states that:


           "(a) periods of inactivity for reasons not of the  person's  own
           making;
           (b) periods of inactivity due to illness or accident; and
           (c) in the case of a worker, periods of involuntary unemployment
           duly recorded by the relevant employment office,
           shall be treated as periods of activity as  a  worker  or  self-
           employed person, as the case may be".


    8. He further noted [7 of the grounds] that Samsam (EEA: revocation and
       retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 165 (IAC) states that [38];


           "Strictly, whether the wife was a worker  is  not  the  same  as
           whether the wife was working at that  time,  as  exemplified  by
           Article 7 (3) of the Directive which provides that the status of
           a worker is retained if any  temporary  inability  to  work  was
           through illness, accident, involuntary unemployment, or relevant
           vocational training...it demonstrates  the  dangers  of  drawing
           inferences from gaps in wage slips alone."


    9. I pointed out to Mr Schwenk that on the  application  the  Appellant
       signed and submitted at 4.17 he did not tick any of the boxes  where
       he was asked;


           "are you or are you the family member of someone who  is  either
           (please tick):
           A worker?
           Economically self sufficient?
           Self-employed?
           Temporarily unable to work through illness or accident?
           Involuntarily unemployed?
           Unemployed and undertaking vocational training?"


   10. Mr Schwenk submitted the Appellant was unrepresented  and  that  was
       not the basis of the appeal. When I pointed out that in the  refusal
       letter it clearly states that when he submitted his  application  he
       was represented by Reiss Solicitors, Mr Schwenk said that he was not
       represented at the hearing, he struggled with English, and the issue
       was not raised by the Judge. I note here that he had the services of
       an interpreter at the hearing and on 4.18 of  the  application  form
       the box is empty where it states;


           "If you answered yes to 4.17 please give details below".


   11. Mr Schwenk submitted [8 of the grounds] that the;


           "HMRC report dated 9th November 2014 was  not  determinative  of
           the issue of whether the A's wife was exercising  Treaty  Rights
           at the date of the  determination.  There  may  have  been  many
           reasons why the HMRC records did not show earnings beyond  2009-
           2010. She may have been incapacitated from working or  left  the
           labour market to look after children."


   12. He submitted [9 of the grounds] that;


           "There was evidence that the  A's  wife  was  exercising  Treaty
           Rights post 2009-2010 as the  R  was  content  to  re-issue  the
           residence card to the  A  on  the  18th  August  2011...The  A's
           evidence was that whilst he and  his  wife  lived  together,  he
           worked as a self-employed taxi driver and his wife continued  to
           work as a cleaner. It is not clear whether the Judge accepted or
           rejected such evidence."


   13. He submitted [10 of the grounds] that;


           "The Judge does not properly assess on the evidence whether  the
           A's wife could be a worker under Regulation 5(3) or 5(4) of  the
           2006 Regulations and those provisions seem to have been (sic) be
           totally overlooked by her .... The Judge has  failed  to  assess
           whether the reason why the A's ex-wife may have left the  labour
           market  was  to  look  after  children  and  whether   in   such
           circumstances she would have retained the status of worker under
           EU law. There was clear evidence of the existence of children by
           references to the child tax credit being paid."


   14. He added nothing orally to any of the above 3 paragraphs.


   15. In relation to this application, Mrs Petterson  submitted  that  the
       Judge weighed the matter up correctly  and  made  findings  she  was
       entitled to reach on the evidence. It had not been argued  that  the
       Appellant's ex-wife  was  on  maternity  leave  or  had  child  care
       commitments.


   16. Judge Pirrota stated in relation to this ground that;


           "there was no reliable evidence that the sponsor was  exercising
           Treaty Rights at the relevant dates, the burden of proof was  on
           the Appellant (sic) he had not submitted any evidence  that  she
           was employed or self-employed."

   17. Judge Goldstein stated in relation to this ground that the Judge;


           "properly  addressed  inter   alia,   the   relevant   statutory
           provisions against the backdrop of the facts as  found,  clearly
           reasoning as to why she  concluded  that  as  submitted  by  the
           respondent, there was indeed no satisfactory  evidence  to  show
           that the appellant's former wife was working as a self  employed
           person after 2011."




Determination

   18. In my judgement there is no merit in the application  to  amend  the
       grant of permission to appeal as the grounds and submissions seeking
       it disclose no arguable material error  of  law  for  the  following
       reasons.


   19. There is no merit in [6/7/8] of the grounds. The Appellant  did  not
       assert on the application that his ex-wife fell within  any  of  the
       categories identified at 4.17 of the application or  may  have  left
       the labour market to look after children. He was  represented  then.
       The box for additional information if any of  those  categories  was
       prayed in aid was left blank. It was not just the missing of a  tick
       on a form. The Appellant signed the form and is responsible for  the
       information in it. There is no suggestion of  any  complaint  having
       been made to the Solicitor's Regulation Authority that he  had  been
       badly advised or represented or that the form was not  completed  in
       accordance with his instructions.


   20. It is not for the Judge to fish for  grounds  that  may  support  an
       application or  speculate  as  to  what  the  Appellant's  ex-wife's
       circumstances may be. She relied on the evidence  submitted  by  him
       and made findings that were supported by the evidence.

   21. The Appellant had the services of an interpreter at the hearing  and
       there is  no  suggestion  that  he  complained  about  the  services
       provided or that he did not understand what was being asked of him.

   22. There is no merit in [9] of the grounds. The fact that  a  residence
       card had been re-issued in August 2011 is irrelevant to the issue of
       whether she was still a qualified person after 2011 as it related to
       a wholly different period of time. The Judge did not need to make  a
       finding as to the occupations they had whilst together as  that  was
       neither central nor peripheral to the decision  -  it  was  entirely
       irrelevant as it related to a wholly different period of time.

   23. There is no merit in [10] of the grounds.  The payment of child  tax
       credit does not mean anything other  than  she  received  child  tax
       credit. It does not mean she may have left the labour market to look
       after children. There was no evidence whatsoever that she  may  have
       left the labour market  to  look  after  children.  This  ground  is
       entirely speculative with no evidential basis.


   24.  It  was  for  the  Appellant  to  establish  on  the   balance   of
       probabilities that his ex-wife was exercising Treaty rights  and  he
       failed to do so.


   25. I therefore decline to allow the  grounds  by  which  permission  to
       appeal was granted to be amended.




Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
21 October 2015
