
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03177/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |     Determination           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 12 March 2015                              |     On 31 March 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           IATIZAAZ AHSAN WARRICH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr E Nicholson, instructed by Veja & Co Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. Whilst this is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
  Department  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties   in   the
  determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant,  a  national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State  of  21  November
  2013 to refuse his application for a residence card as confirmation of  a
  right to reside in the UK under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
  Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations) as the spouse of Norah Langan,  an
  Irish national.  The respondent interviewed the appellant and his  spouse
  and concluded  that  the  marriage  is  one  of  convenience.  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge Hunter allowed the appeal.

3. The issue in  this  appeal  is  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
  properly applied the burden of proof in considering whether the  marriage
  is one of convenience.

4. In  this  appeal  the  respondent  carried  out  an  interview  with  the
  appellant and his spouse. The record of interview  is  contained  in  the
  Reasons for Refusal letter.  The  Judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
  appellant's wife but not from  the  appellant.  The  Judge  set  out  the
  submissions and said at paragraph 44 "I then heard from Mr Nicholson [for
  the appellant] who said that the burden of proving a marriage was one  of
  convenience was on the Respondent." The Judge said at  paragraph  52;  "I
  accept Mr Nicholson's submission that the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
  Respondent to show that a particular marriage is one of convenience."

5. The respondent contends in the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
  that the Judge erred in reversing the burden of proof onto the respondent
  to show that the marriage is one of convenience.

6. The Tribunal gave guidance on the appropriate  burden  of  proof  in  the
  case of IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008]  UKAIT  31  where  it
  said;

      "14. As we have said, these three reasons taken together  lead  us  to
      the view that the burden of proving that a  marriage  is  not  one  of
      convenience lies on the appellant. We would, however,  also  associate
      ourselves with the wording of the Council Resolution to  this  extent.
      Not every applicant needs to prove that his marriage  is  not  one  of
      convenience. The need to do so only arises  where  there  are  factors
      which  support  suspicions  for  believing  the  marriage  is  one  of
      convenience. Translated into the technical language of the English law
      of procedure and evidence, that means  that  there  is  an  evidential
      burden on the respondent. If there is no evidence that could support a
      conclusion that the marriage is one of convenience, the appellant does
      not have to deal with the issue. But once  the  issue  is  raised,  by
      evidence capable of pointing to a conclusion that the marriage is  one
      of convenience, it is for the appellant to show that his  marriage  is
      not one of convenience."

7. The Tribunal confirmed this  guidance  when  it  considered  this  matter
  again in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece  [2012]
  UKUT 00038 (IAC) where the Tribunal summarised its findings in  the  head
  note as follows;

      "i) There is no burden at the outset of an application on  a  claimant
      to demonstrate that a marriage to  an  EEA  national  is  not  one  of
      convenience.


      ii) IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  31  establishes
      only that there is an evidential burden on  the  claimant  to  address
      evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage is  entered
      into for the predominant purpose of securing residence rights."

8. The Tribunal concluded;

      "39. In summary, our understanding is that, where the issue is raised
      in an appeal, the question for the judge will  therefore  be  'in  the
      light of the totality of the  information  before  me,  including  the
      assessment of the claimant's answers and any information provided,  am
      I satisfied that it is more probable than not this is  a  marriage  of
      convenience?'."

9. These cases confirm that there is an initial burden on the  Secretary  of
  State to produce evidence justifying  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  the
  marriage  is  entered  into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of  securing
  residence  rights  and  the  burden  then  shifts  to  the  appellant  to
  demonstrate that the marriage is not one of  convenience.   In  light  of
  this guidance I accept that in stating that the burden of proof is on the
  respondent  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has   over-simplified   the
  position. The proper application of the burden of proof is that  set  out
  above. However the issue is whether that misstatement of  the  burden  of
  proof is material in light of the Judge's findings overall.

10. Mr Shilliday submitted that the mistake is material as it  infected  all
  of the Judge's findings in relation to the marriage.  He  submitted  that
  the Judge applied the wrong standard as demonstrated by his  use  of  the
  phrases not 'implausible' [57] and 'perhaps understandable'  [59].  I  do
  not accept that the use of these phrases in  isolation  demonstrate  that
  the Judge applied the wrong standard of proof. The determination read  as
  a whole reveals no error in relation to the standard of proof.

11. Mr Shilliday submitted that  the  Judge  had  wrongly  failed  to  weigh
  against the appellant his decision not to give oral evidence. However the
  Judge explained at paragraph 55 that  he  found  it  plausible  that  the
  appellant did not want to be questioned on the issues raised in a witness
  statement submitted by the Secretary of  State  on  the  morning  of  the
  hearing in  relation  to  allegations  that  the  appellant  was  working
  illegally. I am satisfied that this finding was open to the Judge on  the
  evidence before him and that he considered this explanation in  attaching
  weight to the appellant's written evidence about the relationship.

12. Mr Nicholson submitted that the cases of IS and Papajorgji were  decided
  in the context of EEA Family Permits and that neither refer to the  issue
  of residence cards as in the current appeal. However  it  is  clear  that
  Citizen's Directive, the EEA Regulations  and  the  guidance  of  the  EU
  Commission (referred to by the Tribunal in IS)  deal with a  marriage  of
  convenience in terms of the rights of spouses of EEA nationals exercising
  free movement rights to move and reside freely within member states. I do
  not accept that the restrictions on parties to a marriage of  convenience
  apply only to the right of entry as suggested by Mr Nicholson.

13. Mr Nicholson relied on the  European  Casework  Instructions  which  are
  reproduced in the appellant's Rule 24 response. This guidance states that
  the burden of proving that a marriage is one of  convenience  is  on  the
  Secretary of State. I accept that this guidance states that the burden is
  on the Secretary of State whereas, as  stated  above,  European  law  and
  guidance and the guidance of the Tribunal is more nuanced than this.  The
  correct approach must be to follow European law and case law rather  than
  the respondent's guidance.

14. Mr Nicholson also submitted that the respondent  had  not  produced  any
  evidence as to the intentions of the parties at the time of the marriage.
  I agree that the emphasis should be on the intentions of the  parties  at
  the time the marriage is contracted. I also agree that in this  case  the
  questions reproduced in the Reasons for  Refusal  letter  all  relate  to
  current circumstances whereas the couple have been  married  since  2009.
  However current circumstances can cast light on a couple's intentions  at
  the time of their marriage. It should be clear  that  this  is  how  such
  evidence is being viewed. It is not clear from the  Reasons  for  Refusal
  letter that this was in the mind of the interviewer or decision maker.

15. Mr Nicholson submitted that it is clear from the  determination  of  the
  First-tier Tribunal Judge that the evidential burden did not shift in the
  current case as the Secretary of State did not submit sufficient evidence
  to discharge the burden upon her. In the alternative he  submitted  that,
  if the Secretary of State did discharge the burden,  the  appellant  then
  discharged the burden on him in light  of  the  oral  evidence  from  the
  appellant's wife and the other evidence submitted.

16. I  accept  this  latter  submission  in  light  of  my  reading  of  the
  determination as a whole. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dealt with all of
  the submissions made  by  the  presenting  officer  at  the  hearing.  He
  accepted that the interview carried out by  the  respondent  demonstrates
  that there have been some difficulties in the couple's  relationship  but
  that it is 'a long way short of demonstrating that there  (sic)  marriage
  is one of convenience' [60]. It is clear from this that the Judge did not
  accept that the interview in itself demonstrated that the marriage is one
  of convenience. However the Judge did not stop there but  considered  all
  of the evidence before him. He said that he found  the  evidence  of  the
  appellant's wife credible and accepted that she and the  appellant  lived
  together in Spain before coming  to  the  UK  in  2012  and  since  their
  arrival. He accepted that, whilst there may have been  periods  when  the
  couple are apart, for example when the appellant's wife goes to  Ireland,
  'their relationship remains a genuine  one  and  is  not  a  marriage  of
  convenience' [61].

17. In considering the evidence in this way I am satisfied  that  the  Judge
  took the correct approach, that recommended by the Tribunal in Papajorgji
  to ask himself whether in light of all the evidence he was satisfied that
  'it is more probable than not this is a marriage of convenience' [39].

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Signed
                       Date: 30 March 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal












