

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers:    IA/03029/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 17th October 2014                         |On: 20th October 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                            Ramesh Kumar Jaiswal
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India date of birth 1st April  1982.  He
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    NMK Lawrence) to dismiss his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    to refuse to grant him further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant and to remove him from the United Kingdom  pursuant  to
    s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


 2. The only issue in this appeal was whether the  Appellant  was  able  to
    demonstrate that  he  held  the  requisite  funds  in  accordance  with
    Appendix C of the Immigration Rules.   He had submitted bank statements
    issued by the Bank of Baroda. For  some  reason  neither  the  original
    decision maker nor the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  these  to  be
    adequate.   The Home Office  Presenting  Officer  who  appeared  before
    Judge Lawrence appears to have submitted that the Appellant  needed  to
    produce some evidence that  this  bank  was  regulated  by  the  Indian
    authorities before the statements could be accepted as evidence of  his
    funds. This submission was accepted  by  Judge  Lawrence,  and  in  the
    absence of any evidence that  it  was  so  regulated,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed for that reason.

 3. There is no requirement that the Appellant produce  evidence  that  the
    Bank of Baroda is regulated. That is because it appears, and has always
    appeared, on the list of approved financial institutions at Appendix  P
    of the Immigration Rules.  Before me Mr Tarlow accepted that to be  the
    case.

 4. The only ground for dismissing this appeal was therefore  an  error  of
    fact amounting to an error of law and the decision is set aside to that
    extent; all other findings of fact being preserved.

 5. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.









                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   17th
                                October 2014
