

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03338/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 April 2015                              |On 5 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                    K. R.

                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr. P. Turner, counsel instructed by Greater London
                   Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 History of Appeal


   1. The Appellant, who was born on 11th May 1969, is  a  national  of  Sri
      Lanka and of Tamil origin.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  3rd
      May 2009 and applied for asylum. His application was refused  on  23rd
      July 2009 and he appealed. His appeal was heard by  Immigration  Judge
      Sanderson on 1st September 2009 and dismissed in a determination  sent
      out on 9th September 2009. Senior  Immigration  Judge  Kekic  made  an
      order  for  reconsideration  on  29th  September  2009.   But   in   a
      determination, dated  15th  January  2010,  Senior  Immigration  Judge
      Gleeson found that  Immigration  Judge  Sanderson  had  not  made  any
      material errors of law and that his determination of the appeal should
      stand.


   2.  The  Appellant  subsequently  made  further  representations  to  the
      Respondent and on 28th November 2013 she refused to treat  them  as  a
      fresh claim for asylum. He made a claim for judicial  review  of  this
      decision and on 10th January 2014  the  Respondent  again  refused  to
      grant  the  Appellant  leave  to  remain  but  recognised   that   his
      representations of 20th December 2013 amounted to a  fresh  claim  for
      asylum and attracted a further right of appeal.

   3. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith who allowed
      his appeal in a decision promulgated on 11th December  2014.  However,
      the Respondent sought permission to appeal, which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 11th February 2015.

   4. In her grounds of appeal the Respondent asserted that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  had  failed  to  adequately  apply  the  decisions  in
      Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2002]  UKIAT
      00702 or JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013]  UKUT  145.  In
      addition, she asserted that the Appellant did not fall within  any  of
      the risk categories identified  in  GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
      returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319 and that, therefore,  he  would
      not be at risk of persecution in Sri Lanka. In the alternative, it was
      submitted that the Judge had not provided  adequate  reasons  for  her
      findings and had failed to resolve a  previous  conflict  relating  to
      evidence previously produced about alleged scarring to the Appellant's
      back.

   5. Permission was given on all grounds on the basis that  the  Judge  may
      have erred in law by focusing on the medical evidence to the exclusion
      of other material considerations and not  addressing  the  finding  by
      Immigration Judge Sanderson  that  the  entirety  of  the  Appellant's
      account was a fabrication. She also found that the Judge had failed to
      apply relevant case law concerning scarring reports.

 Error of Law Hearing

   6. At the hearing the Home Office Presenting Officer submitted  that  the
      Judge had made an error of law by treating both the  medical  evidence
      and the UNHCR Guidelines issued on 21st December 2012 as determinative
      of the appeal before her. She also  asserted  that  Immigration  Judge
      Sanderson's findings should have formed the  starting  point  for  the
      Judge's consideration of the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of
      his fresh claim for asylum and that in paragraph 46  of  her  decision
      she did not give adequate reasons  for  departing  from  the  previous
      judge's findings in relation to credibility. She also noted  that  the
      Judge had erroneously stated in paragraph 55  that  the  core  of  the
      Appellant's claim had been consistent throughout and had  not  engaged
      with the inconsistencies in the evidence identified  by  the  previous
      judge. She also noted that in paragraph 14 of her determination Senior
      Immigration Judge Gleeson had found that at  the  hearing  before  her
      there  were  several  significant  modifications  of  the  Appellant's
      account and that Immigration Judge Sanderson had been entitled to rely
      on the discrepancies in the Appellant's account.   She  also  asserted
      that the  Judge  had  not  explained  why  the  medical  evidence  had
      undermined the previous judge's credibility findings.


   7. She also noted that it was not clear whether  Dr.  Halari,  who  is  a
      senior clinical  psychologist,  had  been  provided  with  a  copy  of
      Immigration Judge Sanderson's determination.  In addition,  she  noted
      that a photograph of another person's back showing  scaring  from  the
      back of the neck to the waist had been submitted in 2009 and that that
      Judge had not addressed this conflict of  evidence.   She  also  noted
      that in paragraph 60 of her decision the  Judge  had  found  that  the
      Appellant did not fall under any of the specific risk  categories  set
      out in paragraph 356(7) of GJ and others (post-civil  war:  returnees)
      Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  but  erroneously  allowed  the
      appeal on the basis that he fell within the UNCHR's  risk  categories.
      She asserted that this was an error of law, as recognised in  MP  (Sri
      Lanka), NT  (Sri  Lanka)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ  829.  She  accepted  that  the  Judge  had
      referred to this case in paragraph 58 of  her  decision  but  asserted
      that she had not properly engaged with its findings and noted that  in
      paragraph 325 of GJ and others  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  found  that
      previous involvement with the LTTE did not now give rise to a risk  of
      persecution. She also noted that family links were now just one factor
      which may need to be taken into account.


   8. The Appellant's counsel then replied. He  asserted  that  the  grounds
      formulated by the Respondent were a mere disagreement with the Judge's
      findings.  He noted that the Judge  had  found  the  Appellant  to  be
      credible and had accepted that people were still looking for him.   He
      also noted that in paragraph 62 of her decision the  Judge  had  found
      that the Appellant's fragile state of health would increase  his  risk
      of being ill-treated.  In addition, he asserted that the  grounds  did
      not explain how the Judge had misapplied Deveeslan and he  noted  that
      the Judge had explicitly  referred  to  it  in  paragraph  45  of  her
      decision. He also noted that she had referred to JL (medical  reports-
      credibility) China [2013] UKUT  145  (IAC)  in  paragraph  48  of  her
      decision.  In addition, he asserted that in paragraphs 100  -  110  of
      her report Dr. Halari had expressly considered whether  the  Appellant
      was malingering.  He also noted that Dr. Arnold had been provided with
      the first judge's determination but had  found  that  the  Appellant's
      scarring was consistent with his account of torture.  He then asserted
      that the Judge had considered the evidence in the light of the medical
      evidence and made her decision in the light of relevant case law.


   9. Having heard these  submissions,  we  find  that  the  Judge  did  not
      properly apply  the  principles  in  Devaseelan.  We  accept  that  in
      paragraph 45 of her decision, she reminded herself of the need to take
      Immigration Judge Sanderson's determination as her starting point. She
      was also aware that she could reach a different decision if there  was
      fresh evidence that entitled her to do so. However, she  then  treated
      the fresh medical evidence as determinative of  her  consideration  of
      whether or not the Appellant had been previously tortured as asserted.
      When doing so she did not address her mind to the  inconsistencies  in
      the Appellant's overall evidence,  which  had  led  Immigration  Judge
      Sanderson to conclude that  the  Appellant's  entire   account  was  a
      fabrication. Neither did she consider  whether  the  medical  evidence
      provided an explanation for any discrepancies which previously arose.
  10. We are satisfied that the approach taken  by  the  Judge  discloses  a
      legal error in that she  failed  correctly  to  apply  the  Devaseelan
      principles. This was particularly the case as Dr. Arnold's  report  on
      the Appellant's scars went no further than finding that all but one of
      his scars was consistent with his account of torture.  He  found  that
      the other scar was typical of a stab wound but also found that a  fall
      onto a sharp object could not  be  totally  excluded.  Therefore,  the
      medical evidence did not exclude  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
      fabricated his account and this required the  Judge  to  consider  the
      reasons  given  by  Immigration  Judge  Sanderson  for  doubting   his
      credibility in paragraphs  33  -  36  of  his  determination.  In  our
      judgment this did amount to an error of law and was not  just  a  mere
      disagreement with the Judge's findings of fact.


  11. Paragraph 37 of this earlier determination also refers to a photograph
      said to be of the Appellant's back which had been  submitted  at  that
      hearing. The later determination of  Upper  Tribunal  Gleeson  reveals
      that this was not a photograph of the Appellant's back and that he did
      not have a scar which extended from the back of his neck  to  near  to
      the left-hand side of his waist.  In our  judgment  the  Judge  should
      have also considered this conflict of evidence and the totality of the
      evidence  before  Immigration  Judge  Sanderson  before   finding   at
      paragraph 55 of her decision that the core of  the  Appellant's  claim
      had been consistent throughout.

  12. In addition, we find  that  given  this  previous  apparent  attempted
      deception, the Judge should have considered the possibility that  some
      of the scars that were on the Appellant's body were self-inflicted  or
      self-inflicted by proxy as required by KV (scarring-medical  evidence)
      Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230. This was not considered by Dr. Arnold  or
      the Judge.

  13. In her grounds of appeal the Respondent had also relied on the case of
      JL China. It is clear from paragraph 48 of her decision that the Judge
      was aware of this case and the fact that those writing reports are  to
      ensure that where possible that before  forming  their  opinions  they
      study  any  assessments  that  have  already  been  made   about   the
      appellant's credibility. But later in the  same  paragraph  she  notes
      that it was unclear whether Dr. Halari had been provided with the  two
      previous determinations,  which  did  doubt  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant's account.  At the hearing before us Counsel was not able to
      clarify whether she had been provided with these determinations but in
      her report she simply states that the background  information  to  her
      report had been  set  out  in  her  letter  of  instruction  from  the
      Appellant's solicitors.  There is nothing to suggest that she had seen
      these determinations and her statement at paragraph 100 of her  report
      suggests that she did rely  on  the  Appellant's  own  account  before
      concluding that the alleged torture was the  precipitating  cause  for
      his post traumatic stress disorder and his major depressive  symptoms.
      We find that this amounted to an error of law as in JL China the Upper
      Tribunal found that the more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming that
      the account given by the appellant was to be believed, the less likely
      it is that significant weight will be attached to it.


  14. The Respondent also asserted that the Judge erred in her  approach  to
      the Appellant's entitlement to protection.  We  accept  that  she  did
      remind herself of the decisions in GJ & Others and also MP Sri  Lanka.
      However, after finding in  paragraph  60  of  her  decision  that  the
      Appellant did not fall within the risk categories identified  in  sub-
      paragraph 356(7) of the former  case,  she  sought  to  rely  on  sub-
      paragraph 356(4) of the case. This states that if a person is detained
      by the Sri Lankan security services there remains a real risk of  ill-
      treatment or harm requiring international  protection.  However,  this
      country guidance read holistically makes it clear  that  a  real  risk
      only occurs if a person falls into one of the categories  referred  to
      in sub-paragraph 356(7).  The Judge also relied on the fact  that  the
      Appellant fell within one of the categories contained in UNHCR's  2012
      Guidelines.  However, in paragraph 16 of MP Sri Lanka,  the  Court  of
      Appeal found that the country guidance in GJ and  Others  was  legally
      sound even though it did not include categories included in the  UNHCR
      guidelines.


  15. For all of these reasons we are satisfied  that  there  were  material
      errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings
      and that it should be set aside in its entirety. We are also satisfied
      that, as there will need to be a complete re-hearing, that this  is  a
      proper case for remission to the First-tier Tribunal.



          Conclusions:

    1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings did  include
    material errors   of law.

      2. The decision should be set aside in its entirety.


      3. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that  the
         appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a
         different judge of that Tribunal.




                  [pic]






Upper Tribunal Judge Finch                           Date: 27 April 2015
