
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                         Appeal   Number:
IA/03717/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the  5th  May  2016                                               On  the
17th May 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                               MRS SHIMA AKTER
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Chowdhury (Solicitor)
For the Respondent: Mr Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Veloso promulgated on the 22nd October 2015,  in  which
      he dismissed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules, under
      Article 3 and under Article 8.

   2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge refused the Appellant's  application  to
      amend the Grounds of Appeal to include  arguments  that  she  will  be
      persecuted and that she was entitled to Human  Rights  and  protection
      under Article  3  in  respect  of  her  treatment  upon  returning  to
      Bangladesh and did not accept the  submission  by  Mr  Chowdhury  when
      appearing before the Tribunal in the First-tier  that  a  Section  120
      Notice could be added to at any time.

   3. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Holmes against that decision following the Appellant's appeal  on  the
      basis it was arguable that the Judge erred in refusing to  engage  the
      argument that the Appellant would be at a real risk of a breach of her
      Article 3 rights in the event of her returning to Bangladesh  and  the
      protection issues that she raised.  However Judge  Holmes  found  that
      there was no arguable merit in the complaint made within  the  Grounds
      of Appeal about the findings of primary fact made  by  the  Judge  and
      that she plainly faced significant credibility issues and the findings
      were well open to him on the evidence and  were  adequately  reasoned.
      He further found there was no error in the Judge's approach either  to
      Section 55 or the overall assessment of  the  proportionality  of  the
      return with her children to Bangladesh.

   4. In his oral submissions to me Mr Chowdhury relied upon the Grounds  of
      Appeal and sought to argue that a Section 120 Notice had  been  served
      and that the Article 3 arguments  had  been  raised  properly  by  the
      Appellant and that the Judge should not have restricted  the  case  to
      considerations under Article 3 and Article 8 simply in respect of  her
      health.  He argued that the Judge had made a material error in respect
      of Section 120 and that the case  should  be  remitted  back  for  re-
      hearing.  He argued that the Judge did have jurisdiction  to  consider
      the additional Grounds of Appeal following the service of the  Section
      120 Notice and that they should have been considered by him.

   5. In his submissions on behalf of the Respondent Mr Kotas accepted  that
      a Section 120 Notice had been served on the 12th January 2015  in  the
      ISI 151B.  Mr Kotas handed up to me the  case  of  Jaff  (Section  120
      Notice;  Statement  of  "Additional  Grounds")  [2012]   UKUT   00396.
      However, he conceded quite  properly  that  that  case  related  to  a
      situation where there have been absence of a Section 120  Notice,  and
      therefore where, in  the  absence  of  a  Section  120  Notice  and  a
      Statement of "Additional Grounds" the Appellant could not rely on  the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 before the First-
      tier Tribunal, as that had not formed  part  of  his  application  for
      Leave to Remain made to the Respondent.  Within the Jaff case  it  was
      also stated that "a statement of 'additional grounds' may be  made  in
      response to a Section 120 Notice at any time,  including  up  to  (and
      perhaps at the time of) the hearing  of  the  appeal".   It  was  also
      stated that "although the legislative scheme prescribes no  particular
      form in which a statement of 'additional grounds' must be made, such a
      statement must as a minimum set out with some level  of  particularity
      the ground(s) relied upon by  the  Appellant  as  the  foundation  for
      remaining in the UK and upon which reliance has  not  previously  been
      placed.  It must 'state' the additional grounds to be relied  upon  in
      substance or at least, in form".

   6. Mr Kotas conceded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was wrong in  law
      to say that the Section 120 Notice could not be added to at  any  time
      and that the Appellant was entitled to file further Grounds of Appeal,
      and that was in effect the point of a Section 120 Notice.  He conceded
      that further grounds could be  argued  in  a  Skeleton  Argument,  but
      argued  that  the  previous  Grounds  of  Appeal  had  not   mentioned
      persecution, but he argued that the  arguments  contained  within  the
      Skeleton Argument did not contain the level of particularity necessary
      to amount to 'additional grounds' in that they had not been said to be
      'additional grounds' within that Skeleton Argument.   He  did  concede
      that possibly the correct approach would have been for the  Respondent
      to ask for an adjournment to consider the issues, but sought to  argue
      that even if the Judge was wrong in failing to consider the additional
      arguments, that the error was not material, in that in the case of  SA
      (Divorced Women - Illegitimate Child) Bangladesh CG [2011] UKUT 00245,
      given the Judge's findings regarding the support  that  the  Appellant
      had previously received, he argued it was difficult  to  see  how  she
      could now succeed in  respect  of  her  new  arguments  and  that  the
      decision would have been the same irrespective.

   My Findings on Law and Error of Materiality

   7. The case of Jaff (Section  120;  Statement  of  "Additional  Grounds")
      [2012] UKUT 00396, is authority for the proposition that  a  statement
      of additional grounds may be made in response to a Section 120  Notice
      at any time, including up to (and perhaps at the time of) the  hearing
      of the appeal and that there is no particular form  in  which  such  a
      statement of additional grounds must be made,  but  such  a  statement
      must as a minimum  set  out  with  some  level  of  particularity  the
      ground(s) relied upon by the Appellant as a foundation  for  remaining
      in the UK and upon which reliance has not previously been placed.   It
      must state the additional ground to be relied upon in substance or  at
      least in form.

   8.  As was properly conceded by Mr Kotas on behalf of the Respondent, the
      Judge was wrong to say that the Section 120 Notice could not be  added
      to  at  any  time  at  [14].   Firstly,  the  Judge  appears  to  have
      misunderstood that in fact the Section 120 Notice is served not by the
      Appellant, but by the Respondent  and  under  Section  120(2)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, it is provided that "the
      Secretary of State or the Immigration Office may by notice in  writing
      require a person to state - (a) his reasons for wishing  to  enter  or
      remain in the United Kingdom; (b) any grounds on which  he  should  be
      permitted to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  (c)  any
      grounds on which he should not be removed from or  required  to  leave
      the United Kingdom".

   9. Under Section 120(3) the statement  under  sub-section  (2)  need  not
      repeat reasons or grounds set out in - (a) the  application  mentioned
      in sub-section (1)(a), or (b) an application to which the  immigration
      decision mentioned in sub-section (1)(b) relates.

  10. The whole purpose of the Section 120 Notice is that if  the  Appellant
      does not in reply to the Section 120 Notice state all of  the  grounds
      upon which he or she should not be removed or required  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom or should be permitted to remain,  then  the  Appellant
      may not subsequently be allowed to argue those points.  It is a way of
      ensuring that all of the arguments are dealt with at once  and  it  is
      therefore often referred to as "a one stop" notice.  As  was  set  out
      within the case of Jaff, the statement of additional  grounds  may  be
      made in response to a Section 120  Notice  at  any  time  up  to  (and
      perhaps at the time of) the hearing of the appeal.

  11.  I do agree with Mr Kotas that the Judge was wrong in law  in  finding
      that a Section 120 Notice once lodged could not be  added  to  at  any
      time.  Additional grounds  having  been  argued  within  the  Skeleton
      Argument, as is properly conceded by Mr Kotas was a viable  course  of
      action taken by the Appellant, the Judge should have considered  those
      additional grounds raised.  It was procedurally unfair for  the  Judge
      not to do so, when they had been raised within the Skeleton  Argument,
      in circumstances where a Section 120 Notice had been served, and  this
      would thereby be  the  Appellant's  one  opportunity  to  argue  those
      points.  The Judge in such  circumstances  did  err  in  limiting  the
      appeal simply to the Article 3  health  arguments  and  the  arguments
      under Article 8.

  12. In respect of the submissions made by  Mr  Kotas  that  the  arguments
      raised within the Skeleton Argument were  insufficient  to  amount  to
      additional grounds, having considered the Skeleton Argument  submitted
      on behalf of the Appellant  before  the  appeal  on  the  day  of  the
      hearing, it is clear  that  at  paragraph  15.1  and  15.2,  that  the
      Appellant was seeking to argue that she feared  persecution  upon  her
      return to Bangladesh of inhuman and  degrading  treatment  for  giving
      birth to two minor children out of wedlock,  and  that  such  children
      born out of wedlock are considered to be illegitimate,  and  that  the
      children as well as the Appellant would be considered to be  a  social
      outcast in Bangladesh and would suffer discrimination because  of  the
      pervading social stigma and prejudice against such children.

  13.  It was further argued that there would be a real risk of violence  to
      the Appellant as a single woman who is a social outcast and  that  she
      has a real risk of suffering sexual  violence,  harassment  for  being
      morally lax and that it was argued that  she  would  not  receive  any
      support from her own family or from members of the community  and  had
      difficulty gaining protection from the law enforcement bodies.

  14.  It was further clear in paragraph 11 that the Appellant  was  seeking
      to rely upon the Upper Tribunal decision in the case of  SA  (Divorced
      Woman - Illegitimate Child) Bangladesh CG [2011] UKUT 00254 (IAC), and
      therefore such arguments were clearly set out both in substance and in
      form and with a sufficient level of particularity within the  Skeleton
      Argument.  Therefore it did amount to additional  grounds,  which  the
      Judge therefore should  have  allowed  to  be  argued  at  the  appeal
      hearing.  This  is  especially  the  case  when  the  Judge  was  also
      considering the claim under Article  8  as  to  whether  it  would  be
      disproportionate to the Appellant's  and  her  children's  family  and
      private life for them to be removed from the UK.  The extent to  which
      they might face persecution or difficulties in Bangladesh as a  result
      of the children being illegitimate  would  clearly  factor  into  that
      assessment as well.

  15. Clearly these arguments will also be relevant to the extent  that  the
      Judge did consider under Article 8 that the move to  Bangladesh  would
      initially constitute a change for the Appellant and her children,  but
      his finding that they would be able to adapt at [61].  The  Judge  has
      therefore failed to take account of material arguments in this regard,
      in respect of his analysis of Article 8, as a result of the failure to
      allow the more expansive Article 3 argument to be run.

  16. In respect of the argument that the decision of the Judge  would  have
      been the same in any event, the Judge found that the Appellant and her
      children would be able to benefit from  the  assistance  of  UTSHO,  a
      charity that provides  support  for  mothers  with  children  in  need
      including single mothers and that they would be suitably  accommodated
      and maintained whilst the Appellant seeks  and  finds  employment  and
      establishes herself  in  her  home  country  and  that  the  charity's
      assistance included free day care for single working mothers  at  [54]
      and that the Judge at [47] found that the  Appellant  would  have  the
      financial support of her many friends whom she claimed  to  have  been
      supporting her during her stay in the UK and the Judge did not  accept
      that her friends would not support her if she returned to Bangladesh".

  17. However, although within the country guidance  case  of  SA  (Divorced
      Woman - Illegitimate Child) Bangladesh CG [2011]  UKUT  00254  it  was
      stated that "(4) the mother of an illegitimate child may  face  social
      prejudice and discrimination if her circumstances and the fact of  her
      having had an illegitimate child become known, but she is  not  likely
      to be at a real risk of serious harm in urban  centres  by  reason  of
      that fact alone" and that "(5) the divorced mother of an  illegitimate
      child without family support  on  returning  to  Bangladesh  would  be
      likely to have to endure a significant degree of hardship but she  may
      well be able to obtain employment in the garment trade or obtain  some
      sort of accommodation, albeit of  a  low  standard.   Some  degree  of
      rudimentary state help would be available to her and she would be able
      to enrol her child in a state school.  If in need or urgent assistance
      she would be  able  to  seek  temporary  accommodation  at  a  women's
      shelter.  The conditions  which  she  would  have  to  endure  in  re-
      establishing herself in Bangladesh  would  not  as  a  general  matter
      amount to persecution or breach of her rights under Article 3  of  the
      ECHR.  Each case, however, must be decided on  its  own  facts  having
      regard to the particular circumstances and disabilities,  if  any,  of
      the woman and the child concerned".

  18. Given the Upper Tribunal indicated that each case  was  in  fact  fact
      specific and that the facts of the particular woman and  children  had
      to be taken into account, I am not persuaded that the  decision  would
      have necessarily been the same irrespective of the  Judge's  error  in
      failing to allow these additional arguments  to  be  run  (CA  v  SSHD
      [2014] EWCA Civ 1165).  The fact that such arguments might be unlikely
      to succeed does not mean that  they  would  inevitably  fail  and  the
      decision would have been the same.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Veloso,
      not having considered the arguments raised by  the  appellant  of  the
      risk to her and to her  children  specifically  as  a  result  of  the
      children being born out of wedlock, and simply not  having  considered
      those arguments in assessing her ability to return both under  Article
      3 and Article 8, I therefore do consider that  the  Judge's  error  in
      failing to allow the  Appellant  to  raise  the  additional  arguments
      following the service of a Section 120 Notice as additional grounds of
      appeal did amount to a material error of law, such that  the  decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso is set  aside  with  no  preserved
      findings of fact, the  matter  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a re-hearing de novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge
      other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;



The appeal is remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-hearing
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Veloso.

Signed

R McGinty

Deputy      Judge      of       the       Upper       Tribunal       McGinty
Dated 5th May 2016
