
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/03015/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th September  2013                         |On 25th September  2013    |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                          Mr MUHAMMAD USMAN KHALIQ
                         (Anonymity Order not Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop (instructed by Bishop, Lloyd & Jackson
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Meah) promulgated on 8th May 2013 by which he dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse him leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 2. The documents in this case have led to a degree of confusion. It is now
    accepted by both sides however that the situation  in  this  appeal  is
    this. The Appellant submitted an application in October 2012 for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant submitting a  CAS  that
    had been issued  by  the  British  School  of  Management  Sciences  in
    September 2012. In December 2012 UKBA wrote to that  College  informing
    it that it now had only legacy status  and  was  unable  to  issue  any
    further CAS documents to new students, they were to  be  restricted  to
    students partway through a course. In January  2013  the  Secretary  of
    State refused the Appellant's application on the basis that the CAS was
    thus invalid.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal found against the Appellant on the  basis  that
    the letter of December 2012 to the college from  UKBA  referred  to  an
    earlier  decision  made  in  April  2012,  before  the  date   of   the
    application. However, that is incorrect. The letter  of  December  2012
    referred to the policy change announced  by  the  government  in  April
    2011.  There was no decision in relation to this College in April  2011
    or April 2012 altering its status. There was a  letter  in  April  2012
    from UKBA to the college but that simply  confirmed  its  status  as  a
    Highly Trusted  Sponsor.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  therefore  made  a
    mistake of fact which amounts to an error of law and I set the decision
    aside.

 4. The situation is that at the time when the Appellant obtained  his  CAS
    and at the time that he submitted his application the CAS was valid. It
    was invalidated between  the  date  of  application  and  the  date  of
    decision, a factor which could not be  known  to  the  Appellant.   The
    Secretary of State should therefore  have  reverted  to  the  Appellant
    giving him a 60 day window in which to supply a valid alternate CAS. In
    failing to do so the Secretary of State acted unlawfully rendering  the
    decision of January 2013 not in accordance with the law.  I  therefore,
    having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  redecide  the
    appeal and allow it to the extent it is remitted to  the  Secretary  of
    State for a lawful decision to be made. It was  agreed  by  Mr  Bramble
    that was the appropriate course.

 5. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.


Signed                              Date 25th September 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

