
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA036132015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2017                           |On 17 August 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                               shah rukh iqbal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Solicitors' Inn
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The subject of the challenge brought by the appellant  with  permission
    is the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge R C Walters sent  on
    14 November 2016 dismissing his appeal against a decision made  by  the
    respondent on 12 January 2015 refusing leave to remain on  private  and
    family life grounds.  The appellant's challenge has two dimensions, one
    procedural, one relating to the substance  of  the  judge's  reasoning.
    The procedural challenge is brought by Mr  Iqbal  in  the  form  of  an
    application to amend the grounds.  I consider that it would be  in  the
    interests of justice to admit the amended  grounds  and  note  that  Mr
    Duffy was afforded additional time to peruse  them  and  then  to  make
    submissions on them.

2.   The essence of the procedural ground is the contention that  the  judge
    erred in deciding the appeal on the basis that the appellant failed  to
    meet the relevant requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  had  not
    shown that the decision appealed  against  was  disproportionate  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Mr Iqbal  submitted  that  this  was  an  error
    because that matter had already been decided by FtT  Judge  Reid  in  a
    decision dated 24 August 2015.  In that decision Judge Reid found  that
    (1) the appellant and his wife were honest and  credible  witnesses  on
    the issue of their relationship; (2) as the couple had legally  married
    on 5 June 2014 and he was not required to show that their  relationship
    had been subsisting for two years (as the respondent had asserted); and
    (3) the appellant met the requirements of Appendix  FM,  in  particular
    the suitability requirement and the relationship requirement.

3.   Judge Reid's decision was the subject of an appeal  by  the  respondent
    who challenged not only the judge's findings on Appendix  FM  but  also
    the judge's finding that the appellant had not used deception in taking
    an ETS test.  This appeal  came  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    (DUTJ) Hill QC.  In a decision dated 20 February 2016  he  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal and remitted the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a rehearing.

4.   I am not able to accept Mr  Iqbal's  submission,  as  skilfully  as  he
    deployed his arguments.  His central argument was that DUTJ Hill QC had
    only allowed the appeal on the ETS matter.  In support  he  pointed  to
    passages of DUTJ Hill QC's judgment which refer to identification of an
    error of law on the ETS issue only; especially paragraphs  10  and  11.
    However, whilst it is true virtually all of DUTJ Hill QC's analysis was
    concerned with the ETS issue, (i) he himself correctly noted  that  the
    respondent's grounds also challenged the judge's finding on Appendix FM
    (see paragraph 3); (ii) he avoided any use of language indicative  that
    he regarded the ETS issue as the sole issue: the furthest he  went  was
    to say at paragraph 3 that "[i]t is with this latter  aspect  [the  ETS
    issue]  that  the  appeal  before  me  today   has   been   principally
    concerned"("principally" does not mean the same as exclusively);  (iii)
    he made no specific finding  to  the  effect  that  he  considered  the
    judge's treatment of the Appendix FM issue was  free  of  legal  error;
    (iv) his "notice  of  decision"  contained  no  restriction  in  scope,
    stating mainly that "Appeal allowed.  Matter remitted to the FtT for  a
    rehearing.  No findings preserved."  Whilst "[m]atter" here appears  to
    relate to the ETS issue only, the legal effect of the unqualified '[n]o
    findings preserved'" is that the decision of FtT Reid was treated as  a
    nullity;(v) the bald legal fact was that the appellant could  not  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM in full: being an overstayer  he  could
    not possibly meet the  suitability  (status)  requirements;  indeed  Mr
    Iqbal conceded as much.  It would elevate  procedural  .formalism  over
    legal fact to consider DUTJ Hill QC's decision as one finding that  FtT
    Judge Reid's decision on the Appendix  FM  matter  was  free  of  legal
    error; (vi) Mr Iqbal did not seek to rely on the procedural ground when
    he himself appeared before Judge Walters; and (vii) it is true that the
    respondent did not cross-appeal DUTJ Hill QC's decision, but there  was
    no basis for her doing so since that decision  did  not  determine  the
    challenge made to Judge Reid's finding on Appendix FM.

5.   I turn therefore to the appellant's substantive grounds  of  challenge.
    It is  immediately  apparent  that  they  lack  arguable  merit.   They
    comprise three submissions with  a  request  that  they  be  considered
    cumulatively.   Each  of  these  submissions  takes  issue  with  Judge
    Walters' finding that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1.(b) which requires it to be shown that  there  would  be
    insurmountable obstacles to family life  with  the  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.

6.   In my judgment, each of these submissions amounts to  no  more  than  a
    mere disagreement with Judge Walters' findings of fact.  Judge  Walters
    had found that he did not believe the appellant's wife's evidence  that
    she feared return to Pakistan because of threats to her  life  received
    from her ex-husband's family.  He stated at paragraphs 29-.30 that:

         "29. I did not believe that evidence.  The Appellant went  back  to
             Pakistan in 2014 and stayed there for two weeks.   She  stayed
             in the same city, Islamabad, in which her ex-husband's  family
             live.  She said that they did not know she was there.


         30.  I did not accept that if the Appellant and his spouse returned
             to Pakistan to continue their Family Life there and  relocated
             to a large city that her ex-husband's family would  ever  find
             that they were present in the country at all."

7.   The first submission contends that when it came to  assessing  risk  on
    return the judge did not appreciate  the  difference  between  visiting
    Pakistan for a short visit of two weeks and returning to the same  city
    permanently.

8.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant  and  also  considered  the
    documentary bundles  submitted  by  both  parties.   Nothing  in  those
    bundles  addressed  the  issue  of  whether  there  was  a  significant
    difference between a short visit to Islamabad and permanent stay  there
    in terms of the potential reality of damage of harm at the hands of the
    ex-husband's family.  The matter was at large for the judge and it  was
    entirely open to him to consider that the appellant's wife's  two  week
    return was not indicative that she genuinely feared  she  was  at  risk
    from her ex-husband's family.

9.   The second submission was that the judge had no evidence  on  which  to
    base his conclusion that if she relocated  to  another  large  city  in
    Pakistan the appellant's wife's ex-husband or family would not be  able
    to locate her.  This submission jars somewhat with the first in that it
    presupposes the ex-husband's  family  has  the  ability  to  trace  the
    appellant's wife anywhere in one of Pakistan's cities even though  this
    ability apparently hangs in suspension for a period of two  weeks.   In
    any event, it is simply a disagreement with the judge's findings.   The
    judge was clearly entitled on the basis of the evidence and submissions
    to conclude as he did.  There was  no  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    indicate that  the  appellant's  wife's  ex-husband's  family  had  the
    wherewithal or desire to track her down anywhere in Pakistan.

10.  The third submission simply reverses the burden of proof.   It  alleges
    that having accepted that the appellant's wife  was  receiving  medical
    attention/treatment in the UK "there was no evidence available  to  the
    judge that she will receive similar treatment/attention  in  Pakistan".
    Absent clear evidence that the appellant's  wife  would  be  unable  to
    access such treatment in Pakistan, the judge  was  fully  justified  in
    concluding at paragraph 38 that:

     "The Appellant has produced no evidence that either of the drugs  taken
         by his wife are unavailable in Pakistan.  Nor has he  produced  any
         evidence that treatment for her depression  and  suicidal  thoughts
         would be unavailable there."

11.  A further observation to be made is that Judge Walters did not  address
    the inability of the appellant to meet the suitability  requirement  of
    Appendix FM.  That was an error, but it cannot be said to constitute  a
    material one because he gave separate reasons why the  appellant  could
    not succeed under EX.1. (b) either  or  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.

12.  In short, the appellant's grounds lack merit and must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

13.  For the above reasons:

     The FtT judge did not materially err in law.  His decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal must stand.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 16 August 2017
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


