
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/03207/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision Promulgated         |
|On  22 June 2016                       |  On 6 July 2016               |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C N LANE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     J E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent: Ms R Head (counsel) instructed by Lawrence Lupin,
solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. We make an anonymity order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, to preserve the anonymity  direction  made
in the first tier.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Perry, promulgated on  4  August  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 2 October 1979 and is a national  of  Zimbabwe.
On 12 January 2015 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's  human
rights claim and made a deportation order  relying  on  s.32(5)  of  the  UK
Borders Act 2007.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Perry ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 30 November 2016 Judge  Davies  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      The Judge, in relation to the deportation order has made an  error  of
      law when proceeding on the basis that the appellant had been sentenced
      to four years' imprisonment when in fact she received  a  sentence  of
      five years' imprisonment. This is relevant as whilst  clearly  stating
      at paragraph 4 of the decision that the appellant received a  sentence
      of five years, the Judge goes on to consider section 117C on the basis
      that the appellant had received "a period of imprisonment of less than
      four years".

6.  In a decision promulgated on 18 February 2016  the  Upper  Tribunal  set
aside the Judge's decision, finding that it  contained  material  errors  of
law. The Upper Tribunal directed that the case should be considered  of  new
at a resumed hearing of the Upper Tribunal.

The Hearing

7.  We heard evidence from the appellant and her two witnesses, AA  and  NR.
Each witness adopted their witness statement before answering  questions  in
cross examination. We then heard parties'  agents' submissions.

8. Ms Isherwood reminded us that the  appellant  was  senteced  to  5  years
imprisonment in 2010, and  then,  when  released  from  prison  on  licence,
committed a further offence, and  was  sentenced  to  a  further  30  months
imprisonment. She told  us  that,  because  of  the  convictin  in  2010,  a
deportation order has been served on the appellant.  As  the  appellant  has
received a cusotfdial sentence of more than 4 years, she  told  us  that  we
must consider the test set out in s.117C of the Nationality, Immigrtion  ans
Asylum Act 2002 (as amended). Ms Isherwood reminded us  of  parahraphs  398,
399 & 399A  of  the  Immigration  rules,  and  emphasised  final  clause  of
paragraph 398 of the rules:

      ...the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
      facotrs where there are very compelling  circumstancesover  and  above
      those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A

9. (a) For the  appellant,  Ms  Head  adopted  the  terms  of  her  skeleton
argument. She rehearsed the history  of  this  case,  and  argued  that  the
appellant establishes very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those
set out in paragraph 399 & 399A of  the  Immigration  rules.  She  explained
that the appellant might be a  national  of  Zimbabwe,  but  she  left  that
country when she was 3 years old, and did not even  know  that  Zimbabwe  is
her country of origin until comparatively recently.  The  appellant  has  no
ties to Zimbabwe, she know s no-one there, she has  no  network  of  support
there, and she cannot speak any language other than English.

(b) Ms Head told us that the appellant is  a  vulnerable  young  woman,  who
experienced rejection as a child and spent a lot of her childhood  in  care.
She told us that the  appellant  has  learnt  form  her  mistakes,  and  the
purpose of the criminal justice penalties  imposed  on  the  appellant  have
been served. She reminded us  that  rehabilitation  of  the  offender  is  a
cornerstone of the purpose  of  criminal  justice,  and  told  us  that  the
appellant has no outstanding cases, no outstanding fines, and is  not  in  a
position of trust - so that her rehabilitaion has been achieved.

(c) Ms Head told us that the appellant has a British citizen child  who  she
had to entrust to her brother  whilst  she  was  in  prison,  and  that  the
appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with her  son.  She  has
residential contact to her son for at least three nights each week. Ms  Head
told us that if the appelant were removed to Zimbabwe, she  could  not  take
her son with her, so that her relationship with her son would be  destroyed.
She argued that the detrinental effect of separating the appellant from  her
son, and effectively  terminating  the  relationship  of  mother  and  young
child, is a very compelling circumstances over and above those described  in
paragraphs 399 and 399A.

(d) Ms Head urged us to allow the appellant's appeal.

Our Findings of fact

10. The appellant entered the UK on 11  October  1992,  when  she  was  only
three years old. She has remained in the  UK  since  then.  The  appellant's
childhood  was  disrupted  by  problems  within  her  own  family,  and  the
appellant was taken into the care of the local authority  when  she  was  12
years old.  As a young adult, the appellant descended into drug addiction.

11.  On 15 February 2008  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  burglarly  and
sentenced to a community order. On 22 May 2009, the appellant was  convicted
of two offences of dishonesty and sentenced to a 24 month  community  order.
On 4 October 2010 the appelant was convicted of an offence under the  Misuse
of Drugs Act 1971. She was sentenced to 5 years imprisonment. On 13  October
2011 the respondent wrote to the appellant informing her  of  her  laibility
to deportation. On 4 December 2012 the appelant was released on Licence.

12. On 19 September 2013 the appellant was recalled to  prison  because  she
had reoffended. On 27 February  2014  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  30
months imprisonment for burglary. On 12 January 2015 the  respondent  served
a deportaiton order on the appellant because she is a foreign  criminal  who
has been sentenced to more than 4 years imprisonment.

13.   The appellant has one child, born on 13 February 2006.  The  appellant
is not married to her son's father  and  her  relationship  with  her  son's
father is at an end. The father of the appellant's child is  now  serving  a
custodial sentence. When the appellant  was  first  taken  into  custody  in
2010, her child was cared for by the local authority. On 14 August 2013  the
appellant's child was released into her care. The appellant lived  with  her
son for about two months before being recalled to prison.

14. Since the appellant was recalled to prison on 2013,  her  son  has  been
cared for by her brother. The appellant's brother was  granted  a  residence
order for the child whilst the  appellant  was  in  prison.  That  residence
order has not been recalled. During  each  of  the  appellant's  periods  in
prison, contact with her son  was  maintained.  The  appellant  had  contact
visits once per month and enjoyed regular telephone contact  with  her  son.
On release from prison, the appellant went to live with her brother and  her
son, but in January 2016 the appellant and her brother  disagreed,  and  the
appellant left her brother's house (where her son remains). She  has  relied
on friends for acommodation since then.

15. Since January 2016, the appellant has  enjoyed  residential  contact  to
her son each weekend. She collects her son on a Friday and  returns  him  to
her brother each Monday morning. The appellant's son knows the appellant  as
his mother. There is a genuine bond of affection between the  appellant  and
her son.

16. The appellant's two brothers and three half siblings continue to  reside
in the UK. The appellant's son is a Britsh citizen.  The  appellant  has  no
memories at all of Zimbabwe. For many years the appellant believed  she  was
a South African citizen, and only found out that  she  is  Zimbabwean  as  a
young adult. If the appellant's Zinbabwean origins had been known to  social
services whilst she  was  in  care  as  a  teenager,  she  might  have  been
naturalised as  a  British  Citizen.  The  appellant  has  no  relatives  in
Zimbabwe, and no friends there. The appellant knows  nothing  of  Zimbabwean
traditons and culture.

Analysis

17.  Section 117C of the 2002 Act says

       117CArticle 8: additional considerations in cases  involving  foreign
      criminals


      (1)The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


      (2)The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
      greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.


      (3)In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
      to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the public interest
      requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.


      (4)Exception 1 applies where-


      (a)C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of  C's
      life,


      (b)C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and


      (c)there would be very significant obstacles to C's  integration  into
      the country to which C is proposed to be deported.


      (5)Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and  subsisting
      parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect  of  C's
      deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


      (6)In the case of a foreign criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
      period of imprisonment of at least four  years,  the  public  interest
      requires deportation unless there are very  compelling  circumstances,
      over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.


      (7)The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken  into
      account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to  deport
      a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for the decision
      was the offence or offences for which the criminal has been convicted.

18. Paragraphs 398, 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules say

      398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary to
      the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,
      and
       (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
      public good and in the public interest because they have been
      convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a period
      of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
      (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
      public good and in the public interest because they have been
      convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a period
      of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or
        (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
      public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
      Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
      are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
      law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
      whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the public
      interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other factors where
      there are very compelling circumstances over and above those described
      in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
        399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
      if -
        (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
      with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
           (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
           (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
           7 years immediately preceding the date of the immigration
           decision; and in either case
           (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
           country to which the person is to be deported; and
           (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK
           without the person who is to be deported; or
        (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
      partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
      UK, and
           (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
           (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
           was not precarious; and
           (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
           country to which the person is to be deported, because of
           compelling circumstances over and above those described in
           paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
           (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
           UK without the person who is to be deported.
        399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
      if -
        (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
      life; and
        (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
        (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
      into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.
19. The deportation order against which the appellant  appeals  proceeds  on
the basis of paragraph 398(a) of the Immigration rules.  Paragrapghs  399  &
399A only come into effect if the deportation  order  relies  on  paragrapgh
398 (b) or (c). There is no need to consider paragraphs 399 or 399A in  this
case.  In any event, paragraphs 399 and 399A set  out  certain  presumptions
which an appellant  can  rely  on.  In  this  case  the  appellant's  appeal
proceeds entirely on the effect deportation will have  on  her  relationship
with her son. On the facts as we find them to  be,  if  paragraphs  399  and
399A had relevence the appellant could  argue  that  she  falls  within  the
exception set out in paragrapgh 399(a).

20. Because of the operation of paragrapgh 398(c), we must look for
       ...very compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
      paragraphs 399 and 399A.

21. In MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  the  main  issue  concerned  the
position  when  the  appellant  could  not   succeed   substantively   under
paragraphs 398 or 399 of the rules on a deportation  and  the  determinative
question is whether there are  "exceptional  circumstances"  such  that  the
public interest in deportation is outweighed  by  other  factors  (paragraph
398 of the new rules).  The Court accepted a submission for the SSHD that
      the reference to  exceptional  circumstances  serves  the  purpose  of
      emphasising that, in the balancing exercise, great  weight  should  be
      given to the public interest in deporting foreign criminals who do not
      satisfy paras 398 and 399 or 399A.   It  is  only  exceptionally  that
      such foreign criminals will succeed in showing that their rights under
      article  8(1)  trump  the  public  interest   in   their   deportation
      (paragraphs 39 and 40).
The Court went on to say:
      In our view, [this] is not to say that a  test  of  exceptionality  is
      being applied.  Rather it is that,  in  approaching  the  question  of
      whether removal is a proportionate interference with  an  individual's
      article 8 rights,  the  scales  are  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
      deportation   and   something   very   compelling   (which   will   be
      "exceptional") is required to outweigh the public interest in  removal
      (paragraph 42).
Accordingly, the new rules applicable to deportation cases  should  be  seen
as
      a complete code ... the exceptional circumstances to be considered  in
      the balancing exercise involve the application  of  a  proportionality
      test as required by the Strasbourg jurisprudence

22. In SSHD v AQ (Nigeria) CD (Jamaica) and TH (Bangladesh) [2015] EWCA  Civ
25 it was held that when a foreign criminal appealed against  a  deportation
order on the  ground  that  the  public  interest  in  his  deportation  was
outweighed by his private or family life in the UK, the tribunal would  need
to examine the factors that would, under the Respondent's policy in part  13
of the Immigration Rules,  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.
Ultimately, the assessment of proportionality was for the  tribunal  or  the
court to make, but  national  policy  as  to  the  strength  of  the  public
interest in deporting foreign criminals was a fixed criterion against  which
other factors and interests had to be measured.


23. In McLarty (Deportation- balance) 2014  UKUT  00315  it  was  held  that
there can be  little  doubt  that  in  enacting  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007
Parliament views the object of deporting those with a criminal record  as  a
very strong policy, which is constant in all  cases  (SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
[2013] EWCA Civ 550).  The weight  to  be  attached  to  that  object  will,
however, include a variable component, which  reflects  the  criminality  in
issue.  Nevertheless, Parliament has tilted the scales  strongly  in  favour
of deportation and for them to return to the level and then swing in  favour
of a criminal opposing deportation there must be compelling  reasons,  which
must be exceptional; (ii) What amounts to compelling reasons or  exceptional
circumstances is very much fact dependent but must necessarily  be  seen  in
the context of the articulated will of Parliament in favour of  deportation;
(iii) Where the facts surrounding an individual who has  committed  a  crime
are said to be "exceptional"  or  "compelling",  these  are  factors  to  be
placed in the weighing scale, in order to  be  weighed  against  the  public
interest;  (iv)  In  some  other  instances,  the  phrase  "exceptional"  or
"compelling" has been used to describe the  end  result:  namely,  that  the
position of the individual is "exceptional" or "compelling" because,  having
weighed the unusual  facts  against  the  (powerful)  public  interest,  the
former outweighs the latter.  In this sense  "exceptional"  or  "compelling"
is the end result of the proportionality weighing process.

24. In PF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2015]
EWCA Civ 251 it was  held  that  the  First  Tier's  determination  did  not
identify the features of the Claimant's case  that  amounted  to  compelling
reasons  or  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  the  success   of   his
deportation  appeal,  given  the  seriousness  of  his   repeated   criminal
offending.  If the Judge's factual findings were well founded,  there  would
be a real and damaging impact on the Claimant's partner  and  children,  but
that was a common consequence of the deportation of a person  with  children
in the UK.

25.   In SSHD v LW (Jamaica) (2016) EWCA Civ 369 it was held  that  where  a
foreign national  was  subject  to  automatic  deportation  because  of  his
criminal  conviction  unless  there  were  exceptional  circumstances  under
paragraph 398(a) of the Immigration Rules, a  proportionality  test,  taking
all the relevant Article 8 of the ECHR criteria into  account  and  balanced
against the very strong public interest in deportation was to  be  conducted
through the lens of the Immigration Rules, rather than  as  a  free-standing
exercise. "Exceptional" meant something "very compelling".

26. In PF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2015]
EWCA Civ 251 it was held that deportation would normally be  appropriate  in
cases such as the instant, even  though  children  would  be  affected,  and
their interests were a primary consideration. In AD Lee  v  SSHD  2011  EWCA
Civ 348 Sedley LJ said

      the tragic consequence is that  this  family...  Would  be  broken  up
      forever, because of  the  appellant's  bad  behaviour.  That  is  what
      deportation does.


27. In this case, what is plead for the appellant is that  deportation  will
sever her relationship to her only son, and will deposit her  in  a  country
she knows nothing about. Had the appellant committed only one  offence,  and
had the penalty for that offence been a  custodial  sentence  of  less  than
four years, then the appellant would probably succeed.  In  this  case,  the
appellant cannot  succeed.  The  appellant  has  established  a  pattern  of
criminality. The appellant has not committed minor  offences.  Her  offences
have attracted custodial sentences, one of which was  for  five  years.  The
appellant offended again soon  after  release  from  prison.  That  offence,
serious in itself, is aggravated by the fact that it  was  committed  whilst
the appellant was on licence. When in a position  of  trust,  the  appellant
had to be recalled to prison to serve the unexpired portion of the  sentence
imposed in 2010.

28.  The appellant will be removed to Zimbabwe, where she knows no-one,  but
it is not realistically argued that the appellant cannot  start  again,  nor
that the appellant will be destitute. No  background  materials  are  placed
before us. Only passing reference has been made (by the  witnesses  in  this
case) to the appellant's  ability  to  cope  if  returned  to  Zimbabwe.  In
reality this case is plead entirely on the  effect  of  deportation  on  the
appellant's family life with her son.

29. The best interests of the appellant's son are a  primary  consideration.
In ZH (Tanzania)  (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 Lady Hale noted Article  3(1)  of  the
UNCRC: which states that

      in all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by  ...  courts
      of law, administrative authorities or  legislative  bodies,  the  best
      interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.


Article 3 is now embodied in section 55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other  things,
to immigration, asylum or nationality, the  Secretary  of  State  must  make
arrangements for ensuring that those functions

      are discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the
      welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom.

30. The arrangements for the appellant's son's  care  will  continue.  There
will be separation between the appellant and her son, but that is  a  factor
set out in paragraph 399 of the rules. We have to look  for  more,  and,  on
the facts as we find them to be, there is nothing in this case which  raises
the effect of the deportation order beyond the factors set out in  paragraph
399 of the immigration rules (and repeated  in  s.117C  of  the  2002  Act).
This appeal cannot, therefore, succeed.

Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law and has already been set aside

32. We substitute the following decision.

33. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date:
6th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

