
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03653/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 March 2016                          |On 19 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MADEEHA MINTY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Graham, Counsel instructed by UK Immigration
SVS


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Thanki) allowing an appeal by the  applicant
    against a decision made on 12 January 2015 refusing her  further  leave
    to remain on the basis of  her  relationship  with  her  partner.   The
    appeal was allowed both under the immigration rules and  under  article
    8.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of South Africa born on 17  May  1992.   She
    left South Africa when she was 2 years old with her parents and  sister
    and moved to Dubai where she continued to live until coming to  the  UK
    as a student on 10 September 2011 with valid leave to  remain  until  7
    November 2014.  She began her studies at Kingston University where  she
    met her current partner, a British national.  On 7  November  2014  she
    applied for further leave to remain on the basis of that  relationship.
    In the decision letter dated 12 January 2015  the  respondent  accepted
    that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship but  she  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was able to meet the requirements of  para
    EX.1 of Appendix FM as there was no evidence to suggest there were  any
    insurmountable   obstacles   preventing   her   from   continuing   her
    relationship in South Africa.  As the respondent was not satisfied that
    para EX.1 applied she did not meet the  requirements  of  R-LTRP1.1(d).
    The application was refused accordingly.

3.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that  the  respondent's  decision
    did not take into account the full circumstances of the appellant.  She
    had moved from South Africa to Dubai when she was 2 years old and  with
    or without her British partner she would face insurmountable  obstacles
    integrating into life there.  She was an atheist and her  parents  were
    practising Muslims. They would not accept  her  relationship  with  her
    British partner and she would not be able to return to Dubai.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant, her partner and her partner's mother.  The
    judge clearly accepted that there was a  genuine  relationship  between
    the appellant and her partner and indeed this was not in  dispute.   He
    commented that as to Appendix FM the respondent had  found  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles for  the  appellant  and  her  partner
    relocating to South Africa, the country of the appellant's nationality,
    but he said that this was clearly not  appropriate  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this appeal as the appellant was for all  intents  and
    purposes one who belonged to Dubai where she had lived almost  all  her
    life [52].  The judge went on to say:

         "53. Under Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE  the  sole  issue  is
             whether there are significant obstacles for the appellant  and
             her [partner] to live abroad.  I have no evidence before me as
             to any difficulties in South  Africa  except  the  appellant's
             statement explains that she has no contact with  South  Africa
             and the only family she is aware of  is  her  father's  family
             with who she has sparse contact.  I find that the appellant if
             returned to South Africa would do so as a  complete  stranger.
             She speaks English and Arabic and no other language.  She  has
             spent almost all her life in a modern City State and  is  used
             to  the  life  in  Dubai.   I  accept  that  there  would   be
             difficulties for her to relocate to South Africa."


5.   The judge went on to consider the position  in  Dubai  taking  note  in
    particular of the fact that the appellant said that she was an  atheist
    and her non-belief in Islam was a source of  major  conflict  with  her
    father.  The  judge  said  that  he  formed  the  impression  that  the
    appellant was a modern westernised young woman and  that  it  was  more
    likely than not that she had renounced her religion and that  this  had
    placed her in conflict with her father.  He accepted her evidence  that
    when her father visited in 2014 he was deeply upset about his  daughter
    cohabiting with a man without being married.   In  summary,  the  judge
    accepted that the appellant and her partner would  face  insurmountable
    obstacles if they were to be residents in Dubai.  He then  went  on  to
    consider  the  position   under   article   8   and,   when   assessing
    proportionality, said that it was clear to him that the  appellant  and
    her partner would have significant difficulties settling in Dubai where
    they would not have parental love, affection or support and  as  single
    people living together would not be tolerated.  Accordingly the  appeal
    was allowed on both immigration and article 8 grounds.

6.   In the grounds the respondent argued that the judge  erred  by  failing
    to consider whether the  appellant  could  return  to  her  country  of
    origin.  The appellant would be able to return to South Africa but  the
    judge had  failed  to  consider  this  matter  fully  although  he  had
    concluded that there "would be difficulties"  with  relocation.   There
    had been no sustainable finding  that  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to relocation in South Africa.

7.   In her submissions Ms Isherwood relied on  the  grounds,  arguing  that
    the appellant who had leave  to  enter  as  a  student  could  have  no
    legitimate expectation of remaining save in so far as  she  could  meet
    the requirements of the rules.  The First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in
    law by failing to give proper consideration to  whether  the  appellant
    and her partner could relocate to South Africa.

8.   Mr Graham submitted that if the judge had erred by failing to  consider
    South Africa that error would not be material to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  The judge had accepted that there would be difficulties there.
     He had gone on to consider the position under article  8  and  reached
    findings which were properly open to  him.   He  argued  that  for  the
    appellant to be returned to South Africa would in her circumstances  be
    more akin to exile (relying on a phrase  used  by  Sedley  LJ  in  B  v
    Secretary of State [2000] Imm AR 478 in the context of deportation of a
    foreign criminal).  He indicated that he would also  wish  to  rely  on
    further evidence about the situation in South Africa and in  particular
    a UNHCR Report on  attacks  on  foreigners  in  South  Africa  exposing
    refugee women to new dangers.




Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law

9.   The issue for me at this stage of the  hearing  is  whether  the  judge
    erred in law such that his decision should be set aside.  It  is  clear
    that when considering insurmountable obstacles within the provisions of
    EX.1 the judge took the view that these should be  considered  only  in
    respect of Dubai and that it was  not  appropriate  to  consider  South
    Africa.

10.  However there is no such restriction in para EX.1 which provides that:

         "(b) The applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             partner who is in  the  UK...  and  there  are  insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK."


     When considering whether there are insurmountable obstacles  continuing
    outside the UK, there is no requirement to choose one of  a  number  of
    potential locations as the most appropriate or to  exclude  a  possible
    location as inappropriate without properly  considering  whether  there
    would be insurmountable obstacles as defined in the rules.

11.  It follows that the judge was  wrong  not  to  consider  relocation  to
    South Africa not  least  as  this  was  relocation  considered  by  the
    respondent  in  the  decision  letter,  albeit   under   the   mistaken
    apprehension that the appellant had lived there until coming to the  UK
    as a student.  Further, there was evidence that the appellant would  in
    fact have difficulties returning to Dubai as she  depended  upon  being
    supported or sponsored by  her  father  but  there  would  be  no  such
    difficulties in returning to South Africa  where  the  appellant  is  a
    citizen.  This does not mean  that  there  may  not  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life there but this is an issue, which has not been
    adequately considered by the judge.  He confined  himself  in  [53]  to
    accepting that there would  be  difficulties  in  relocating  to  South
    Africa and commenting that he had no evidence as  to  any  difficulties
    there except the appellant's statement that she now had no contact with
    South Africa and the only family she was  aware  of  was  her  father's
    family with whom she had sparse contact.

12.  I find that the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to  consider  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles  to  returning  to  live  in  South
    Africa.  The issue was not explored at the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and it is clear that there is further evidence  that  the
    appellant wishes to rely on.  It is therefore not appropriate for me to
    attempt to re-make the decision on the basis of the evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

13.  I am satisfied that  the  proper  course  is  for  this  appeal  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for that issue to be  decided.   Mr
    Graham was content that the matter be remitted to Judge Thanki for  him
    to re-open and continue the hearing whereas Ms Isherwood submitted that
    in the light of the error of law there should be a different First-tier
    judge.  I am not  satisfied  that  the  judge's  error  by  failing  to
    consider the position in South Africa would put the respondent  at  any
    apparent, still less real, disadvantage in putting her case at the next
    hearing.  The appeal is therefore remitted  to  Judge  Thanki  to  make
    findings on the issue of whether there are insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life on return to South Africa.

14.  The judge also  allowed  the  appeal  on  article  8  grounds  but  the
    assessment of proportionality must  be  flawed  because  there  was  no
    consideration of the question of  whether  there  would  insurmountable
    obstacles on return to South Africa and  the  assessment  was  to  this
    extent freestanding and did not  take  proper  account  of  the  public
    interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration  control  through  the
    proper application of the rules when considering who should be  granted
    leave to remain in the UK.

Decision

15.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.  The appeal is remitted for re-hearing before  Judge  Thanki
    in the First-tier Tribunal for him to consider and make findings on the
    issue of whether there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life
    being continued in South Africa.







Signed                                  Date: 12 April 2016
                   H J E Latter
H J E Latter
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
