
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03884/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 29 April 2014                              |On 28 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                              MR JIANG DONG GUO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr E Fan a Solicitor from Fletcher Day LLP
For the Respondent: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. By a Decision dated 8 July 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer set aside
      the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal allowing the appellant's
      appeal against the respondent's decision of 21 January 2013 to remove
      the appellant to China following the refusal of his asylum and human
      rights claims. He adjourned the reconsideration of the appeal to a
      "for mention" hearing because the appellant's partner, the mother of
      their two children, had an outstanding application made to the
      respondent. At that stage neither representative was able to say what
      the application was for although it is now apparent that it was for an
      extension of discretionary leave granted to her after she arrived in
      this country as an unaccompanied minor. She claimed to fear
      persecution in China. At the date of Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer's
      Decision the respondent had not made a decision on this application.


   2. The appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Craig on 20 August 2013 at
      which stage the respondent had still not decided the application.
      There was a further adjournment.


   3. Today Mr Saunders tells me that yesterday (28 April 2014) the
      respondent made a decision to refuse the appellant's partner's
      application. The written decision should reach her within the next few
      days. Both representatives agreed that in the circumstances the best
      course of action would be to remit this appeal for re-determination by
      the First-Tier Tribunal after it has been linked with the appeal which
      I am told the appellant's partner will now bring against this
      decision.


   4. In the circumstances I remit this appeal to be reheard in the First-
      Tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House by a judge other than First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Whalan. The rehearing should not take place until this
      appeal can be linked and heard with the appeal to be brought by Ms Shu
      Nei Chen, unless no such appeal is made within three months of 29
      April 2014. If no such appeal has been made within that time then this
      appeal should be reheard on its own.





    Signed:........................................
    Date: 30 April 2014
         Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

