
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA037382015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination & Reasons       |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 13th April 2016                            |On 23rd May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         MRS ATTIA FATIMA USMAN RAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Ashika Fijiwala (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Roopnarine-Davies, promulgated on 26th August 2015,  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 3rd August 2015.  In the determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the Appellant "to the limited  extent  that
    the Respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  the
    application remains outstanding with the Respondent and  the  Appellant
    awaits a lawful decision."

Grounds of Application

 2. The  grounds  of  application  state  that,  to  the  extent  that  the
    Appellant's application was for a derivative residence card  under  EEA
    law, the judge erred in law in allowing the appeal to the  extent  that
    the Secretary of State had failed to  have  regard  to  Article  8  and
    Section 55 BCIA 2009, because these issues were not before  the  judge,
    in circumstances where no Section 120 notice had been served.

 3. On 18th January 2016, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me on 13th April 2016, there was no attendance by
    the Appellant, and no representation by anyone on her behalf.  Nor  was
    there any explanation given for  this  non-attendance  at  what  was  a
    matter listed before this Tribunal by way  of  oral  hearing.   On  the
    other  hand,  Ms  Ashika  Fijiwala,  appeared  as  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State.  Ms
    Fijiwala submitted that the judge was wrong to have allowed the  appeal
    on the limited basis that she did quite simply  because  the  Appellant
    had appealed the Respondent's refusal letter on 10th  January  2015  to
    issue a derivative residence card under Regulation 15A(4a), 15A(7), and
    18(a) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 5. The Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had  determined  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show  that  the  Appellant's  British  citizen
    children would be unable to remain in the UK or  the  EEA  if  she  was
    forced to leave.  There was no human rights claim before  the  Tribunal
    to be determined  and  no  Section  170  notice  issued.   Ms  Fijiwala
    directed my attention to the case  of  Amirteymour  [2015]  UKUT  00466
    where the Tribunal determined that, where no notice under  Section  120
    of the 2002 Act has been served and where no EEA decision to remove has
    been made, an Appellant cannot bring a human rights  challenge  to  the
    removal in an appeal under the EEA Regulations.

 6. That decision had subsequently been upheld in  TY  (Sri  Lanka)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1233, where the Court  of  Appeal  heard  argument  that,  "by
    reason of Schedules 1 and 2 to the EEA Regulations the Appellant had  a
    right to advance his asylum and human rights claims in the  context  of
    his appeal against the EEA decision"  but  Lord  Justice  Jackson  held
    that,

         "I  do  not  think  that  that  is  the  effect  of  the  statutory
         provisions.  The Appellant would only have  such  a  right  if  the
         Secretary of State had served a One-Stop Notice pursuant to Section
         120 of the 2002 Act and paragraph 4(8) of Schedule  2  to  the  EEA
         Regulations" (see paragraph 26).

 7. Ms Fijiwala further submitted  that  no  removal  directions  had  been
    issued against the Appellant.



Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making on an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set  aside  the  decision  and  re-make  the
    decision (see Section  12(2)  of  TCEA  [2007]).   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  Given what has been established in  Amirteymour  [2015]  UKUT
    00466 and in TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1233, the appeal could  not
    have been  allowed  on  the  basis  of  a  human  rights  challenge  in
    circumstances where no Section 120 of the  2002  Act  notice  had  been
    given and the appeal could not have been allowed under  Section  55  of
    the BCIA either.  I note that there are no removal directions  in  this
    case.

Re-Making the Decision

 9. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before her, and  the  submissions  I  have
    heard today.  I dismiss this appeal for the reasons  already  given  by
    the judge in  the  determination.   First,  the  judge  held  that  the
    Appellant's husband, being a British  citizen  husband,  "shares  equal
    responsibility for the children," and he would be in a position to care
    in practice for the children.  The  judge  held  that,  "requiring  the
    Appellant to leave the UK would not lead to a  denial  of  the  genuine
    enjoyment of the children's rights as a British citizen" (see paragraph
    6).   Second,  the  main  issue  before  the  Tribunal  being  the  EEA
    Regulations, the judge held that, "the  appeal  fails  under  the  2006
    Regulations" (see paragraph  10).   It  is,  of  course,  open  to  the
    Appellant to make a fresh application.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.   I  re-make  the  decision  as  follows.   This  appeal  is
dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st May 2016
