

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal
Numbers: IA/03938/2015

                                                      IA/03939/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at  Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2018                         | On 19 February 2018           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             rana waqas shamshad
                            mohammed sohail wajid
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan, born on 19 February 1988  and
      13 March 1982 respectively. They have been given permission to  appeal
      against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Maciel  dismissing
      their appeals  against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  their
      applications for leave to remain as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrants.

   2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on  15  May  2010  with
      leave to  enter  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  and  was
      subsequently granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study)  Migrant
      until 8 August 2014. On 8 August 2014 he applied for leave  to  remain
      as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant. The second appellant  entered  the
      United Kingdom on 9 June  2010  with  leave  to  enter  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant and was subsequently granted leave to remain
      as a Tier 1 (Post Study) Migrant until 22 August 2014.  On  21  August
      2014 he applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
      Migrant.
   3. The appellants applied as business partners. The first  appellant  was
      interviewed about his application on 30 September 2014 and the  second
      appellant on 20 October 2014. Both applications  were  refused  on  13
      January 2015 for non-point scoring reasons on  the  grounds  that  the
      respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  were  genuinely
      intending and able to establish a business  in  the  UK  and  was  not
      satisfied that  the  appellants  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
      245DD(h) with reference  to  paragraph  245DD(i)  of  the  immigration
      rules. The respondent was  not  satisfied  as  to  the  viability  and
      credibility of the business plan and market research, the  appellants'
      previous educational  and  business  experience  and  the  appellants'
      immigration history and previous activity in the UK.  With  regard  to
      the  viability  and  credibility  of  the  business  plan  and  market
      research, the respondent considered that the appellants'  evidence  at
      interview  about  the  setting  up  of  the  company's   website   was
      inconsistent with the business plan, that  the  evidence  relating  to
      employer's liability insurance was not  credible,  that  the  evidence
      about the one business contract with  Naveed  Anjum  Limited  was  not
      credible and that  there  was  no  credible  evidence  of  any  market
      research having  been  undertaken.  With  regard  to  the  appellants'
      previous  educational  and   business   experience,   the   respondent
      considered that the  appellants  had  not  provided  evidence  of  the
      knowledge and  experience  required  to  run  a  consultancy  services
      business. With regard  to  the  appellants'  immigration  history  and
      previous activity in the UK, the respondent considered that  they  had
      failed to show that they had effectively used their  Post  Study  Work
      leave to develop a consultancy service business.


   4. The  appellants'  appeals  were  initially  heard  in  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on 8 January 2016 and were  dismissed.  However  the  judge's
      decision was subsequently set aside by the Upper Tribunal on 24 August
      2016. The judge was found to have materially erred in  law  by  making
      adverse findings based on an absence of up-to-date evidence, when such
      evidence would have been inadmissible pursuant to  section  85A(4)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


   5. The appeals were then heard de novo before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Maciel on 8 March 2017 and dismissed in a decision promulgated  on  29
      March 2017. Judge Maciel did not agree with the respondent's  concerns
      about the business plan and the evidence as to  the  company  website.
      However she was not satisfied as  to  the  evidence  relating  to  the
      employers liability insurance and the contract with the client  Naveed
      Anjum Ltd and considered that the contract was  contrived.  The  judge
      did not accept that the appellants' business was  genuine  and  viable
      and found that the first appellant had failed to substantiate his work
      experience. The judge found that  the  appellants  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of the immigration rules. She found,  further,  that  the
      respondent's decision did not interfere with the  appellants'  private
      lives and did not breach their Article 8 human rights.


   6. Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  by  the
      appellants and was initially refused in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  A
      renewed application to the Upper Tribunal was made on the grounds that
      the judge had erred in law by making adverse findings on the basis  of
      evidence that was excluded under section  85A  of  the  2002  Act,  in
      particular oral evidence at the hearing, contrary to the  findings  in
      Ahmed and Another (PBS:  admissible  evidence)  [2014]  UKUT  365  and
      Olatunde v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ
      670, and that the judge had erred by failing to take into account  and
      carrying out  any  assessment  of  the  matters  listed  in  paragraph
      245DD(i) of the  immigration  rules.  Permission  was  granted  on  19
      December 2017 on the first ground, although the second ground was  not
      specifically excluded.

Appeal Hearing

   7. At the hearing both parties made submissions. Mr Malik relied upon the
      grounds and submitted that the  judge  had  erred  by  making  adverse
      findings on the oral evidence  received  at  the  hearing,  which  was
      inadmissible under section 85A of the 2002 Act, and that the judge had
      failed to take account of relevant matters in paragraph 245DD(i)  such
      as the viability and credibility of the source of the  money  and  the
      appellants' immigration history and previous activity in the UK.

   8. Mr Tarlow relied on the respondent's Rule 24  response  and  submitted
      that any errors made by the judge in taking account of  oral  evidence
      were immaterial given the various reasons for not finding the business
      to be genuine.


   9. Mr Malik responded that such errors were material.

Legal Framework

  10. Paragraph 245DD provides as follows:

   h) the Secretary of State must be satisfied that:

      (i)the applicant genuinely:

        1. intends and is able to establish, take over or become a director
           of one or more businesses in the UK within the next six  months,
           or

        2. has established, taken over or become a director of one or  more
           businesses in the UK and continues to operate that  business  or
           businesses; and


     (ii) the applicant genuinely intends to invest the money  referred  to
     in Table 4 of Appendix    A in the business or businesses referred  to
     in (i);


     (iii)the money referred to in Table  4  of  Appendix  A  is  genuinely
     available to the applicant, and will remain  available  to  him  until
     such time as  it  is  spent  for  the  purposes  of  his  business  or
     businesses.

   i) In making the assessment in (h), the Secretary of  State  will  assess
      the balance of probabilities. The Secretary of  State  may  take  into
      account the following factors:

      (i) the evidence the applicant has submitted;


      (ii) the viability and credibility of the source of the money referred
      to in Table 4 of Appendix A;

      (iii) the viability and credibility of the applicant's business  plans
      and market research into their chosen business sector;

       iv) the applicant's previous educational and business experience (or
           lack thereof);

        v) the applicant's immigration history and previous activity in the
           UK;

      (vi) where the applicant has already registered in the UK as self-
      employed or as the director of a business, and the nature of the
      business requires mandatory accreditation, registration and/or
      insurance, whether that accreditation, registration and/or insurance
      has been obtained; and

      vii) any other relevant information.

Consideration and findings

  11. I do not agree with Mr Malik's  submission  that  the  case  of  Ahmed
      effectively  precludes  any  oral  evidence  in  points-based   system
      appeals. The ratio of the decision in Ahmed was that  the  prohibition
      on new evidence in section 85A(4) applies  to  the  non-points-scoring
      part of a decision as well as the points-scoring  part  in  a  points-
      based system application. It  was  in  that  context  that  the  Upper
      Tribunal in that case said at [5]:

   "The purpose of that provision is quite clear. It is that where a  Points
   Based application is made and refused, the assessment by the Judge is  to
   be of the material that was before the decision-maker rather than  a  new
   consideration of new material.  In  other  words  the  appeal  if  it  is
   successful is on the basis that  the  decision-maker  with  the  material
   before him should have made a different decision, not on the basis that a
   different way  of  presenting  the  application  would  have  produced  a
   different decision."

  12.  I do not conclude that that inevitably excludes any oral evidence  in
      such appeals. Indeed it is relevant to note that it was the appellants
      themselves who chose to give oral evidence before the Tribunal and the
      appellants cannot now complain, as they are in effect seeking  to  do,
      that the judge erred in law by permitting them to do so.

  13. Judge Maciel was plainly fully aware of the  restrictions  imposed  by
      section 85A(4)  and  made  it  clear  throughout  the  decision  which
      evidence she was able to take into account pursuant to that provision,
      making specific comments in that regard at  [9],  [14]  and  [21]  and
      rejecting post-application evidence at [33].  She  addressed  in  turn
      each of  the  respondent's  concerns.  At  [26]  she  found  that  the
      appellants had failed to show that the respondent was  wrong  to  have
      had the  credibility  concerns  that  she  did  about  the  employer's
      liability insurance and she provided reasons for concluding  that  the
      evidence  provided  to  the   respondent   by   the   appellants   was
      unsatisfactory and lacking in credibility. At [27] to  [32]  she  gave
      reasons for finding that the evidence before the respondent in  regard
      to the business contract with Naveed Anjum Limited  and  the  services
      claimed to be provided to that company by the appellants including the
      hiring of staff, was not credible and that the contract was contrived.
      At [34] the judge found that the evidence before  the  respondent  did
      not demonstrate  that  the  first  appellant  had  the  required  work
      experience for running the business.

  14. It seems to me that, in making the adverse findings that she did,  the
      judge was simply confirming, and  providing  reasons  for  concluding,
      that the  appellants  had  not  been  able  to  demonstrate  that  the
      respondent decision-maker should have made a different decision on the
      material before her. I find no merit in the suggestion that the  judge
      reached her adverse findings and  conclusions  on  the  basis  of  the
      appellants' oral evidence,  but  in  the  event  that  there  was  any
      reliance on oral evidence which raised matters not considered  by  the
      respondent I fail to see how that was material in light  of  the  many
      other adverse findings fully  and  properly  made  on  the  restricted
      evidence. The judge provided cogent reasons for  concluding  that  the
      evidence submitted by the appellants with their  application  did  not
      show that their business was a genuine and  viable  one.  That  was  a
      conclusion which was fully and properly open to  her  and  I  find  no
      merit in the first ground of appeal.


  15. As for the second ground, the judge plainly had  full  regard  to  the
      relevant matters listed in paragraph 245DD(i) of the immigration rules
      and in any event it is clear from the wording of that  provision  that
      there was no requirement for all the factors therein to be  considered
      and specifically addressed. The grounds assert that the judge accepted
      the appellants' business plan but failed to form  a  view  as  to  its
      viability and credibility. However the judge's findings  at  [24]  and
      [25] in relation to the business plan were simply that the  respondent
      had  wrongly  found  the  appellants'  evidence  as  inconsistent   or
      discrepant, but in no way went as far as accepting the  business  plan
      as viable and credible. It is clear from the judge's findings at  [26]
      to [33] that she did not find the business to be viable  and  credible
      in any respect. She did not consider that the business had any genuine
      contracts, she did not accept the appellants as credible witnesses and
      she did not consider that there was a genuine  business  at  all.  She
      found that the one and only business contract had been  contrived  and
      that the business  was  not  providing  services  to  any  party.  The
      viability of the source of the appellants' money and  the  appellants'
      immigration history were plainly immaterial matters in light  of  such
      significant adverse findings.

  16. For all of these reasons I  find  no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
      decision. The judge was fully entitled to dismiss the  appeal  on  the
      basis that she did and for the reasons fully and properly  given.  Her
      consideration of the evidence was  entirely  in  accordance  with  the
      provisions of the relevant immigration rules. Accordingly I uphold the
      judge's decision.

DECISION

  17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed   [pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 February
2018
