
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03677/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 20th November 2015                    |             On 7th December 2015   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                AMARJIT KAUR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Rashid instructed by Bhogal & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Mrs Kaur had been admitted to the United Kingdom on 16th July  2012  as
    the spouse of her Sponsor husband with a visa valid from 19th June 2012
    until 19th  September  2014.   On  17th  September  2014  she  made  an
    application for further leave to remain.  Her application  was  refused
    by the Secretary of State  on  8th  January  2015,  with  reference  to
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  paragraph  276ADE  of  those
    Rules.

 2. Mrs Kaur appealed and her appeal was heard before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ghani on 28th April 2015.  In a brief decision promulgated on 3rd
    June 2015 the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed her appeal on the basis
    that it was not in accordance  with  the  law  and  would  have  to  be
    reconsidered by the Secretary of State. The reasons for  that  decision
    were that Mrs Kaur had entered on the basis of the earlier  Immigration
    Rules and her application should have been considered under those Rules
    bearing mind relevant transitional provisions.

 3. The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal  against  that
    decision, contending in the application that  the  decision  maker  had
    been entitled to take account of the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules having regard  to  the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Singh v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted on that basis.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Mills said  that  having  looked  into  the
    matter and in particular having viewed  the  notes  of  the  Presenting
    Officer who had been at the original hearing he had noted that  it  had
    been agreed at that hearing that as entry clearance had been granted in
    June of 2012 transitional provisions applied and the application should
    have been considered under paragraph 287  of  the  Rules.   Regrettably
    that concession had not been recited in the  judge's  decision  but  he
    accepted that the concession had been correctly made.  He  pointed  out
    that he could understand why the original decision maker on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of  State  had  decided  the  matter  with  reference  to
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE as the application  appeared  to  have
    been made upon the wrong form but nonetheless the concession  had  been
    made and the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Singh was not in  those
    circumstances relevant.  He  did  not  therefore  seek  to  pursue  the
    appeal.

 5. In those circumstances I did not need to call upon Mr Rashid.  I accept
    that both representatives at the original hearing had accepted that the
    transitional provisions applied and that the original decision made  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law  as
    the Rules in their revised form had wrongly been applied.   The  appeal
    of the Secretary of State accordingly fails.

Decision

There was no material error of law in the making  of  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal and that decision, which was  that  the  appeal  of  Mrs
Kaur be allowed as the original decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the
law, therefore stands.

There was no application for an anonymity order and none is made.


Signed                              Date 30 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

