
IAC-AH-LEM-VP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03633/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th November 2014                           |On 23rd December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                EMILY HOBWANA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Timpson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 11th August  1986.   The
    Appellant had applied for a derivative residence card  as  the  primary
    carer of a British citizen who is resident in the United Kingdom.   The
    Appellant's application was considered in  accordance  with  Regulation
    15A and 18A of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.   By  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 20th December 2013 the Secretary of State held  that  the
    Appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  she  met  the   relevant
    conditions of the Regulations.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal De Haney sitting at Manchester on 15th May  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 2nd June 2014 the Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed under the EEA Regulations.

 3. On 10th June 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On  4th  August  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fisher granted permission to  appeal.   Judge  Fisher  noted  that  the
    grounds seeking permission asserted that the judge had erred in law  by
    concluding that the Appellant was the primary carer of the child on the
    basis that her husband worked full-time and was sometimes  required  to
    work at short notice or overnight.  Judge Fisher found that it was  for
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  determine  as  a  question  of  fact
    whether the EU citizen would be compelled to leave the EU to follow the
    Appellant.  However nothing less than compulsion would suffice  and  EU
    law was not engaged where the quality or standard of  life  of  the  EU
    citizen would simply be diminished.  Judge Fisher concluded that it was
    arguable in his relatively short paragraph 14 that the judge had failed
    to fully engage with the requirements and that there was  therefore  an
    arguable error of law in the judge's reasoning  which  was  capable  of
    affecting the decision made.

 4. On 20th August 2014 the Appellant's instructed  solicitors  provided  a
    response pursuant to Rule 24.  That response contended that the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had engaged with  the  requirements  and  that  the
    Appellant was the primary carer of the child and that the  child  would
    be compelled to leave the EU if her mother was not granted a  residence
    card.  Further it was contended  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to
    consider Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights and  that
    it was not a defence to state that because the Appellant did  not  make
    an application under the Immigration  Rules  that  the  Respondent  was
    precluded from considering Article 8 ECHR.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  This is an appeal
    by the Secretary of State.  For the purpose of  continuity  within  the
    proceedings the Secretary of State is referred to  hereinafter  as  the
    Respondent and Mrs Hobwana as the Appellant.  The Appellant appears  by
    her instructed Counsel Mr Timpson.  Mr Timpson is  familiar  with  this
    matter having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mrs Petterson.

Submissions and Discussions

 6. Mr Timpson submits that the issue centres on the very discrete point as
    to whether or not the Appellant is or is not the primary carer  of  her
    British citizen daughter born on 28th January 2012.  The  Secretary  of
    State's submission is that the Appellant cannot be described  as  being
    the primary carer simply because her husband, the child's father, works
    full-time and that that interpretation fails to appreciate the case law
    upon which  the  Secretary  of  State  drew  up  the  derivative  right
    provisions of the EEA Regulations.  Mr Timpson submits it is  difficult
    to know how that argument can be sustained.

 7. Mrs Petterson relies on the Grounds of  Appeal  and  submits  that  the
    Appellant's husband can be the primary carer here.  Mr Timpson  retorts
    by saying that in fact that is  not  the  law  and  refers  me  to  the
    principles to be found in the authorities  of  Ahmad  (Amos;  Zambrano;
    Regulation 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC) and  Sanneh
    v the Secretary of State for Works and Pensions and  the  Commissioners
    for Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs  [2013]  EWHC  793  (Admin).   Mr
    Timpson specifically refers me to the proposition that can  be  derived
    from those authorities that even where a non-EU ascendant  relative  is
    compelled to leave an EU territory the Article 20 rights of an EU child
    will not be infringed if there is another ascendant  relative  who  has
    the right of residence in the EU and who can and will in practice  care
    for the child.

 8. He submits that such a premise which  is  recited  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal by the Secretary of State actually favours the Appellant.

 9. Mr Timpson points out that the findings of fact at first instance  have
    not been challenged and that the Immigration Judge found the  Appellant
    to be the primary carer.  He submits that  the  father's  evidence  was
    heard before the judge and that the judge has made  findings  that  the
    father is not in a position to care for the  child.   He  submits  that
    this position is not challenged by the Secretary of State and therefore
    the Secretary of State cannot possibly succeed on this appeal.  He asks
    me to dismiss the appeal.  Mrs Petterson indicates  that  she  does  no
    more than rely on the Grounds of Appeal.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. I acknowledge that the findings of  fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge are relatively short but  that  in  itself  does  not  constitute
    error.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge has set out in some  considerable
    detail the relevant law and paragraphs of the  EEA  Regulations  and  I
    take them on board and it is not necessary  nor  appropriate  to  fully
    recite them here.  Further the First-tier Tribunal Judge has set out in
    very  considerable  detail  the  documentary  evidence  that   he   has
    considered and the evidence that he has considered.  He heard both from
    the Appellant and from her husband and he found both  witnesses  to  be
    credible.  The findings of fact that he made are not challenged by  the
    Secretary of State.

13. At  paragraph  14  of  his  determination  the  judge  found  that  the
    overwhelming evidence before him showed that Mr  Cherera  (the  child's
    father) worked over 37 hours a week and that  his  job  meant  that  he
    could be called in at short notice and to work  overnight.   The  judge
    concluded that it was abundantly clear (his words) that  the  Appellant
    was the primary carer of their daughter who was a British  citizen.   I
    find that that is a conclusion applying the law and the facts  to  this
    case that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled to reach
    and to draw the conclusion from the factual matrix of this case that if
    the Appellant was be  required  to  leave  the  UK  that  it  would  be
    practically impossible for the  child's  father  to  assume  duties  as
    carer.  I am only determining whether or not there is a material  error
    of law.  On the facts as presented however I would agree with  him  and
    certainly on the evidence before him and the way he has dealt  with  it
    there is nothing to show that he has not followed a proper analysis  of
    the law and made findings that he is perfectly entitled  to.   In  such
    circumstances the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  discloses  no
    material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error of  law.
 The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 19th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
