

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03072/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 8th July 2013                            |On : 9th July 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD IMRAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Daniel Hayes of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr Royln Jean-Paul Seeboruth of Abbotts Close
Chambers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   On 13th February 2012 Muhammad  Imran's  application  for  a  residence
    card as the 'extended family member' of an EEA  national  was  refused.
    He was not  thought  to  be  in  a  'durable  relationship'  with  Rasa
    Naraskeviciene, a Lithuanian citizen.   An  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal came before  Judge  Turkington  on  11th  June  2012  and  was
    allowed, but this outcome was challenged on the grounds that the couple
    had not been cohabiting for long enough to be in anything more than  "a
    general boyfriend/ girlfriend relationship", and  that  the  judge  had
    made certain errors in the facts that he found, based upon the evidence
    given by the couple.  Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by
    Judge Davidge, but on renewal directly to the Upper Tribunal permission
    was granted by Judge Goldstein.  Notice of a hearing at Field House  on
    14th December was posted to Mr Imran's address, but Mr  Imran  did  not
    attend the hearing, and Judge McGeachy proceeded to hear the appeal  in
    his absence.  The Secretary of  State's  appeal  was  allowed,  but  it
    transpired that Mr Imran had not received notice of the hearing, and so
    on 6th February 2013 Judge McGeachy set  his  determination  aside  and
    gave directions that the appeal in the Upper Tribunal be heard afresh.

2.   When the matter came before me today, my preliminary view, having  seen
    a wealth of documentary evidence on the file, was that this couple were
    indeed in a durable relationship.  Taking  a  very  fair  and  sensible
    approach, Mr Hayes indicated that there was no requirement,  either  in
    the Citizens Directive or in the EEA Regulations, for a couple to  live
    together for two years in order to establish  a  durable  relationship.
    That  being  so,  the  challenge  could  only  fall  back  on   certain
    discrepancies in the couple's evidence as to their wedding plans.   But
    that was hardly enough to undermine their claim  to  be  in  a  durable
    unmarried relationship.  I canvassed with Mr  Seeboruth  whether  there
    were flaws  in  Judge  Turkington's  fact-finding  which  required  his
    determination to be set aside, but clearly that is not  the  case.   On
    the evidence before him, he was entitled to reach the  conclusion  that
    he did, for the reasons  he  gave.   It  follows  that  the  First-tier
    determination will stand.



     DECISION

     The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               8th July 2013



