
[pic]
IAC-AH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03389/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KNOWLES QC


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            MRS ANGELA AMINA ODEI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MR DUFFY
For the Respondent:    MISS VICTOR-MAZELI


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State. The  Respondent
    is a Ghanaian national who appealed first in time against  the  refusal
    of the Appellant to issue her with a residence card as a family  member
    of an EEA national under Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ["the 2006 Regulations"].

 2. The Respondent's appeal was first heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Elliman on  22  July  2014.  The  judge  allowed  the  appeal,  without
    reference to binding case law on the validity of proxy marriages in the
    EEA Sponsor's country of nationality. In so doing she made  a  material
    error of law.  On 30 October 2014 Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Davidge
    set aside her decision on appeal by the Secretary of State. The  matter
    was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing as Tribunal Judge
    Elliman had also failed to  make  sufficient  findings  of  fact  about
    whether the Respondent was in  a  durable  relationship  with  her  EEA
    Sponsor.

 3.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  heard  oral  evidence  from   the
    Respondent and her Sponsor at a hearing on  16  April  2015.   He  made
    findings of fact that the couple had been  in  a  durable  relationship
    since 2008 as they had claimed. He  also  found  that  they  had  lived
    together at the same address for about seven years and  that  they  had
    two children together whom they cared for jointly. He found  absolutely
    no evidence to doubt the sincerity and genuineness  of  the  Respondent
    and her Sponsor and held that they were witnesses of truth.

 4. He determined that the Respondent  was  entitled  to  the  issue  of  a
    residence card under section 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations. He  allowed
    the appeal, holding that the Respondent was an extended  family  member
    under Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal the decision of
    Tribunal Judge Taylor on the basis that he had materially erred in  law
    by allowing the appeal outright. It was submitted that the Secretary of
    State had not exercised her discretion in this case  pursuant  to  rule
    17(4) and, having found  that  the  Respondent  was  an  extended/other
    family member pursuant to regulation 8(5), Tribunal Judge Taylor should
    have remitted the case to the Secretary of State  instead  of  allowing
    the appeal outright.

 6. On 8 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker granted  permission  to
    appeal on the ground argued for  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  in
    reliance on the case of Ihemedu (OFMs - Meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT
    00340 (IAC).

 7. We heard brief submissions from each  of  the  parties.  The  Appellant
    confirmed that the Secretary of State did not seek to appeal either the
    findings of fact made  by  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  about  the  durable
    relationship between the Respondent and her Sponsor or  his  conclusion
    that she was an extended family member pursuant to regulation  8(5)  of
    the 2006 Regulations. The Respondent questioned  the  exercise  of  the
    Secretary of State's discretion and  suggested  that  the  findings  of
    Tribunal Judge Taylor might somehow not be taken  into  account  and/or
    that the Respondent would be disadvantaged if  we  were  to  allow  the
    appeal.

 8. In accordance with the case of Ihemedu, regulation 17(4)  of  the  2006
    Regulations makes the issue of a residence card to an  extended  family
    member a matter of discretion for the Secretary of State  -  she  "may"
    issue a residence card if the conditions in regulation 17(4)  are  met.
    She is also required by regulation 17(5) to  provide  reasons  for  any
    refusal unless this is contrary to the interests of national  security.
    To borrow from the headnote of Ihemedu, where the  Secretary  of  State
    has not exercised that discretion, the most Tribunal Judge  Taylor  was
    entitled to do was to allow the appeal as being not in accordance  with
    the law and to leave the matter of whether to exercise this  discretion
    in the Respondent's favour to the Secretary of State.

 9. We are satisfied that the Secretary of  State  had  not  exercised  her
    discretion pursuant to regulation 17(4) in this case as her decision to
    refuse a residence card to the  Respondent  had  been  based  on  facts
    entirely different to those found by the tribunal on 16 April 2015.  In
    accordance with Ihemedu, we are satisfied that Tribunal Judge erred  in
    law by allowing this appeal in its entirety. His decision is set  aside
    to be remade.

10. We allow the Appellant's appeal as being not in accordance with the law
    though we leave both the tribunal's findings  as  to  the  relationship
    between the Respondent and her partner  and  its  conclusion  that  the
    Respondent was an extended/other family member pursuant  to  regulation
    8(5) intact. The matter is remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    consideration under regulation 17(4).

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed as being not in accordance with the law.

This matter is remitted to the Secretary of State  for  consideration  under
regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 21 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway
Upper Tribunal Judge Knowles QC

