
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/03338/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                    |
|On 4 October 2017                   |On 07 November 2017            |
|                                    |                               |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Robinson, Counsel
      (instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 4 August 2017  against  the  decision
           and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington  who  had
           allowed the Appellant's protection and human rights appeal.  The
           decision and reasons was promulgated on 25 January 2017.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on [ ]  1969,  of
           Tamil ethnicity, who had claimed asylum on his  arrival  in  the
           United Kingdom on 3 May 2009.  His asylum  claim  (that  he  was
           suspected  of  LTTE  membership  and  had  been  tortured   when
           detained) was refused  and  dismissed  on  appeal,  following  a
           reconsideration order.  The Appellant failed to leave the United
           Kingdom and made a fresh claim, which  was  refused  10  January
           2014. The Appellant's appeal was allowed but  material  error(s)
           of law were found by the Upper Tribunal and thus the appeal came
           before Judge Heatherington.


      3.    Judge Heatherington accepted the Appellant as a credible witness
           and felt able to depart from the earlier dismissal determination
           on that basis, having taken into account  the  medical  evidence
           now provided.  The Appellant would be unable to obtain  adequate
           mental  health  care  in  Sri   Lanka   and   there   was   some
           stigmatisation as explained in GJ and  Others  (post-civil  war:
           returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  The judge thus
           allowed the appeal.


      4.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
           arguable  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  risk
           categories set out  in  GJ  (above)  and  had  failed  to  apply
           paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules properly and to  apply
           J [2005] EWCA (Civ) 629 at all.


      5.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice was filed by the  Respondent,  dated  7  September  2017,
           opposing the onwards appeal.




      Submissions


      6.    Mr Tarlow for the Appellant submitted that the determination was
           inadequately reasoned, as the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal
           indicated.  GJ had not been  addressed.   The  findings  reached
           were not  clearly  stated  and  it  was  not  possible  for  the
           Secretary of State to understand why the appeal had  been  lost.
           There was no alternative to the appeal's being  reheard  in  the
           First-tier Tribunal before another judge.


      7.    Ms Robinson for the Respondent submitted that  the  error(s)  of
           law were not material.  It was true  that  the  judge  had  only
           mentioned GJ in the context of the Respondent's  mental  health,
           but elsewhere a GJ risk had been identified: see, e.g.,  [12.6].
           The judge must have had GJ in mind when considering the  appeal.
           He  had  departed  from  the  First-tier   Tribunal's   previous
           findings.  The  judge  had  dealt  sufficiently  with  paragraph
           276ADE, which had turned on the findings about the  Respondent's
           mental health.  The onwards appeal should be dismissed.




      Discussion - error of law


      8.    The tribunal must agree with Mr Tarlow's submissions.  No  doubt
           the judge had considered the appeal with care, and had  directed
           himself correctly as to Devaseelan* [2002] UKIAT 00702, but  his
           actual findings are not clearly recorded, which is of particular
           concern  when  the  Respondent's  claims  had  been   considered
           inconsistent and there were previous judicial findings  to  such
           effect.  Indeed, it was rightly  accepted  on  the  Respondent's
           behalf that there were errors of law, albeit not material.


      9.    The tribunal finds that the errors of  law  complained  of  were
           material. Attempting to make sense  of  [12.1]  onwards  of  the
           decision and reasons is not straightforward.  The  losing  party
           is entitled to plain and logical reasons, the more so where  the
           winning party had  previously  been  disbelieved,  and  was  now
           reliant on expert evidence dealing with  largely  stale  matters
           when seeking to combat past findings. It is  not  clear  exactly
           what general risk the Respondent  was  found  to  be  facing  on
           return many years after the end of the civil war on 18 May 2009.
            There was, for example, no finding about  the  significance  of
           the Respondent's claimed sur place activities.


      10.   J (above) was not considered in the mental health  context,  and
           it certainly ought to  have  been.   The  judge  seems  to  have
           thought that it  was  enough  for  the  Respondent  to  threaten
           suicide if he feared removal.


      11.   The tribunal considers that  the  Respondent's  allegedly  fresh
           claims  were  insufficiently  analysed  and  solid  reasons  for
           accepting them largely at face value were not supplied. It  must
           also be said that the judge's treatment of the  current  country
           background materials for  Sri  Lanka  was  somewhat  scant.   No
           findings can safely be preserved.


      12.   The onwards appeal is accordingly allowed.  The appeal  must  be
           reheard in the First-tier Tribunal before  a  judge  other  than
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Heatherington.


      DECISION


      The onwards appeal is allowed


      The decision and reasons is set aside because of material error of law




      The appeal will be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House,
      not before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Heatherington,  on  the  first
      available date



      Signed                 Dated 6 November 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
