
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/03698/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Determination Promulgated         |
|Oral determination given following       |  On 22 April 2016                  |
|hearing                                  |                                    |
|On 9 February 2016                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             RICHARD CHIDI EZEH

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Youssefian, Counsel, instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff promulgated on 26 June  2015  following  a
    hearing at Richmond Magistrates' Court on 15 June 2015.   For  ease  of
    reference throughout this determination I shall refer to  Mr  Ezeh  who
    was the original appellant as "the claimant" and to  the  Secretary  of
    State who was the original respondent as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The background to this appeal can be summarised briefly.  The  claimant
    is a national of Nigeria who was born on 26 September 1978.  He entered
    into a marriage with a lady,  Ms  Wiels,  who  is  a  national  of  the
    Netherlands born on 9 June 1986.  Following this marriage the  claimant
    applied for a residence card under the EEA  Regulations  but  following
    investigation by the Secretary of State the application was refused  on
    the ground that the marriage was a sham  marriage.   The  Secretary  of
    State also at that time issued removal  directions  in  respect  of  Ms
    Wiels on the basis that by entering into a sham marriage she had abused
    her rights of free movement and was accordingly no longer  entitled  to
    remain in this country.  One of the reasons advanced by  the  Secretary
    of State for making these decisions was that in interview Ms Wiels  had
    confessed that the marriage was one of convenience.   This  version  of
    the interview was very strongly contested by the claimant and  also  by
    Ms Wiels and Ms Wiels in particular denied very  strongly  having  made
    any such "confession".  As already noted  they  appealed  against  this
    decision and their appeal was listed for hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 15 June 2015.

 3. At that hearing the Presenting Officer who had originally been  due  to
    attend was apparently taken ill but the Secretary  of  State  or  those
    representing her took a decision not to apply for  an  adjournment  and
    were content for the hearing to proceed in the absence of a  Presenting
    Officer and I note from Judge Seelhoff's decision at paragraph 11  that
    the Presenting Officers Unit was specifically contacted by the Tribunal
    first to see whether or not they still wished the appeal to proceed and
    in Judge Seelhoff's words "they indicated they were  happy  for  us  to
    proceed with the case".  Judge Seelhoff, having reviewed the file,  was
    still concerned that because the Secretary of State was making  such  a
    serious allegation it was important that he had some  evidence  of  the
    alleged confession which  Ms  Wiels  was  said  to  have  made  and  he
    contacted the Presenting Officers Unit again and was sent a  file  note
    which he set out in his determination.  The file note just contained  a
    summary of what Ms Wiels was said to have confessed but did not set out
    a  full  record  of  the  interview  which  apparently  was  conducted.
    Obviously no live witness was called on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State and so neither the appellant nor Ms Wiels was in  a  position  to
    cross-examine anyone or test such evidence as had been produced.

 4. The appellant and Ms  Wiels  then  gave  evidence  and  set  out  their
    position which was that the marriage was a genuine marriage and  not  a
    sham marriage and that Ms Wiels had never made the confession  she  was
    said to have made.  In light of that evidence, at paragraph  20,  Judge
    Seelhoff found on the balance of probabilities "that the respondent has
    failed to produce adequate evidence  to  satisfy  me  that  [Ms  Wiels]
    confessed to  being  in  a  marriage  of  convenience".   He  noted  in
    particular that "the interview note I was ultimately provided [with] is
    not a contemporaneous or verbatim record of  a  conversation  with  [Ms
    Wiels]" and that "it is not clear from the note in what environment the
    second interview took place".  The judge also observed that it was  not
    clear whether Ms Wiels  had  been  cautioned  or  whether  anyone  else
    witnessed the exchange.  Further, it did not appear that she was  asked
    to sign a note of the alleged  exchange  or  even  that  she  was  ever
    provided with a  copy  of  it.   In  these  circumstances  the  judge's
    conclusion that the Secretary of State had not proved on a  balance  of
    probabilities that the  marriage  was  a  marriage  of  convenience  is
    unsurprising.

 5. The judge went on to allow the appeals both of the applicant and of  Ms
    Wiels.  In respect of Ms Wiels he allowed her  appeal  challenging  the
    removal directions which had been made.  In respect  of  the  applicant
    the appeal was allowed; all that is said in the notice of  decision  is
    "the appeal is allowed" and the natural meaning of these words is  that
    that the appeal against the refusal  to  issue  a  residence  card  was
    allowed outright.

 6. The Secretary of State does not challenge the substantive decision that
    was made in respect of either the appellant or Ms Wiels so the decision
    in respect of Ms Wiels must stand.  All that is challenged  in  respect
    of the applicant as submitted in the grounds is that in  light  of  the
    reasoning contained within the decision the applicant's  appeal  should
    not have been allowed outright but should have been allowed only to the
    limited extent that the decision had not been in  accordance  with  the
    law such that the application had to be reconsidered by  the  Secretary
    of State.  The basis of this submission is that in the  course  of  his
    decision at paragraph 18 the judge said as follows:

         "I noted that the Secretary of State has not had an opportunity  to
         consider whether or not [Ms Wiels] is exercising treaty  rights  at
         this time... I indicated that given that there had been a change of
         circumstance, that if I found that there  was  not  a  marriage  of
         convenience I would be likely to allow  the  appeal  subject  to  a
         proviso that [the Secretary of State] would need to reconsider  the
         question of whether or not treaty rights were being exercised."

 7. Then at paragraph 32 in the final sentence of the substantive  decision
    the judge said as follows:

         "This means that the [Secretary of State] will need to consider the
         issue of the exercise of treaty rights and come to a fair decision"



    because (as the judge had  remarked  in  the  first  sentence  of  this
    paragraph, paragraph 32):

         "In terms of the exercise of treaty rights I am not satisfied  from
         the decision letters that [the Secretary of  State]  examined  this
         issue in detail as there is no reference to the exercise of  treaty
         rights in the decision."

 8. In my judgment it is clear from what the judge stated within  the  body
    of his Decision that the appropriate decision for him to  make  was  to
    allow the appeal of this applicant but only to the limited extent  that
    the Decision was not in accordance with the law so that it  had  to  be
    reconsidered by the Secretary of State.  Accordingly, I find that there
    was a material error of law and that the Decision has to be re-made.



Discussion

 9. Although had I been restricted to consideration of the  material  which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal I would simply have gone on  to  re-
    make the Decision as Judge Seelhoff ought (and no  doubt  intended)  to
    have made at the time. However, matters have moved  on  since  then  in
    that this Tribunal has now been provided  with  a  bundle  of  evidence
    supporting the applicant's case that his wife, Ms  Wiels  has  in  fact
    been exercising and is continuing to exercise  treaty  rights  in  this
    country.  On behalf of the Secretary of State  Mr  Melvin  very  fairly
    invited this Tribunal to consider  this  evidence  when  re-making  the
    decision which again very fairly he  conceded  was  very  difficult  to
    challenge.  He saw no reason in these circumstances  if  this  Tribunal
    was satisfied that the evidence  showed  that  Ms  Wiels  was  in  fact
    exercising treaty rights in this country, why the  Decision  should  be
    reconsidered by the Secretary of State.  I have considered the evidence
    which has been adduced and I am satisfied  that  it  is  sufficient  to
    establish on the balance of  probabilities  that  Ms  Wiels  is  indeed
    exercising treaty rights in this country.

10. Accordingly, although I have for the reasons I have given been  obliged
    to set aside the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, in light of
    this evidence I am able to remake  the  Decision  allowing  the  appeal
    outright.  For the avoidance of  doubt  the  consequence  is  that  the
    applicant should now be given a residence card as he is entitled to one
    being the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in  this
    country.

Decision

I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  respect  of  this
applicant and remake the decision as follows:

The applicant's appeal is allowed under the EEA Regulations.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 15 April 2016



