
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03779/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th August 2014                             |On 21st August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHARIFA YUSSIF

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Respondent's appeal but for the sake of convenience I shall
    refer to the parties as they were known in the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. This Appellant appealed a decision of the Respondent refusing to  issue
    her with a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence under
    European Community Law as a spouse of a French national exercising  EEA
    treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.   That  decision  is  dated  3rd
    January 2014. The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and
    the appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cohen, who, in
    a determination promulgated on 9th June 2014, allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal.  The judge did so for reasons which are set out  at  paragraphs
    14, 15 and 16 to the point that the marriage, conducted by  proxy,  was
    valid in Ghana.   There seems to be a typographical error at  paragraph
    16 where the  judge  states  that  they  are  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant is a family member,  but  it  is  clear  from  the  preceding
    paragraph that the judge in fact intended to  say  that  judge  was  so
    satisfied.

 3. The Respondent has been granted permission to appeal on the basis  that
    in reaching the conclusions set out in those paragraphs the  judge  has
    failed to take into account the case of Kareem  (Proxy  marriage  -  EU
    law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24.

 4. In Kareem the Tribunal decided that when looking at the validity  of  a
    proxy marriage, regardless of the country in  which  the  marriage  was
    conducted, there were two points that the court needed to  decide.  The
    first point was whether or not the marriage was valid in accordance  of
    the law of the country where it took place and  the  second  point  was
    whether or not the marriage was recognised or treated as being valid in
    the country of the EEA national.

 5. I am satisfied that the judge in  this  case  failed  to  consider  the
    position in respect of French national  law  regarding  Ghanaian  proxy
    marriages, and for that reason the judge fell into material error  such
    that I am satisfied that it is right to set the decision aside and  re-
    make it.

 6. There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal as to the position
    under French law and indeed that remains the position before me  today.
    In those circumstances the Appellant cannot  discharge  the  burden  of
    showing that the marriage is recognised in accordance with the laws  of
    France. No other ground of  appeal  was  raised  and  accordingly  that
    finding is sufficient to dispose of the appeal before me.

 7. I allow the Respondent's appeal to the Upper-tier  and  set  aside  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  remake  it  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


