


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03390/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham                     |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 30 June 2016                             |On: 12 July 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     AOO
                           (Anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  to
refuse to issue her with a derivative residence card as  the  primary  carer
of a British citizen resident in the UK,  under  the  Immigration  (European
Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ]  1977.  It  is  not  clear
when she arrived in the UK, but on  3  October  2012  she  was  served  with
illegal entry papers and then sought asylum. Her asylum  claim  was  refused
on 28 August 2013. On 23 January 2014  she  sought  a  derivative  residence
card as the primary carer of a British  citizen  resident  in  the  UK.  Her
application was refused on 21 February 2014. She  made  another  application
for a derivate residence card on 24 April 2014 which was refused on 28  July
2014. She then made the current application on 1 November  2014,  which  was
refused on 6 January 2015.


In refusing the application, the respondent noted  that  the  appellant  was
applying on the basis  of  being  the  primary  carer  of  AOOA,  a  British
citizen, who was also her son. The  respondent  considered  that  there  was
insufficient evidence to show that the child would be unable  to  remain  in
the UK if she were forced to leave. There was no evidence  why  the  child's
father was not in a position to care for him if she had  to  leave  the  UK.
The respondent did not, therefore,  consider  that  the  appellant  met  the
requirements of the criteria  for  a  derivative  right  of  residence.  The
application was refused with reference to Regulation 15A(4A)(a)(c)  and  18A
of the EEA Regulations.

The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was heard  on  8
May 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Heatherington.  At  the  hearing  the
judge heard from  the  appellant.  The  father  of  her  child  was  not  in
attendance but an email from him was handed in. The Home  Office  presenting
officer  produced  a  copy  of  the  decision  in  the  appellant's  earlier
application for a derivative residence card,  dated  21  February  2014,  in
which doubts were expressed by the respondent as to  whether  the  appellant
was the mother of the child AOOA and  whether  AA  was  his  father.   Judge
Heatherington found as a fact that the  appellant  was  the  mother  of  the
child, and that his father was AA. The appellant lived in Birmingham  whilst
AOOA's father lived in London. The judge found  that  the  evidence  was  of
regular, but infrequent, meetings of AOOA with his father and that they  had
gone to a park in Birmingham two to three months ago and had met two  months
prior to that in London. He summarised AOOA's medical conditions. The  judge
found that this was a last ditch attempt by the appellant to remain  in  the
UK and he did not believe her evidence as to the level  of  contact  between
father and son. He was not satisfied that AA was not in a position  to  look
after his son and he  did  not  accept  that  he  had  the  mental  problems
claimed. He did not accept that AOOA would have  to  leave  the  UK  if  the
appellant were forced to leave. Accordingly he dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission
was initially refused, but was subsequently granted on  16  September  2015,
on the grounds that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account  other
evidence  which  indicated  that  the   child's   father   had   no   shared
responsibility, provided no financial support  for  the  child  and  had  no
regular contact with  him,  and  had  provided  insufficient  reasoning  for
concluding that the child's father was in a position or willing to care  for
him in the absence of the appellant.



Appeal hearing and submissions

At the  hearing  the  appellant  attended  with  a  lay  representative  who
assisted her. She did not  have  a  legal  representative  and  I  therefore
permitted the lay representative to sit next to her and assist  her,  albeit
without directly addressing the Tribunal.

Ms Aboni made submissions first and  asked  that  the  judge's  decision  be
upheld as the findings made were open to him on the evidence and there  were
no errors of law. In response the appellant said  that  her  son  could  not
live with his father as he did not have the same  character  as  his  father
and she did not want him to follow his character. She referred to  the  best
interests of her child.

Consideration and findings.

Permission was granted to the appellant to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on
grounds that were not, in fact, raised by her,  but  which  raised  arguable
grounds of a failure by the judge to  consider  certain  evidence  that  was
before him. However it seems to me that the judge did consider  all  of  the
evidence, albeit not referring specifically to every document.  At  [11]  to
[13] he referred to  the  email  from  AOOA's  father  and  to  the  medical
evidence relating to AOOA's various conditions. At [10] the judge said  that
"the evidence is of regular but infrequent meetings of AA with AOOA",  which
suggests an overview of all the evidence. In any  event,  having  regard  to
the evidence referred to in the grant of permission, which appears at D1  to
E3 of the respondent's  appeal  bundle  and  near  the  end  of  the  bundle
(including a letter from [ ] Day Nursery), it is clear  that  that  goes  no
further than stating what is already known and accepted,  namely  that  AOOA
lives with his mother, that his father lives separately, and that  there  is
contact between them.

It is claimed by the appellant that AOOA's  father  cannot  look  after  him
because of his mental health problems, but there was no evidence before  the
judge, other than an email from AA, to  confirm  that.  The  judge  did  not
accept that AA had mental health problems as alleged and  gave  reasons  for
not accepting that he had been given a credible  account  of  the  level  of
contact between AOOA and his father. He did not accept  that  AOOA's  father
could not care for him in the absence of the  appellant  and,  on  the  very
limited evidence he had before him, he was perfectly entitled to reach  such
a conclusion.


In any event, the relevant  question  to  be  asked,  for  the  purposes  of
Regulation 15A(4A)(c), was whether AOOA would be unable to reside in the  UK
if his mother, the appellant, had to leave, and  the  judge  found  that  he
would not. It is relevant to note that AA, in his email, stated that he  did
not want to be separated from his son. Clearly, therefore, if the  appellant
had to leave the UK, there was an alternative for AOOA, namely to live  with
his father. He would not be forced to leave the UK  himself.  That  was  the
conclusion reached by the judge and was one that was clearly open to him  on
the evidence before him.


In a response to the respondent's Rule 24  response,  it  was  submitted  on
behalf of the appellant that the respondent had failed  to  have  regard  to
the best interests of the child. That was not a  matter  before  the  judge,
but in any event it is clear that the respondent  had  considered  the  best
interests of the child, as referred to the decision of 6 January 2015.  What
the appellant appears to ignore is that there is nothing stopping AOOA  from
accompanying her back to Nigeria and there  is  no  question  of  her  being
forcibly separated from her child. The relevant  EEA  Regulations  recognise
that a British national cannot be forced to leave the UK and  therefore  the
question the appellant had to answer was whether AOOA  would  be  forced  to
leave if she did.  For the reasons properly given by  the  judge,  he  would
not.

Accordingly I find that there are no errors of law in the judge's  decision.
He was entitled to conclude as he did.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error on a point of law,  such
that the decision has to be set aside. I do not set aside the decision.  The
decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.

    Anonymity
    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order. I continue that order
    pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2014.










                               Signed:                   Date: 12 July 2016


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

