
`1[pic]
AI

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03964/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined Without a Hearing                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|at Field House                                |                             |
|On 24th October, 2012                         |On 22nd February 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                 anwar khan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Khawar, promulgated on 10th May, 2012, but to
    avoid confusion she remains described as being the respondent  in  this
    appeal and Mr Anwar Khan remains described as being the appellant.

2.    The  respondent  appeals  against  the  determination  of   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Khawar, promulgated  on  10th  May,  2012,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 24th April, 2012 when he purported to  allow
    the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent, taken on
    24th January, 2012, refusing the appellant's  application  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant under the points-based system and under paragraph 245ZX(c)  and
    245ZX(d) of Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395,  as
    amended ("the Immigration Rules").

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  4th  October
    1971.

4.   In  refusing  the  appellant's  application  to  vary  his  leave,  the
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was entitled  to  claim
    10  points  for  funds  under  Appendix  C,  since  he  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that he had the required level of  funds  for  the  28  day
    period prior to his application and she  was  not  satisfied  that  his
    sponsor's assessment of the appellant's English language  ability  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and as such the appellant was
    not entitled to claim 30 points  for  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies.

5.   The judge noted that in the Secretary of State's letter refusing  leave
    and during the appeal before him,  the  respondent  relied  on  Section
    82(2)(d) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
    submitted that the appellant did not have a right of appeal, because he
    had extant leave  to  remain  until  31st  January,  2012.   The  judge
    concluded  that  the  respondent's  argument  was,  "something   of   a
    technicality" because if the appellant made a fresh application on 31st
    January, 2012 the respondent's subsequent refusal  would  have  carried
    with it a right of appeal.  He formed the view that  sub-paragraph  (e)
    did not apply, because the specific requirement "If when the  variation
    takes effect" are not in fact made out in  the  appellant's  case.   He
    went on to consider Sapkota & Anor (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2011]  EWCA  Civ
    1320 and Patel (Consideration of Sapkota  -  unfairness)  India  [2011]
    UKUT 00484 (IAC) and concluded  that  the  appellant  had  a  right  of
    appeal, "if only under Article 8 of the ECHR".

6.   The judge went on to find that the appellant met the  English  language
    requirement of paragraph  245ZX,  by  having  achieved  a  Postgraduate
    Diploma which the judge  believed  was  the  equivalent  of  a  Masters
    degree.  Accordingly, he found himself satisfied that  the  appellant's
    college was entitled to issue such Level 7  qualification,  studied  in
    the United  Kingdom  in  the  English  language,  as  representing  the
    appellant's competence in  the  English  language  as  being  at  least
    equivalent to minimum CEFR Level B2.

7.   The judge allowed the appeal.

8.   The respondent challenged the judge's  determination  and  in  granting
    permission Ms M Plimmer,  sitting  as  a  Deputy  Judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, said:-

         "The grounds of appeal submit that the judge has erred  in  law  in
         finding that there is an immigration decision  capable  of  lending
         itself to an appeal.  The  judge  has  arguably  erred  in  law  in
         regarding this  as  a  technicality  on  the  basis  that  he  must
         determine Article 8 of the ECHR in  any  event.   Article  8  is  a
         ground of appeal that can only be raised  before  the  Tribunal  in
         response to an immigration decision for the purposes of Section  82
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."

9.   She went on to agree that both grounds could  be  argued.   The  second
    challenge was on the basis that the judge had found that the  appellant
    met the English language requirement of paragraph 245ZX, because he had
    achieved a Postgraduate Diploma which was  taught  in  English  in  the
    United Kingdom.  However the Postgraduate Diploma  was,  as  the  judge
    noted, a professional award and not  an  academic  qualification.   The
    challenge suggested that the judge had erred in law as a result.

10.  When Ms Plimmer's grant  of  permission  to  appeal  was  sent  to  the
    parties by prepaid first class  post  on  26th  June  2012,  which  was
    accompanied by standard directions in the form set out in the  Appendix
    to this determination.

11.  Despite the requirement that the respondent should, no  later  than  28
    days after the date on which  the  directions  are  sent  out,  file  a
    response under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 ("the Rules") nothing further had been heard by the Upper Tribunal
    from the respondent.

12.  On 17th  September,  2012  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued  the  following
    directions:-

         "1.  Neither party has responded to the  directions  sent  to  them
             with the grant of permission to appeal on 26th June, 2012  and
             presumably has nothing further to say about the appeal, has no
             further submissions to make and is  content  to  rely  on  the
             evidence already before the Tribunal.


         2.   Subject to any further comments from the  parties  which  were
             made in writing to the Upper  Tribunal  before  20th  October,
             2012 the appeal will be placed in a paper list and the  appeal
             determined without an oral hearing."

13.  The Upper Tribunal directions were sent to the parties by  first  class
    prepaid post on 26th September, 2012.

14.  On 24th October, 2012 neither party had responded  to  the  directions.
    I have assumed that the parties have nothing (or  nothing  further)  to
    say or advance in support of the appeal before the Upper Tribunal and I
    have concluded that this appeal is suitable  for  disposal  without  an
    oral hearing.

15.  It is first necessary for me  to  decide  whether  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Khawar has erred in law.  I have concluded that he has.

16.  As Ms Plimmer has pointed out, the judge was wrong  to  regard  Section
    82(2)(e) as "something of a  technicality".   The  appellant  did  have
    extant leave to remain until 31st January, 2012 and the effect  of  the
    respondent's decision being dated 26th January,  2012  meant  that  the
    appellant did not have a right of appeal.  He would  only  have  had  a
    human rights appeal in response to  an  immigration  decision  for  the
    purposes of Section 82 of the 2002 Act.

17.  The judge's first mistake was compounded when he went on to  find  that
    the appellant's Postgraduate Diploma was at least equivalent  to  a  UK
    bachelors degree, because although he had noted it, he  had  failed  to
    take account of the fact that it was a professional award  and  not  an
    academic one.

18.  I set aside the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

19.  The respondent's decision was made on 26th January, 2012.  At the  time
    of that decision the appellant had  leave  until  31st  January,  2012.
    Applying Section 82(2)(e) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 I find that the appellant did not have a right of appeal.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
























                                 APPENDIX A


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                 DIRECTIONS

Note: In these directions, "appellant" means the party who has been  granted
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the determination of  the
First-tier Tribunal and "respondent" means any other person who was a  party
before the First-tier Tribunal

1.  Not later than 21 days after the date  on  which  these  directions  are
sent out:-:-

      (a)  the appellant must file with the Upper Tribunal and serve on  the
      respondent a written notice stating whether the appellant  wishes  the
      case to be dealt with at an oral hearing  or  decided  on  the  papers
      without  an  oral  hearing  (giving  reasons   for   the   appellant's
      preference); and


      (b)  unless the appellant is relying solely on the grounds for seeking
      permission to appeal, the appellant must file with the Upper  Tribunal
      and  serve  on  the  respondent  a  skeleton   argument   or   written
      submissions, setting out  all  lines  of  argument  pursued,  both  as
      regards the reasons why the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      should be set aside and as to the re-making of  the  decision  in  the
      appeal, if that determination is set aside; and


      (c)  where  the  appellant  wishes  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider
      evidence that was not before the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  evidence
      (including any  witness  statement)  must  be  filed  with  the  Upper
      Tribunal and served  on  the  respondent;  together  with  the  notice
      required by rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008, indicating the nature of that evidence and explaining  why
      it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

2.  Not later than 28 days after the date  on  which  these  directions  are
sent out, the respondent must file with the Upper Tribunal and serve on  the
appellant:-

      (a)  any response under rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 the respondent intends to make to the  notice  of
      appeal;


      (b)  any response the respondent  intends  to  make  to  the  skeleton
      argument or  submissions made by the appellant pursuant  to  direction
      no. 1; and


      (c)  where the  respondent  wishes  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider
      evidence that was not before the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  evidence
      (including any  witness  statement)  must  be  filed  with  the  Upper
      Tribunal and  served  on  the  appellant;  together  with  the  notice
      required by rule 15(2A), indicating the nature of  that  evidence  and
      why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


3.  Any reply from the appellant under rule 25 to the respondent's  response
must be filed with the Upper Tribunal and  served  on  the  respondent,  not
later than 35 days after the date on which these directions are sent out.

4.  The parties are on notice that:

      (a)  the Upper Tribunal will consider everything  received  by  it  in
      response to these directions, before deciding under rule 34 whether it
      is necessary to have an oral hearing of any aspect of the appeal; and


    (b)  a failure by a party to comply with any of  these  directions  may
         lead the Upper Tribunal to proceed on the basis  that  nothing  (or
         nothing further) is to be said  or  advanced  in  support  of  that
         party's case before the Upper Tribunal.
