
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 03929 2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 June 2016                          |On 11 August 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 REBU THAPA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Parliament Maqsood, Counsel, instructed by Pride
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I see no need for and do not  make  any  order  restricting  reporting
      about this case.

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the present  respondent
      against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse him leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom.  The result of the First-tier Tribunal's
      decision is that the respondent became entitled to indefinite leave to
      remain.  The Secretary of State's grounds, which happen to be  settled
      by Mr Whitwell who appeared for the Secretary of State  today,  insist
      that the judge's approach was completely wrong and the judge could not
      lawfully have made the decision that he did because it was premised on
      the respondent having a form of leave that he did not have.

   3. That said, Mr Whitwell made it  perfectly  clear  before  me,  as  was
      hinted in the grounds, that the respondent is entitled  to  leave  but
      not indefinite leave at this stage because his  circumstances  satisfy
      the requirements of paragraph 319C(b)(iv) of HC 395. If I were to  set
      aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and replace  it  with  a
      decision allowing  the  appeal  but  not  with  the  result  that  the
      respondent has indefinite leave to remain but that the respondent  has
      limited leave to remain in accordance with 319C(b)(iv)  the  Secretary
      of State could not complain about the decision.

   4. Mr Maqsood has had an opportunity for considering this  suggestion  as
      well as producing a skeleton argument for me which  I  have  read.  He
      cannot resist Mr Whitwell's submission.

   5. It follows therefore that with the consent of the parties I set  aside
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I  substitute  a  decision
      allowing the appeal of the respondent against the Secretary of State's
      decision  because  the  respondent  satisfies  the   requirements   of
      391C(b)(iv) and is therefore entitled to leave to remain.

   6. Whether or not the respondent becomes entitled to indefinite leave  to
      remain is a matter for a further application which may not may not  be
      made in due course.

Notice of Decision

   7. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed the limited extent indicate
      above.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 9 August 2016                  |





