
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)                            Appeal  Number:
IA/03887/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard             at             Field             House,             London
    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the               7th               April               2016
               On the 20th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                             MRS AMENDEE BHAIROO
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr Reynolds (Counsel)
For the Secretary of State: Miss Fijiwala  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Metzer promulgated on the  26th  August  2015,  in
      which he allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision to refuse to grant her a certificate confirming  that
      she had the right of abode in the United Kingdom under  Section  2  of
      the Immigration Act 1971 (as amended by  Section  39  of  the  British
      Nationality Act 1981).

   2. The Claimant is a citizen of  Mauritius  who  was  born  on  the  11th
      October 1986.  She had applied under Section 10  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 for a certificate  that  she  had  the
      right of abode in the United Kingdom.  Within the Secretary of State's
      refusal letter dated the 5th January 2015, it was  stated  that  under
      Section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971 (amended by Section  39  of  the
      British  Nationality  Act  1981)  all  British  citizens  and  certain
      Commonwealth citizens had the right of abode in  the  United  Kingdom.
      It was stated that there were two ways in which a Commonwealth citizen
      was eligible for the right of abode in the United Kingdom:

     i) As a Commonwealth (not British) citizen born before the 1st January
        1983   to   a   parent   or   adopted   parent   who   was    born,
        registered/naturalised in the United Kingdom prior to your birth;

    ii) As a female Commonwealth citizen who was  married  before  the  1st
        January 1983 to a man with a right of abode in the  United  Kingdom
        prior to the 1st January 1983.




   3.  It was found that the Claimant was born  in  Mauritius  on  the  11th
      October 1986  to  parents  also  born  in  Mauritius  and  that  their
      Citizenship of  the  United  Kingdom  and  Colonies  (CUKC)  was  lost
      automatically on the 12th March 1968, as a  result  of  the  Mauritius
      Independence Act 1968.  It was found that her parents lost their  CUKC
      status and became citizens of Mauritius on that  date.   The  Claimant
      did not have a parent who  was  born,  registered/naturalised  in  the
      United Kingdom prior to her  birth  and  had  no  entitlement  through
      marriage.  Her application was therefore refused.




   4. The Claimant sought to appeal that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
      and that appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Metzer  at
      Taylor House, London on the 12th August 2015.  He stated  specifically
      that the Claimant had acquired the right of abode through her  parents
      who immediately before the commencement of the British Nationality Act
      1981 had Citizenship of the United Kingdom and that the Claimant, as a
      Commonwealth citizen, had the right of abode  since  the  1st  January
      1983 and had not ceased to be a Commonwealth citizen at any time since
      then and therefore met the conditions necessary under Section 39(2) of
      the British  Nationality  Act  1981.   He  did  not  accept  that  the
      Mauritius  Independence  Act  1968  had  the  effect  claimed  by  the
      Secretary of State, in terms of meaning that  the  Claimant's  parents
      ceased to be citizens of the United Kingdom.

   5. The Secretary of State has sought to appeal that decision to the Upper
      Tribunal.  Within the Grounds of Appeal it is  argued  that  upon  the
      enactment of the Mauritius Independence Act 1968  on  the  12th  March
      1968, the Claimant's parents  lost  their  CUKC  (Citizenship  of  the
      United Kingdom and Colonies) status and that  there  was  no  evidence
      before Judge Metzer that the  Claimant's  parents  had  registered  as
      British citizens or met any of the requirements under Section 2  or  3
      of the 1968 Act and thus were Mauritian citizens under the umbrella of
      British Commonwealth Citizenship.   It  is  argued  that  the  refusal
      letter set out the only two ways that a Commonwealth citizen would  be
      eligible for a right of abode in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  the
      Claimant did not meet either category.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish
      on the 20th December 2015 who found that there was an  arguable  error
      of law in First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer allowing the appeal against
      the refusal of a right of abode under Section 2 of the Immigration Act
      1971 and Section 39 of the British Nationality Act 1981 and  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge had arguably overlooked the  fact  that  the
      Claimant lost her CUKC status by reason of the Mauritius  Independence
      Act 1968 and non-registration of her parents as  CUKC  citizens  under
      Sections 2 or 3 of that Act and of the British Nationality Act 1981.

   7. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal initially came before me on  the  5th
      February 2016, and I adjourned the appeal on that date,  in  order  to
      allow for the preparation of full written Skeleton  Arguments  on  the
      issue.  I am most grateful to the parties  for  having  prepared  such
      Skeleton Arguments,  which  I  have  carefully  considered  and  taken
      account of, in addition to the oral  submissions  made  by  the  legal
      representatives, in reaching my decision.  I am also most grateful  to
      Miss Fijiwala for having provided me with  a  copy  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal's decision in the case of The Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department v Ize-Iyamu [2016] EWCA Civ 118.  Although this case  dealt
      with the question as to whether or not a Nigerian citizen born on  the
      23rd July 1975 had a right of abode in the United  Kingdom,  following
      the enactment of the Nigerian Independence Act 1960, and therefore was
      clearly dealing with the effect of a difference piece of  legislation,
      I do consider it is useful as a guide as to  how  the  Upper  Tribunal
      should approach the question of "right of abode", but I fully bear  in
      mind that it is not a binding precedent in this case,  given  that  it
      relates to a completely different piece  of  independence  legislation
      and relates to a different country.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   8. The Claimant herself, her father and  grandfather  were  all  born  in
      Mauritius.  Her father, from his birth certificate, was  born  on  the
      28th  September  1956.   By  virtue  of  Section  4  of  the   British
      Nationality Act 1948, a person born  within  the  United  Kingdom  and
      Colonies after the commencement of the Act became  a  citizen  of  the
      United Kingdom and Colonies.  By virtue of Section 12(1) a person  who
      was a British subject before the commencement of the Act became also a
      citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies, if he had been born within
      the territories of the United Kingdom and Colonies and would have been
      a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies if Section 4 had been  in
      force at the time of his birth.  As a result following the passing  of
      the  British  Nationality  Act  1948,  the   Claimant's   father   and
      grandfather became citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies.

   9. As was stated within paragraph [3] of the Court of Appeal decision  in
      the case of The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Ize-
      Iyamu, under the British Nationality Act 1948, citizens of the  United
      Kingdom and Colonies had the status of British Subjects and were  free
      to enter and remain in this country at will.   It  was  argued  by  Mr
      Reynolds on behalf of the Claimant that the Court  of  Appeal  in  the
      case of The Secretary of State for the Home Department v Ize-Iyamu did
      not consider the effect of Section 1(1) of the British Nationality Act
      1948 which stated that "every person who under this Act is  a  citizen
      of the United Kingdom and Colonies or who under any enactment for  the
      time being in force in any country mentioned in  subsection  (iii)  of
      this section is a citizen of that country  shall  by  virtue  of  that
      Citizenship have the status of a British subject".  However, when  one
      reads [3] of the Judgment of the Court of Appeal, the Court of  Appeal
      specifically recognised, as stated  above,  that  "under  the  British
      Nationality Act 1948 citizens of the United Kingdom and  Colonies  had
      the status of British Subjects and were free to enter  and  remain  in
      this country at will".  The argument that the Court  of  Appeal  level
      had not considered that section  or  the  British  subject  issue,  is
      therefore entirely misconceived.

  10. By virtue of Section 1(1) of the Mauritius Independence  Act  1968  on
      the 12th March 1968, Mauritius  became  independent  from  the  United
      Kingdom.  By Section 2(2)  of  the  Mauritius  Independence  Act  1968
      "except as  provided  by  Section  3  of  this  Act,  any  person  who
      immediately before the appointed  day  is  a  citizen  of  the  United
      Kingdom and Colonies shall on that day cease to be such a  citizen  if
      he becomes on that day a citizen of Mauritius".

  11. Under Section 3 of the Mauritius Independence Act 1968 it  was  stated
      that:

      "3(1) subject to subsection (5) of this section, a  person  shall  not
      cease to be a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies under Section
      2(2) of this Act if he, his father or his father's father -

   a) was born in the United Kingdom or in a colony or an associated  state;
      or

   b) is or was a person naturalised in the United Kingdom and Colonies; or

   c) was registered as a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies, or

   d) became a British subject by reason of the annexation of any  territory
      included in a colony.

       ii) A person shall not cease to be a citizen of the  United  Kingdom
           and Colonies under the said Section 2(2) if either -

   a) he was born in a protectorate or protected state, or his father or his
      father's father was so born and is  or  at  any  time  was  a  British
      subject".

      However, pursuant to Section 3(5), it was provided that

      "3(5) In this section -

   a) references to a  colony  shall  be  construed  as  not  including  any
      territory which, on the  appointed  day,  is  not  a  colony  for  the
      purposes of the British Nationality Act 1948 as that Act has effect on
      that day, and accordingly does not include Mauritius, and

   b) references to a protectorate or protected state shall be construed  as
      not including any territory which, on the  appointed  day,  is  not  a
      protectorate or a protected  state  (as  the  case  may  be)  for  the
      purposes of that Act as it has effect on that day;

           and subsection (i) of this section shall not apply to  a  person
           by virtue  of  any  certificate  of  naturalisation  granted  or
           registration  effected  by  the  Governor  or  Government  of  a
           territory which by virtue of this subsection  is  excluded  from
           references  in  this  section  to  a  colony,  protectorate   or
           protected state".

  12. The argument sought to be run by Mr Reynolds on behalf of the Claimant
      that Mauritius is a colony for the purposes  of  Section  3(1)(a)  and
      that thereby the Claimant's father did not cease to be  a  citizen  of
      the United Kingdom and Colonies upon the commencement of the Mauritius
      Independence Act 1968, completely overlooks the effect of Section 3(5)
      and that in that Section 3 references to  a  colony  'do  not  include
      Mauritius'.  Further, the argument sought to be  run  by  Mr  Reynolds
      that the Claimant's father's birth was registered by the  Governor  or
      Government of Mauritius for the  purposes  of  Section  3(1)(c)  again
      fails to take account of the effect of Section 3(5)  that  "subsection
      (i) of this section shall not apply to  a  person  by  virtue  of  any
      certificate of naturalisation granted or registration  effect  by  the
      Governor or  Government  of  a  territory  which  by  virtue  of  this
      subsection is excluded from references in this section  to  a  colony,
      protectorate or protected state".  It was not in dispute that, and was
      not argued before me that the Claimant's father  and  grandfather  did
      become citizens of Mauritius upon Mauritius gaining independence,  but
      in  respect  of  the  argument  that  the  Claimant's  father   and/or
      grandfather both retained their  status  of  Citizens  of  the  United
      Kingdom and Colonies, I find that as a result of Section 3(5) and  the
      fact that the reference to colony in  Section  3(1)  did  not  include
      Mauritius, means that as a  result  of  Section  2(2)  the  Claimant's
      father and grandfather on that day ceased to be citizens of the United
      Kingdom and Colonies and became citizens of Mauritius.

  13. As was stated in [5] of the Court of Appeal case of The  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department v Ize-Iyamu, "the concept of  the  right
      of abode is central to the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The  Act,  which
      superseded  the  Commonwealth  Immigrants   Act   1962-1968,   imposed
      restrictions on the number of British Subjects  who  could  enter  and
      remain in this country as a right.  Section 1 provided (and  continues
      to provide) that those who have the right of abode are free to live in
      and to come into and  go  from  the  United  Kingdom  without  let  or
      hindrance, but that those not having the right of abode may live, work
      and settle in the United Kingdom only by permission and subject to the
      regulation and control imposed by the Act".

  14. Paragraph [6] through to [8] of the Court of Appeal decision, are also
      relevant in respect of the question regarding right of abode under the
      Immigration Act 1971 and the effect of  the  British  Nationality  Act
      1981.  The Court of Appeal stated in those paragraphs that:

      "6.   Section 2(1) of the Act defined  those  who  had  the  right  of
        abode. The section has since been amended, but for present purposes
        it is sufficient to note that as originally  enacted  such  persons
        included (i) citizens of the United Kingdom and  Colonies  who  had
        acquired that citizenship by birth in the United Kingdom or any  of
        the Islands, (ii) citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies  born
        to a parent who had that citizenship at the time of the  birth  and
        had himself acquired it by birth in the United Kingdom  or  any  of
        the Islands and (iii) citizens of the United Kingdom  and  Colonies
        born to a parent who had that citizenship at the time of the  birth
        and had himself been born to a parent who "so had it". (The islands
        to which the section referred were the Channel Islands and the Isle
        of Man: see section 33. In the rest of this judgment I shall  refer
        for convenience simply to "the United  Kingdom".)  Subject  to  the
        meaning of the expression "so had it" in  section  2(1)(b)(ii),  to
        which it will be necessary to return, it can be seen that the broad
        scheme  of  the  legislation  was  that  the  right  of  abode  was
        restricted to those citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies who
        had acquired that status in the United Kingdom,  or  one  of  whose
        parents or grandparents had himself acquired  that  status  in  the
        United Kingdom. Section 2 also made provision for  the  acquisition
        of the right of abode by adoption, naturalisation and registration,
        but none of those is relevant for present purposes.

     1. Section 3(2) of the 1971 Act required the  Secretary  of  State  to
        draw up  rules  governing  the  practice  to  be  followed  in  the
        administration of the Act for regulating the entry into and stay in
        the United Kingdom of those who did not have the right of abode and
        required leave in order to do so. Section 1(5) of the Act  provided
        that the  rules  should  not  make  Commonwealth  citizens  already
        settled in this country any less free to come into and go from  the
        United Kingdom than they had been before the Act was passed.

      The British Nationality Act 1981

     1. Further changes to the law governing  the  acquisition  of  British
        citizenship and the right of abode were made with effect  from  1st
        January 1983 by the British Nationality Act  1981.  By  section  11
        those who immediately before the commencement of the Act  had  been
        citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies and had  the  right  of
        abode under the Immigration  Act  1971  as  then  in  force  became
        British citizens when the Act came into force. A person born in the
        United Kingdom after that date became (and still becomes) a British
        citizen only if at the time of his birth his father or mother was a
        British citizen or was settled in the United Kingdom (section 1). A
        person born outside the United Kingdom after commencement became  a
        British citizen only if his father or mother had  acquired  British
        citizenship otherwise than by descent. (Special provision was  made
        for children born to parents serving overseas  as  members  of  the
        armed forces or civil servants.) The 1981 Act has been  amended  on
        more than one occasion, but for present purposes it is necessary to
        refer only to the current form of section 4C  which  resulted  from
        amendments introduced by section 45 of the Borders, Citizenship and
        Immigration Act 2009 in order to remove the  discriminatory  effect
        of section 5 of the British Nationality  Act  1948.  (That  section
        provided for the acquisition of the status of citizen of the United
        Kingdom and Colonies by descent from a person's father, but not his
        mother.) By section 4C those born before 1983 are able  to  acquire
        British citizenship by registration, subject to certain conditions,
        two of which have particular relevance  to  the  present  case.  Of
        those, the first is that the applicant would at  some  time  before
        1st January 1983 have become a citizen of the  United  Kingdom  and
        Colonies under section 5 of the 1948 Act if that section  had  also
        provided for the acquisition  of  citizenship  by  descent  from  a
        person's mother; the second is that immediately before 1st  January
        1983 the applicant would have had the right of abode in the  United
        Kingdom by virtue of section 2 of the  Immigration  Act  1971.  The
        1981 Act also amended section 2 of the  Immigration  Act  1971,  to
        which it will be necessary to refer in detail in a moment".

  15. In my judgment it is clear that the Claimant  is  not  entitled  to  a
      right of abode under Section 2(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  as
      amended.  She was not a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies who
      had acquired that Citizenship by birth in the United Kingdom or any of
      the islands, nor was she a citizen of the United Kingdom and  Colonies
      born to a parent who had that Citizenship at the time of the birth and
      had himself acquired it by birth in the United Kingdom or any  of  the
      islands or, nor was she a citizen of the United Kingdom  and  Colonies
      born to a parent who had that Citizenship at the time of the birth and
      had himself been born to a parent who "so had it". As  result  of  the
      effect  of  the  Mauritius  Independence  Act  1968,  her  father  and
      grandfather (if still alive at that date) both lost their  Citizen  of
      the  United  Kingdom  and  Colonies  status  and  became  citizens  of
      Mauritius, such that the Claimant is not entitled to a right of  abode
      under  Section  2(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.  Nor,  in  such
      circumstances,  did  she  acquire  British   Citizenship   under   the
      provisions of the British Nationality Act 1981, under Section  11,  as
      immediately before commencement of the British  Nationality  Act  1981
      she was not a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies and  did  not
      have the right of abode under the Immigration Act 1971 as was then  in
      force.

  16. In respect of the argument contained within the  original  Grounds  of
      Appeal that the Claimant held "dual  nationality",  being  that  of  a
      British citizen and Commonwealth citizen, as a result of Section 39(2)
      of the British Nationality Act 1981 as amended in  Section  2  of  the
      Immigration Act 1971, again that argument entirely  misses  the  point
      that  as  a  result  of  the  Mauritius  Independence  Act  1968,  the
      Claimant's father lost his CUKC Citizenship and became  a  citizen  of
      Mauritius and therefore the Claimant does not hold  dual  nationality.
      Further, in any  event  the  Commonwealth  is  not  a  nation,  but  a
      commonwealth of nations.

  17. Further, in respect of the argument contained  within  the  additional
      Grounds of Appeal and elaborated further within the Skeleton  Argument
      produced  on  behalf  of  the  Claimant  and  by  Mr   Reynolds   that
      "Commonwealth citizens" are defined within the Home Office Directorate
      guidelines Annex A; Section 2 in respect of  "persons  entitled  to  a
      right of abode and that a Commonwealth citizen is defined as  being  a
      British citizen, a  British  overseas  territory  citizen,  a  British
      national (overseas), a British Subject, a British overseas citizen  or
      a citizen of any country which, on the relevant date(s)  is  mentioned
      in schedule 3 the British Nationality  Act  1981,  which  is  said  to
      include Mauritius and that under  the  IDI,  "all  other  Commonwealth
      citizens who had right of abode under the original Section 2(i1(d)  or
      Section 2(2) of the 1971 Act on the 31st December  1982  and  had  not
      ceased to be Commonwealth citizens at any  time  since  then  (Section
      2(1)(b)) qualified on or after the 1st January 1983", again misses the
      point that the Claimant did not have a right of  abode,  nor  did  her
      father, under Section 2 of the 1971 Act.

  18. In such circumstances, I find that it is quite  clear  that  upon  the
      enactment of the Mauritius Independence Act 1968, both the  Claimant's
      father and also her grandfather if still alive at that date would have
      lost their CUKC status and became citizens of Mauritius.  As a  result
      the Claimant is not entitled to a right of abode under  Section  2  of
      the Immigration Act 1971.  In such circumstances the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Metzer does contain a material  error  of  law  in
      that he erred in law by finding that the Claimant was  entitled  to  a
      right of abode under  Section  2  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   I
      therefore set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Metzer
      and for the reasons given above, I re-make the decision and find  that
      the Claimant does not have a right of abode in the United Kingdom  and
      is not entitled therefore to a certificate of entitlement.  I  dismiss
      the Claimant's appeal against the refusal of the Secretary of State to
      issue her a certificate stating that she had the right of abode in the
      United Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;

I re-make  the  decision,  dismissing  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
decision of the Secretary of State dated the 5th January 2015 under  Section
10 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Signed

[pic]
Deputy      Judge      of       the       Upper       Tribunal       McGinty
Dated 8th April 2016

