
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/03308/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Judgment given orally        |
|On 10 September 2013                          |On 23 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                           Ademola Jospeh Adewunmi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Mr Adewunmi was in the UK as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.   He
    had been granted leave to remain in that category on 10 September  2010
    until 10 September 2012.  On 8 September 2012 he applied for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.  On 6 April 2011 the  Immigration
    Rules were amended such that on the date of application by Mr  Adewunmi
    for leave to remain as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant  his  then  current
    leave to  remain  as  a  post-study  work  migrant  did  not  enable  a
    successful application.  The criteria for a successful  application  is
    set out in paragraph 245CA of the Immigration Rules.

2.   Mr Adewunmi's grounds of appeal  were  that  the  decision  was  unfair
    because he had been granted leave to remain on the basis that he  would
    have been able to apply successfully in the future.  The respondent can
    change the Rules as she wishes.  There are no  transitional  provisions
    for these particular Rule changes which were HC 1883.

3.   In the case of MO (Nigeria) [2008] EWCA Civ 308  the  Court  of  Appeal
    said that in general there is nothing in Immigration Rules  to  suggest
    that a person making an application  acquired  a  right  to  have  that
    application determined in accordance with the provisions  in  force  at
    the time of the application.  There is no discretion in paragraph 245CA
    of the Immigration Rules and although I have  great  sympathy  with  Mr
    Adewunmi the appeal fails in terms of the Immigration Rules.  The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge took a decision that the decision of the  Secretary
    of State to refuse the application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    correct and in the light of the Rules that is so.

4.   So far as human rights is concerned, the First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    set out  the  correct  test,  burden  and  standard  of  proof  and  in
    paragraphs 11 to 14 of the decision gave her reasons for  finding  that
    the decision was proportionate.  Again, much as I have sympathy for  Mr
    Adewunmi who has studied in the UK, acquired skilled qualifications and
    took a decision in 2010 on  the  basis  of  the  information  that  was
    available to him at that time, the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    was a decision taken by the judge within the range of decisions open to
    her.  It was neither perverse nor irrational and although another judge
    may have come to a different conclusion, there is no error  of  law  in
    her decision such that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  should
    be set aside to be re-made.

5.   One matter however that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider
    correctly was the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to  remove  the
    appellant in accordance with Section 47.  As was accepted  by  Ms  Kiss
    before me, this decision was unlawful.  I therefore quash the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal that  the  whole  of  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State was in accordance with the law and  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The decision by the Secretary of State to remove the  appellant
    was clearly unlawful and the appeal succeeds on that basis.


Signed on 20th September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
