
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03235/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Made on 2 September 2013             |Determination Sent           |
|at Field House without a hearing              |19 September 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

                               MR UMER FAROOQ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Raymond who for reasons given in his determination dated
    13 May 2013 dismissed  the  appeal  by  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born 18 September 1990 against the decisions of the  Secretary
    of State dated 9 January 2013 refusing to extend the appellant's  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 Student and to remove him.





 2. My reasons for granting permission to appeal were as follows:



         "The decision by DJUT M Hall was at best declaratory; he found that
         the decision to curtail leave was unlawful but made no direction to
         give effect to his determination  other  than  observing  that  the
         appellant ..."now has leave to remain until 28  October  2013".  It
         also needs to be borne in mind that the judge also found  that  the
         appellant failed to meet the maintenance requirement and  that  the
         SSHD had correctly refused under  para  245ZX(d)  for  want  of  an
         "established presence".


         It  appears  that  the  SSHD  in  giving  effect   to   the   above
         determination granted 60 days leave and it  is  accepted  that  the
         application thereafter made by the appellant was  without  a  valid
         CAS.  It was open to the appellant to challenge (by way of Judicial
         Review) the decision by the SSHD in giving effect to that  decision
         by only varying the leave until 17 July 2012 however he did not  do
         so. I would add however that it is difficult to see  how  he  could
         have succeeded in the light of the decision under 245ZX(d).


         The grounds of appeal against the decision on the  application  for
         further leave to remain made 16 July 2012 do  not  seek  to  assert
         that valid CAS  had  been  submitted  but  that  the  decision  was
         unlawful in the light of DJUT Hall's  decision  and  under  Art   8
         which relies on close community bonds and  that  the  appellant  is
         well settled ( he arrived in February 2010)


         FTJ Raymond noted that of the six exams at Kaplan (the college  the
         appellant had switched to without permission as  so  prompting  the
         curtailment) between December 2011 and June 2012, the appellant had
         only passed one. He also noted a letter from the college indicating
         that his ACCA course had expired on 13 February 2012. The appellant
         also gave evidence that he had passed an exam in December 2012. The
         judge dismissed the appeal under the Rules and on Art 8 grounds.


         Turning to the  grounds  of  application,  even  though  the  judge
         arguably erred in not specifically reaching  a  conclusion  on  the
         lawfulness argument I am not persuaded that error was  material  as
         having regard to the findings by DUTJ Hall particularly with regard
         to para 254ZX(d) he could not have come any conclusion  other  than
         to dismiss the appeal on this ground.


         As to the Art 8 arguments, although the  proportionality  reasoning
         is succinct here too and taking  account  of  the  matters  in  the
         appellant's statement dated 19  April  2013,  there  was  no  other
         possible outcome and I am not persuaded  there  is  any  basis  for
         finding an arguable material error.


         The decisions by the SSHD were to  refuse  to  vary  leave  and  to
         remove. No argument was raised as to the lawfulness of  the  latter
         before the judge and surprisingly none is advanced in  the  grounds
         of  application.  The  point  goes  to  jurisdiction  and  I  grant
         permission on this basis only. Unless I received a proposal to  the
         contrary within 7 days from  the  date  of  the  sending  out  this
         decision, I will remake the decision in the appeal  to  remove  and
         allow the appeal against that decision."

 3. The Secretary of State has responded as requested indicating  that  she
    is in agreement with the  proposed  resolution.   No  oral  hearing  is
    requested.

 4. There has been no response from either the appellant or  his  advisors.
    The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8.  I set aside that decision which I  now  re-
    make.  The appeal against the  variation  decision  is  dismissed,  the
    appeal against the decision to remove the appellant is allowed.






Signed                                  Date 18 September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

