
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/03594/2013
     IA/03597/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th September  2013                         |On 27th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             Mr almamon mostafa
                               mrs akter rina
                         (Anonymity Order not Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellants in person
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State  against a determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Kimnell) promulgated on 11th June 2013 by which he  allowed  the
    Appellants' appeals against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    them leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post  Study  Work)  Migrant  and  his
    dependant spouse.

 2. The Secretary of State refused the application because at the  date  of
    application the first Appellant did not have his qualification.  It was
    received between the date of application and the date of  decision  and
    the First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal on the basis of  Khatel  and
    others (s85A; effect  of  continuing  application)  [2013]  UKUT  00044
    (IAC).

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  the  basis  that
    the Court of Appeal has decided in Raju & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ 754  that
    Khatel was wrongly decided and in order to comply with  the  Rules  the
    documents had to  be  submitted  at  the  date  of  application.   This
    Appellant could not comply with that as he had not  then  received  his
    qualification.

 4. On the basis of Raju the First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law  and
    as that was the sole basis for allowing the  appeal  the  determination
    must be set aside in its entirety and the appeal redecided.

 5.  The  Appellant  who  is  unrepresented  had   until   yesterday   been
    represented.  Those representatives had applied for an  adjournment  on
    the basis that Raju was the subject of an appeal to the Supreme  Court.
    That adjournment was refused as this Tribunal is bound by the law as it
    is now, not as it may be in the future and is obliged to  follow  Court
    of Appeal decisions.

 6. The Appellant requested an adjournment which I also  refused.   Whether
    or not the Appellant is represented  cannot  alter  the  fact  that  he
    cannot win this appeal and so an adjournment would be pointless.

 7. As the first Appellant did not have the requisite qualification when he
    applied for leave to remain he cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Post  Study  Work)
    Migrant.

 8. With regard to Article 8 there is no  basis  upon  which  to  find  the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision  a  disproportionate  breach  of   the
    Appellants' right to a private and family life.  They have been in  the
    UK since 2006 but they will  be  returning  to  the  country  of  their
    nationality, heritage, culture and language and where  they  lived,  in
    the first Appellant's case for 32 years and in the second for 25  years
    prior to coming to the UK.  They will return as a family unit.

 9.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  having  made  an  error  of  law  and   the
    determination being set aside I redecide the appeal. The  Secretary  of
    State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  such  that  the
    Appellants' appeals against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  are
    dismissed.


Signed                              Date 26th September 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
