
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/03313/2015
                                                               IA/03314/2015
                                                               IA/03315/2015
                                                               IA/03316/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 01 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           1) mrs birgul kaygusuz
                            2) mr cengiz kaygusuz
                                  3) [e k]
                                  4) [h k]
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr C Jacobs, instructed by Ahmed Rahman Carr
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the SSHD.  The  claimants[1]
    are citizens of Turkey.  The first and second claimants are married  to
    each other and the third and fourth  claimants  are  their  sons.   The
    third claimant was born in February  2000  in  Turkey  and  the  fourth
    claimant in May 2008 in the UK.  No anonymity order has been sought and
    none is made.

 2. The second claimant entered the United Kingdom illegally  in  2005  and
    has remained here unlawfully ever since.  The  first  claimant  entered
    the UK as a visitor in January 2007,  with  the  third  claimant,  each
    having leave to enter conferred until 24 July 2007.  Both have remained
    here unlawfully since the expiry of the aforementioned leave.  There is
    now a third child of the family, born in August 2014. This child is not
    one of the claimants in the instant appeal.

 3. On or around 4 March 2014 the claimants applied for leave to remain  on
    the basis of their family and  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    These applications were initially refused in a decision  dated  19  May
    2014.  A challenge was brought thereto by way  of  an  application  for
    judicial review, which  was  subsequently  compromised  upon  the  SSHD
    agreeing to reconsider the claimants' applications and, in the event of
    a further refusal, to thereafter issue the  claimants  with  a  removal
    decision triggering a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  That
    process of reconsideration was completed on 2 January  2015,  when  the
    applications were once again refused.  On the same date decisions  were
    made to remove the claimants from the United Kingdom.

 4. The claimants appealed these decisions to the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    their appeals were allowed in a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pears promulgated on 27 July 2015.  The appeals of  the  first,  second
    and third claimants were allowed under the Immigration Rules and all of
    the claimants' appeals were allowed on "human rights grounds".

 5. The Secretary of State subsequently sought, and obtained, permission to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  by  way  of  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Heynes, made in the following terms on 29 October 2015:

         "2.  The grounds complain  that  the  Judge  erred  in  considering
             whether it would be reasonable  for  the  third  appellant  to
             leave  the  United  Kingdom,  gave  insufficient  reasons  for
             allowing  the  appeals  of  the  first,   second   and   third
             appellants,  placed  too  much  weight  on   a   compatibility
             statement predating changes to the Immigration  Rules,  failed
             to acknowledge that a child's private  life  established  over
             seven years could be outweighed by other factors  and  wrongly
             stated that the first and second  appellants  could  meet  the
             requirements of the parent route when they were  precluded  by
             the requirements of E-LTRPT2.3.

         3.   The decision of the Judge is careful and thorough  but  it  is
             arguable  that  insufficient  consideration   was   given   to
             countervailing  factors  in   determining   whether   it   was
             reasonable for the appellants to return."

Legal context

 6. It is prudent to set out the  legal  context  within  which  First-tier
    Tribunal's ("FtT's") decision sits.

 7. The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain as a parent  are
    found in paragraph R-LTRPT of Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules;
    paragraph 1.1(d) thereof reading:

         '(i)  the  applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal  under   S-LTR:
         Suitability Leave to Remain; and

         (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT2.2-
         2.4 and E-LTRPT3.1; and

         (iii)    paragraph EX.1 applies.'

    E-LTRPT 2.3 requires that:

         '(a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for  the
             child: or the child normally lives with the applicant and  not
             their other parent (who is a British citizen or settled in the
             United Kingdom); or

         (b)  the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be
             -

             (i)  a British citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

             (ii) not the partner of the applicant ...;

             (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
                  to remain as a partner under this Appendix.'

 8. At the material  time,  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    insofar as is relevant, provided:

         '276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v)  is aged 18 years or above and  under  25  years  and  has
             spent at least half of his life living continuously in the  UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,
             has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK.'

 9. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("2002
    Act") is also of significance, and reads:

         '(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.'

Discussion

Immigration Rules - Appeals of the First and Second Claimants

10. At the outset of the hearing Mr Jacobs properly conceded that  the  FtT
    erred in allowing the appeals of the first and second claimants' on the
    basis that each met the requirements of the Immigrations Rules.

11. In her decision letter the Secretary of State concluded that the  first
    and second claimants each failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  both
    paragraph E-LTRPT 2.2 and paragraph E-LTRPT 2.3 of Appendix FM  to  the
    Rules. In its decision the First-tier Tribunal addressed  its  mind  to
    only the  former  requirement,  failing  to  engage  at  all  with  the
    requirements of the latter provision.

12. This is significant because there is no  dispute  that  both  claimants
    cannot fulfil the requirements of paragraph E-LTRPT 2.3 and thus cannot
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph R-LTRPT of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Rules. The FtT's decision to allow their appeals on the basis that each
    met  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is,  consequently,
    perverse.

13. Despite the aforementioned concession, Mr Jacobs  maintained  that  the
    FtT's conclusions on Article 8 outwith the  Rules  cannot  be  impugned
    and, accordingly, its decision to allow the claimants'  appeals  should
    not be set aside.

Immigration Rules (third Claimant)  /  Article  8  outwith  the  Rules  (all
Claimants)

14. It is to this matter that I now turn, observing that at its core  there
    is the need to  analyse  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  consideration  of
    whether it is reasonable to expect the  third  claimant  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and return to Turkey - a requirement  that  is,  in  the
    instant case, not only central to the third claimant's claim under  the
    Rules, but also the first and  second  claimants'  claims  outwith  the
    Rules (as a consequence of the operation of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act).



15. The Secretary of State, eloquently represented  by  Ms  Savage  at  the
    hearing, seeks to bring challenge to the reasoning and  conclusions  of
    the FtT on the aforementioned issue, on the following basis:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal erred by failing to take into  account
             relevant 'countervailing' factors;

         ii) The First-tier  Tribunal  attached  excessive  weight  to  the
             Secretary  of   State's   statement   of   the   "Grounds   of
             Compatibility with Article  8",  which  pre-dates  a  material
             amendment to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules;

        iii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in directing itself at [38] that
             "there is nothing in the Immigration Rules  that  states  that
             "the fact that all of a family unit  would  be  returning  can
             trump a child's private life established for 7 years";

         iv)  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusions   are   inadequately
             reasoned.

16. The following provides  further  addition  to  the  framework  for  the
    Tribunal's consideration of the lawfulness of the FtT's  decision,  and
    the claimed errors therein:

          i) When the question posed by s.117B(6) of the 2002  Act  is  the
             same  as  the  question  posed  in  relation  to  children  by
             paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules, it  must  be  posed  and
             answered in the proper context of whether it is reasonable  to
             expect the child to follow its parents  to  their  country  of
             origin;

         ii) This is not a question that needs to be posed in  relation  to
             each child more than once (see AM (s.117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT
             0260 (IAC) at [36]);

        iii) The underlying  parliamentary  intention  is  that  where  the
             conditions of s.117B(6) are satisfied,  the  public  interests
             identified in Section 117B(1)-(5) are of no  application  (see
             Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B(6) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC)
             at [21]-[22]).

17. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Ms Savage accepted that:

          i)  The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  seek  to  bring  a  pure
             rationality challenge to the FtT's conclusion  that  it  would
             not be reasonable to require the third claimant to  the  leave
             the UK; and,

         ii) The FtT's conclusions in relation to the fourth claimant stand
             or fall with the decision on the  appeals  of  the  first  and
             second claimants.

18. I now turn to consider the substance of  this  appeal  i.e.  the  FtT's
    treatment of the issue of whether it is reasonable to expect the  third
    claimant to leave the United Kingdom and move to Turkey.  The reasoning
    and conclusions on this issue pervade all other aspects of this appeal,
    save for  the  discreet  consideration  of  paragraph  E-LTRPT  2.3  of
    Appendix FM which, as identified above, the FtT ought to have, but  did
    not, consider.  It was not suggested that the FtT's error  in  relation
    to the application of paragraph R-LTRPT (as identified above) of itself
    vitiates the FtT's decision on Article 8  outwith  the  Rules.  In  any
    event, I find that it does not - the FtT's consideration of the  latter
    ground clearly being undertaken on the alternative basis  that  it  was
    wrong in its conclusions under the Rules in relation to the  first  and
    second claimants (see paragraph 48 of the FtT's decision).

19. The FtT's finding that it would not be reasonable to require the  third
    claimant to leave the United Kingdom is at the heart of its  conclusion
    that; (a) the  third  claimant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules; and, (b) the first  and  second  claimants'
    removal would breach Article 8, when considered outwith the confines of
    the Rules (in large  part  in  consequence  of  the  operation  section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act).

20. In her submissions Ms Savage placed focus on the  following  'offending
    paragraphs' in the FtT's decision:

         "[14] The  appellant's  Counsel  referred  me  to  the  Grounds  of
             Compatibility with Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
             Human Rights... (I have highlighted parts) paragraph 27 and 28
             says this:

                  'The Rules deal clearly with how to treat British  citizen
                  and other children  in  cases  where  we  would  otherwise
                  intend to remove  their  parents  and  how  countervailing
                  factors should weigh in  the  decision.   There  are  some
                  instances where children may  be  allowed  to  stay  in  a
                  permanent or temporary basis on best interests.   The  key
                  test for remaining on a  permanent  basis  is  around  the
                  length of continuous residence of a  child  in  the  UK  -
                  which  we  have   set   at   seven   years,   subject   to
                  countervailing factors.  We  consider  that  a  period  of
                  seven continuous years spent in the UK as  a  child  would
                  generally establish a sufficient level of integration  for
                  family and private life to exist such that  removal  would
                  normally not be in the best interests of the child ... the
                  changes are designed to bring consistency and transparency
                  due to decision making.'

             While  the  best  interests  of  the  child  are   a   primary
             consideration, in some circumstances  criminality  will  be  a
             countervailing  factor  which  outweighs  the   child's   best
             interests.  The criminality thresholds which  will  apply  are
             set out below

         ...

         [16] In the most recent  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  on
             Family Migration this is said at 11.2.4:

                  'The requirements that a  non-British  citizen  child  has
                  lived in the UK for a continuous period of  at  least  the
                  seven years immediately preceding the date of application,
                  recognises that over time children start to put down roots
                  and integrate into life in the  UK,  to  the  extent  that
                  being required to leave the UK may be unreasonable ... and
                  strong reasons will be required in order to refuse a  case
                  with continuous UK residence of more  than  seven  years."
                  [emphasis in original]

    And then in the conclusory paragraphs:

         "[36]    The case would  turn  on  my  view  of  the  law  and  the
             importance of the children being in the UK for as long as they
             have been.

         ...

         [38] I conclude that there is nothing in the Immigration Rules that
             says that the parent route is not intended to be relied on  by
             a person who remains in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
             with the other  parent  of  their  child.   Further  there  is
             nothing in the Immigration Rules that says that the fact  that
             all of a family unit would be returning can  trump  a  child's
             private life established for a period of seven years.

         [39] I apply what is said in paragraph 14 and 16.

         [40] I find that the third appellant at the time of the application
             and the fourth appellant currently have been  in  the  UK  for
             more than seven years.

         [41] Further I find that the third appellant has put down roots and
             integrated into life in the  UK,  to  the  extent  that  being
             required to leave the UK is unreasonable.

         [42] Further I find that the fourth  appellant  has  now  put  down
             roots and integrated into life in the UK, to the  extent  that
             being required to leave the UK is unreasonable.

         [43] I find that there is no criminality or countervailing  factors
             of sufficient weight to offset what is said  in  paragraph  41
             and 42.

         [44]  I  find  therefore  that  the  third  appellant   meets   the
             requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) as he is under 18 and has
             lived in the UK for at least seven years at the  date  of  the
             application and it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
             leave the UK.

         [45] I find that he is a qualifying child and that  the  first  and
             second appellants  meet  the  requirements  of  R-LTRPT1.1  of
             Appendix FM  not  least  because,  unlike  the  respondent,  I
             conclude that EX.1 applies, as it would not be reasonable  for
             [EK] to leave the UK.

         [46] I turn to the fourth appellant and it seems to me that he only
             fails to meet the requirements of the Rules because he had not
             been in the UK for seven years at the time of the application.
              The possibility of the first three appellants  remaining  and
             the  fourth  appellant  returning  to  Turkey  means  that  an
             arguable basis for the exercise of  discretion  has  been  put
             forward, the relevant factors have not already  been  assessed
             and a repeat evaluation is necessary outside the Rules.

         [47] I find that  the  decision  will  interfere  with  the  fourth
             appellant's private and family life and will have consequences
             of such gravity as potentially to engage Article 8.  I  accept
             it is in accordance with the law and may be necessary  but  it
             cannot be proportionate where, if the first, second and  third
             appellants remain, the fourth appellant should be required  to
             leave the UK for Turkey, either to remain there or to make  an
             application from Turkey to return.

         [48] I turn to the first and second appellants in the event that my
             views in their meeting the Immigration  Rules  are  considered
             incorrect.  I find that the decision will interfere with their
             family life if the third appellant is permitted to remain  and
             it will have consequences of such gravity  as  potentially  to
             engage Article 8.  I accept it is in accordance with  the  law
             and may  be  necessary.   I  have  considered  paragraph  117B
             including (6) and I judge  that  it  cannot  be  proportionate
             where the third appellant remains in the UK."

21. Turning to the first of the Secretary of  State's  grounds,  Ms  Savage
    identified  the  following  four  'countervailing  factors'  that,  she
    asserted, the FtT failed to take account of when finding that it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the third  claimant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and move to Turkey:

         (a)  The third claimant would be living in  the  same  core  family
         unit in Turkey as has been the case in the UK;

         (b)  He has resided at all times in the  United  Kingdom  with  his
         Turkish national parents;

         (c)  He has previously resided in Turkey; and,

         (d)  He speaks Turkish.

22. As to the second ground Ms Savage observed that in paragraph 39 of  its
    decision the FtT directed itself to apply the  guidance  given  in  the
    statement of the "Grounds of Compatibility" (set out  at  paragraph  20
    above). This, she asserted, was in error given that this statement  had
    been drawn up prior to the  change  in  the  Immigration  Rules,  which
    introduced an additional limb to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  thereof  i.e.
    that a child applicant must demonstrate, in addition to the  fact  that
    they have been in the UK for 7 years, that it would not  be  reasonable
    for them to leave the UK.

23. In relation to the third ground of challenge, Ms Savage drew  attention
    to the terms of the second  sentence  of  paragraph  38  of  the  FtT's
    decision and  commended  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  conclude  that  this
    sentence should be read as the FtT directing itself that the length  of
    a child's residence in the UK - if over seven years - should be treated
    as determinative of the  issue  of  whether  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules had been met.

24. Lastly, Ms Savage asserted that when the FtT's decision is  read  as  a
    whole the Secretary of State is not in a position to understand why she
    was unsuccessful in  the  appeal  -  thus  the  decision  discloses  an
    unlawful inadequacy of reasoning.

25. Mr Jacobs did not seek to  dispute  that  the  features  of  the  third
    claimant's circumstances identified by Ms Savage  (in  her  submissions
    made in relation to the first ground) are relevant to  a  consideration
    under both paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Rules and s.117B(6)  of the 2002
    Act. He submitted, however, that when the FtT's decision is read  as  a
    whole it is apparent that such circumstances were properly  taken  into
    account. It was further  asserted  that  the  FtT's  reference  to  the
    "Grounds of Compatibility" was not unlawful, and that it had been  well
    aware of the subsequent change in the Rules - as amply  evidenced  both
    by  its  consideration   of   the   current   Immigration   Directorate
    Instructions (paragraph 16 of its decision) and its reference  to,  and
    conclusions on, the issue of whether it would be reasonable  to  expect
    the third claimant to leave the  UK.  As  to  the  challenge  drawn  in
    relation to the self-direction given  in  paragraph  38  of  the  FtT's
    decision, Mr Jacobs submitted this to be misconceived.

26. It is clear, in my view, that the FtT was well aware  of  each  of  the
    'countervailing'  features  of  the  third   claimant's   circumstances
    referred to by Ms Savage in her submissions. Nowhere in its decision is
    there a suggestion that the FtT proceeded on the basis that  the  third
    claimant had ever lived apart from his parents whilst in  the  UK  and,
    when identifying in paragraph 25 of its decision  that  "[T]hey  stayed
    with family and friends" (my emphasis) the FtT was clearly alluding  to
    the fact that the four claimants had lived together in the UK. Equally,
    there is no indication in  the  decision  that  the  FtT  advanced  its
    conclusions on the unlawful basis that  the  third  claimant  would  be
    returning to Turkey without the other claimants; indeed,  the  contrary
    is posited in paragraph 38 thereof.  Furthermore,  the  FtT  finds,  in
    paragraphs 25 and 26 of its decision, that the third claimant lived  in
    Turkey prior to coming to the United Kingdom. This  fact  also  readily
    apparent from reading paragraphs 1, 3 and 5 of the FtT's decision as  a
    whole. That the third claimant can speak Turkish, although cannot write
    in that language, is observed in paragraph 27 of the FtT's decision.

27. I find there to be no merit in Ms Savage's  submission  that  the  fact
    that  certain  features  of  the  claimant's  circumstances  are   only
    mentioned in  paragraphs  25  to  32  of  its  decision,  and  are  not
    thereafter  repeated  under  the  heading  "Observations  Findings  and
    Conclusions" [paragraphs 33 onwards], ought to lead to a  finding  that
    the FtT excluded such features from its consideration. At the  risk  of
    being repetitive, I remind myself that the FtT's decision must be  read
    as a whole. On a fair reading of its decision it is  clear  that  those
    findings made  in  paragraphs  25  to  32  (albeit  under  the  heading
    "Evidence") were fed into the conclusions identified later therein.  It
    is to the circumstances identified  in  paragraphs  25  to  32  of  its
    decision that the FtT must have been referring when, in  paragraph  41,
    it stated: "the Third Appellant has now put down roots  and  integrated
    into life in the UK..."

28. Although not advanced by Ms Savage at the hearing, the pleaded  grounds
    also aver that the FtT erred  in  failing  to  take  into  account  the
    relevant circumstances of the other claimants when determining  whether
    it is reasonable to require the third claimant to leave the UK.  Again,
    I find that this submission is not made out when the FtT's decision  is
    read as a whole.

29. The circumstances of all four claimants are identified in paragraphs 25
    to 32 of the FtT's decision. Although clumsily expressed,  in  my  view
    reading paragraphs  41  and  43  together  demonstrates  that  the  FtT
    understood  that  it  should  not   consider   the   third   claimant's
    circumstances in isolation and  that  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    Rules (and 117B(6) of the 2002  Act)  require  an  examination  of  the
    circumstances of all four family members. Significantly, as alluded  to
    further below, the issue of whether  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    require the third claimant to leave the UK was considered on the  basis
    most favourable to the Secretary of State  i.e.  on  the  understanding
    that the third claimant's parents would leave the UK with him.

30. For these reasons I reject the Secretary of State's contention that the
    FtT  erred  in  failing  to  take  account  of  relevant  matters  when
    concluding that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  require  the  third
    claimant to leave the UK.

31. I also reject the contention that the FtT attached excessive weight  to
    the 'Grounds of Compatibility". The fact that these were drawn up prior
    to the amendment to the Immigration Rules on 13 December 2012 is highly
    unlikely to have escaped the expert judge's attention, and  a  sensible
    reading of paragraphs 14 to 16 of the FtT's decision (particularly when
    read with paragraphs 17 to 22)  discloses  that  the  FtT  was  therein
    correctly setting out  the  genesis  of  the  relevant  rule,  and  the
    rationale underpinning it.

32. Furthermore, the FtT correctly directed itself to the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules, identifying that in  addition  to
    the need for a child applicant to demonstrate a period of  seven  years
    residence, such applicant must also demonstrate that it  would  not  be
    reasonable to require them to leave the UK. It is of some  significance
    in my mind that as well as quoting from the "Grounds of  Compatibility"
    the FtT also cited, in paragraph 16 of its decision, from the 'current'
    IDIs - which clearly post-date the  change  to  the  immigration  rule;
    indeed, emphasis was placed therein on the aspects  of  the  IDI  which
    reflected such a change.

33. Turning to the third ground, I agree that  if  the  claimed  'offending
    sentence' in paragraph 38 of the FtT's decision is  read  in  isolation
    then it is suggestive of  the  Tribunal  having  directed  itself  that
    residence of the third claimant in the UK for over seven years would be
    determinative of the third claimant's appeal.  However, one only has to
    read paragraphs 41 to 44 of its decision to identify that this  is  not
    how the FtT approached its task. As already  recognised  above,  it  is
    clear that the Tribunal was aware that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
    Rules incorporates a two-step consideration, both steps  of  which  the
    third claimant had to surmount; the latter being a requirement that  it
    "would not be reasonable to expect [the third claimant]  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom."

34. As to the final limb of the Secretary of State's case before the  Upper
    Tribunal, in my view although the structure of the FtT's decision  does
    little  to  assist,  when  it  is  read  as  a  whole  it  is   clearly
    understandable why the Secretary of  State  was  unsuccessful  in  this
    appeal.

35. For the reasons given above, I find that the FtT's conclusion  that  it
    would not be reasonable to require the third claimant to leave  the  UK
    is not infected by material error. Contrary to the Secretary of State's
    assertions, I find that the FtT properly directed itself in  law,  took
    into  account  all  relevant  matters,  did   not   take   account   of
    irrelevancies and gave lawfully adequate reasons for  its  conclusions.
    The Secretary of State does not seek to challenge the FtT's decision on
    rationality grounds.

36. Consequently, I  conclude  that  the  FtT's  decision  that  the  third
    claimant meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE is  not  flawed  by
    legal error capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal. As  to  the
    decision in relation to the first and second claimants' appeals,  there
    is no error in the conclusion that they each fulfil the requirements of
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. Following the rationale  in  Treebhawon  [at
    18] in such circumstances  the  Article  8  public  interest  does  not
    require their removal. If this is wrong, and meeting  the  requirements
    of s.117B(6) is not determinative of the issue of  whether  removal  is
    proportionate  in  any  given  case,  then  the   FtT's   decision   is
    nevertheless sustainable. First, the terms of paragraph 48 of the FtT's
    decision convey that it did not treat the requirements of s.117B(6)  as
    determinative of the first and second claimants' appeals  and,  second,
    Ms Savage did not seek to identify any features of the first and second
    claimants' circumstances which, having fulfilled  the  requirements  of
    s.117B(6) should, nevertheless, have led to an adverse decision.

37. To summarise, my conclusions in the appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    are as follows.

      a) The FtT erred in allowing the first and second  claimants'  appeals
         under the Immigration Rules. Nevertheless, I  do  not  exercise  my
         discretion to set aside the FtT's decision because:

          i) The  FtT's  conclusion  that  the  third  claimant  meets  the
             requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration
             Rules is not flawed by legal error and remains standing; and,

         ii) The FtT's conclusion that removal of  the  first,  second  and
             fourth claimants would  breach  Article  8  ECHR  outwith  the
             confines of the Immigration Rules is not flawed by legal error
             and remains standing.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given above, the SSHD's appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is
dismissed.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 2 February 2016

-----------------------
[1] To avoid confusion the appellants before the First-tier Tribunal (the
Respondents before the Upper Tribunal) are referred to herein as 'the
claimants'.

