
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/04515/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |    Decision and Reasons           |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On  22 June 2016                   |On 5 July 2016                     |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE C LANE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Miss MARIA CHRISTINA GUARIN OLERMO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent: Mr S Karim (counsel) instructed by Ashfield, Solicitors

DECISION AND REASONS


1. We have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence  we
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw, promulgated  on  9  November
2016 which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was born  on  14  July  1979  and  is  a  national  of  the
Philippines.


4. The appellant came to the UK on 7 February 2009  as  a  tier  4  student.
Although the respondent extended leave to remain as a tier  4  student  that
leave was curtailed on 14 August 2013 so that it expired on 3 January  2014.
On 20 May 2013 the appellant applied for a residence card  as  a  derivative
right to reside in the UK. That application was refused on 25 October 2014.

5. On 25 November 2014  the  appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
confirmation of her derivative right to reside in  the  UK  as  the  primary
carer of her British citizen mother. That  application  was  refused  on  19
January 2015.

The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Bradshaw ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

7. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 May 2016,  Acting  Resident  Judge
Zucker gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "2. The grounds take issue with the finding that the appellant was the
      primary carer. That is a finding of fact that was open  to  the  judge
      and for the avoidance of doubt permission is not granted to  challenge
      the finding. However it is arguable  that  the  judge  has  failed  to
      consider the  application  of  regulation  15A[4A](c)  and  that  such
      amounts to an error of law. The guidance in the  case  of  Ayinde  and
      Thinjom (Carers - Reg.15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 560 may  offer  some
      assistance."

The Hearing

8. (a) Ms Isherwood, for the respondent, told us that the decision  contains
a material error of law because the Judge omitted one crucial  part  of  the
test set out in regulation 15A(4A) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006. Ms Isherwood accepted there can be no  challenge  to
the Judge's finding that the appellant is the primary carer of  her  British
citizen mother, but argued that the Judge  failed  to  consider  what  would
happen to the  appellant's  British  citizen  mother  if  the  appellant  is
required to leave the UK (which is the final part of the  test  set  out  in
regulation 15A(4A) of the 2006 Regulations)

(b) Ms Isherwood took us to [13] of the  decision.  The  first  sentence  of
[13] is a finding that the appellant works 24 hours  a  week.  Ms  Isherwood
told us that that fact is not mentioned in the  care  plan  referred  to  at
[16] of the decision, so that an inconsistency in the  evidence  before  the
Judge has not been resolved. Ms Isherwood  relied  on  at  [41]  &  [42]  of
Ayinde and Thinjom (carers- Reg 15A  -  Zambrano)  (2015)  UKUT  00560,  and
reminded us that the appellant's mother already receives  NHS  care  in  the
UK. She told us that even if the appellant's mother requires  24-hour  care,
that  care  is  available  to  the  appellant's  mother  regardless  of  the
whereabouts of the appellant.

(c) Ms Isherwood took us to [17] of the decision, and told  us  that  there,
when the Judge weighs the various facts as he found them to  be,  the  Judge
applied the wrong test. At [17] the Judge finds that the appellant's  mother
requires daily 24-hour care, which, he finds would be

      .... difficult and detrimental to her health...


 without the appellant's assistance. She  reminded  us  that  the  pertinent
question set by regulation 15A(4A) is

      will the appellant's mother be unable  to  reside  in  the  UK  or  in
      another EEA state if the appellant leaves the UK?

(d) Ms Isherwood urged us to set the decision aside and then  to  substitute
our own decision dismissing the appeal.

9. Mr Karim, counsel for the appellant, told us that the decision  does  not
contain any errors of law, material or otherwise. He adopted  the  terms  of
the skeleton argument prepared for  the  appellant,  and  relied  on  Shizad
(sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC).  He  argued  that
the respondent's submissions are irrelevant.  He  told  us  that  the  Judge
acknowledges that the appellant works part time,  before  finding  that  the
appellant's presence in the UK is a crucial part  of  her  mother's  overall
care-plan.  He took us to [3] of the decision, where the Judge sets out  the
correct test in law, and then told us that the Judge's  findings  throughout
the decision are informed by the correct self-direction  found  at  [3].  He
asked us to dismiss the  respondent's  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

10. EEA Regulation 15A (4A) says
      15A. (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies
      the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of this
      regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the United
      Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.
      ......(4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
           (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
           British citizen");
           (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United
           Kingdom; and
           (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
           the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.


11. In Ayinde and Thinjom (carers- Reg 15A - Zambrano) (2015) UKUT 00560  it
was held that  (i)    The  deprivation  of  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  the
substance of the rights attaching to the status of European  Union  citizens
identified in the decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ C-34/09  is  limited  to
safeguarding a British citizen's EU rights as defined in  Article  20;  (ii)
The provisions of reg. 15A  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006 as amended apply when the effect of removal  of  the  carer
of a British citizen renders the British citizen no longer  able  to  reside
in the United Kingdom or in another EEA state.  This requires the  carer  to
establish as a fact that the British citizen will be  forced  to  leave  the
territory of the Union; (iii) The requirement is not met  by  an  assumption
that the citizen will leave and does not involve a consideration of  whether
it would be reasonable for  the  carer  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   A
comparison of the British citizen's  standard  of  living  or  care  if  the
appellant remains or departs is material only in the context of whether  the
British citizen will leave the United Kingdom' (iv)The Tribunal is  required
to examine critically a claim that a British citizen will  leave  the  Union
if the benefits he currently receives by remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom
are unlikely to be matched in the country in which  he  claims  he  will  be
forced to settle.

12. The Judge correctly sets out the test  to  be  applied  at  [6]  of  the
decision. The Judge sets out  his  findings  between  [10]  &  [20]  of  the
decision. At [19] the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  is  her  mother's
primary carer. It is accepted that  the  appellant's  mother  is  a  British
citizen. Those  findings  of  fact  are  sufficient  to  address  regulation
15A(4A)(a) & (b).

13. What the Judge does not do is address regulation 15A(4A)(c) of the  2006
regulations. Throughout his  findings  of  fact,  the  Judge  considers  the
appellant's mother's mental health and associated needs. He finds  that  the
appellant is instrumental  in  providing  care,  and  that  the  appellant's
mother  will  face  challenges  without  the  assistance  offered   by   the
appellant, but the Judge does not consider the appellant's mother's  ability
to reside in the UK if the appellant has to leave,  nor  does  he  make  any
findings in fact which drive at the test set out  in  regulation  15A(4A)(c)
of the regulations.

14. We find that the  failure  to  consider  regulation  15A(4A)(c)  of  the
regulations is a material error of law, because it leads  to  an  incomplete
assessment of the appellant's  case.  We  must  therefore  set  the  Judge's
decision aside. Although  we  set  the  Judge's  decision  aside,  there  is
sufficient material before us to enable us to make our own findings of  fact
and substitute our own decision.

Our findings of fact

15. The appellant came the UK from the Philippines on 7 February 2009  as  a
tier 4 student. She has remained in the UK since then. The  appellant  lives
with her mother, who is a British citizen. The appellant's two sisters  live
in the UK. They are also British citizens.

16. The appellant's mother suffers from psychotic depression with  cognitive
impairment. She is tormented by paranoid ideation and has poor  memory.  Her
condition is  treated  by  oral  medication.  The  appellant  helps  in  the
administration of that medication.

17. The appellant has lived with her mother since  June  2013.  She  assists
her mother with the ordinary activities of daily living both during the  day
and during the night. The appellant's mother also  now  receives  night-time
assistance from NHS carers two nights each week.  A care plan was  drawn  up
for the appellant's mother in September  2015.  That  care  plan  says  that
without the appellant the appellant's mother would  require  constant  care,
and would struggle if she had to enter residential care.

18. The appellant works 24 hours per week. Her sisters are British  citizens
who live in the UK. One of her sisters helped with the appellant's  mother's
care until recently. Because of her own health concerns, she  is  no  longer
able to offer assistance with the appellant's mother's care.

Discussion

19. It is clear from the evidence in this case that the  appellant's  mother
suffers from a mental disorder and that the appellant provides a great  deal
of care to her mother. The  finding  that  the  appellant  is  her  mother's
primary carer has been preserved. The care plan relied on by  the  appellant
indicates that the appellant's mother already  receives  NHS  care.  If  the
appellant does not stay in the UK, her mother will rely more heavily on  NHS
resources.

20. At [42] of Ayinde and Thinjom this Tribunal said

    The appellants argue that the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the
    rights of their British family members  includes  the  right  of  those
    suffering the effects of increasing age, infirmity or illness should be
    protected against losing their home and losing  the  care  provided  by
    their family members.  The submission runs dangerously close to arguing
    that those who are unable to benefit  from  carers  from  within  their
    family are at risk of suffering a violation of their  rights  by  being
    cared for by local authority carers or social workers or by the NHS  or
    by being placed in a care-home.   This  is  simply  misconceived.   The
    support provided by local authorities, care agencies, residential homes
    and hospitals has at its core the preservation of the dignity of  those
    under their care.  Care workers would justifiably feel aggrieved at the
    suggestion that their care falls below a standard  that  preserves  the
    dignity of their patients.  The fact that examples can be found of care
    falling below acceptable standards is not to the point.  Whilst, in the
    course  of  argument,  Mr  Knafler  disavowed  any  suggestion  to  the
    contrary, it is the inevitable consequence of  his  reliance  upon  the
    Charter.  If he were not suggesting the two British  citizens  involved
    in these appeals would suffer  a  loss  of  their  protected  right  to
    dignity if they were required to go into residential care, there  would
    have been no point in relying on the Charter.

.
21. There is no reliable  evidence  that  the  appellant's  mother's  mental
health is so fragile that she cannot accept either an increase in  NHS  care
or  a  transfer  to  residential  care.  The  weight  of  reliable  evidence
indicates that if the appellant leaves the UK,  her  mother  will  be  cared
for; there are facilities available for the appellant's mother. We  have  to
consider whether or not the appellant's mother would be unable to reside  in
the UK. The weight of reliable  evidence  indicates  that,  because  of  the
available care for the appellant's mother, she will be  able  to  reside  in
the UK. A high threshold  is  set  by  Regulation  15A(4A)(c)  of  the  2006
regulations. The test  is  unambiguously  whether  or  not  the  appellant's
mother will be unable to continue to reside  in  the  UK.   The  appellant's
mother is not well  and  requires  care.  Care  is  available.  Those  facts
indicate that the appellant's mother is able to continue to  reside  in  the
UK.

22. The appellant cannot fulfil the requirements of the final  part  of  the
test set out in Regulation 15A(4A) of the  2006  regulations.  We  therefore
have to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Decision

23. The decision of  Judge  RJ  Bradshaw  promulgated  on  9  November  2015
contains errors of law such that it falls to be set aside. We therefore  set
the decision aside.

24. We have remade the decision.

25. The appeal against the respondent's decision dated 19  January  2015  is
dismissed.



Signed                                                              Date:
5th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


