
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04535/2015
                                                IA/04542/2015, IA/04551/2015
                                                IA/04555/2015, IA/04558/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4th October 2016                |On 22nd November 2016              |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD [A]
                                  FAIQ [T]
                                    [Q T]
                                    [A R]
                                    [A M]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

No application for anonymity was made and there is no apparent reason for
anonymity.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss. R. Dulay, Counsel, instructed by Farani-Javid-
                    Taylor Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. For convenience I will refer to the parties as they were named in the
    First tier Tribunal.

 2. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs who allowed the appeals under the
    immigration rules.

 3. The first appellant came to the United Kingdom on 18 January 2008 as a
    work permit holder. His leave was valid until 26 November 2011. He was
    accompanied by his wife, the second appellant and their two children; a
    third child being born in United Kingdom. All are nationals of Pakistan
    and are dependant on the first appellant's appeal succeeding.

 4. First-tier judge Isaacs recorded that in October 2011 the first
    appellant provided his employer with various documents intending that
    application could be made for an extension of his leave. The judge
    referred to a misunderstanding on the part of the employer as to when
    the leave expired the result of which was at the tier 2 application was
    made on 31 January 2012.

 5. On 23 April 2012 the appellant was granted leave to remain as a Tier 2
    migrant.

 6. On 14 February 2013 the appellant and his family applied for
    settlement. This was covered by paragraph 245HF of the immigration
    rules, paragraph (c) of which required five years lawful residence. The
    application was refused on 15 February 2013 and the refusal was
    affirmed on reconsideration on 27 June 2013.

 7. On 1 May 2013 the appellant made a further application for settlement.
    This was refused on 22 October 2013. An appeal against that decision
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig on 3 July 2014 who
    referred the matter back to the respondent for consideration in light
    of a public policy. This any article 8 issues arising were also to be
    adjudicated upon. On 12 January 2015 the refusal was maintained. The
    matter then came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Isaacs.

The First tier Tribunal

 8. At paragraph 26 of the decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs under
    the heading `Findings and conclusions' stated that it was agreed
    between the parties that the appellant was not at fault in the steps he
    took to extend his leave in October 2011. There was a reference to a
    combination of delay and confusion resulting in a break of more than 28
    days of his lawful leave to remain.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs refers to the refusal letter of 12
    January 2015 which deals with a referral back. The refusal letter
    states that the respondent took into account the fact that the break in
    lawful residence was not due to the fault of the appellant; that he and
    his family had lived almost exclusively in either the United Arab
    Emirates or the United Kingdom and regard was had to the welfare of
    their children as required under section 55. First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Isaacs concluded that the respondent had exercised her discretion.

10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs went on to consider the Home Office
    guidance v.12 in relation to the calculation of lawful residence. The
    judge referred to 3 sets of circumstances in the guidance where the
    decision maker can disregard application is made more than 28 days
    after the expiry of leave. The Judge summarises these as consisting of
    serious illness: travel or postal delays: and the inability to provide
    necessary documents. The judge stated that the list is exhaustive.
    However these third category, travel or postal delays, provides
    examples. The judge concluded that the list of examples was not
    exhaustive.

11. The judge went on to consider whether the first appellant situation
    came within the policy and concluded the delay from his leave expiring
    was due to circumstances beyond the appellant's control. The judge
    referred to the appellant providing documents to his employer in time
    and that it was for his employer to obtain a sponsor's license and
    thereby be in a position to issue a certificate of sponsorship. The
    judge found that the appellant did everything he was required to do in
    order to progress his application. This conclusion therefore was that
    he was unable to provide the necessary documents in circumstances
    beyond his control as referred to in the guidance.

12. Having reached this conclusion the judge then posed the question at
    paragraph 32 as to whether the judge was empowered to exercise
    discretion. The judge concluded that as the respondent had exercised
    her discretion it was open to the tribunal to then exercise discretion
    independently. The judge concluded that the circumstances arising were
    exceptional as set out in the policy and that he was entitled to the
    benefit of the policy and the break in continuity should be
    disregarded.

The Upper Tribunal

13. In seeking permission to appeal the respondent contended that First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs in allowing the appeal out right materially
    erred in law. This is because there was no discretion within the
    immigration rules in relation to the gap. The discretion was contained
    in a policy outside the rules. The respondent had already exercised her
    discretion following the referral by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig.

14. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
    judge was not entitled to allow the appeal under the immigration rules
    on a policy falling wholly outside the rules. Reference was made to the
    decision of DS Abdi-v- SSHD [1996] Imm AR. A

15. At hearing, Mr D. Clarke referred to the decision of AG and others
    (policies; executive discretion is; tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007]
    UKAIT 00082 which held that in terms of a policy dependent on the
    exercise of discretion outside the rules the tribunal has no power to
    substitute its own decision. Miss. R. Dulay submitted that the decision
    should be upheld as First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs had concluded
    there was a discretion which could be exercised in the appellant
    favour.

Consideration

16. There is no dispute on the facts that the appellant came to the United
    Kingdom on 18 January 2008 with leave until 26 November 2011. His next
    leave for whatever reason was not granted until 23 April 2012.
    Consequently there was a period of 148 days when he and his family had
    no leave.

17. He has made application for settlement. This is covered by paragraph
    245 HF of the immigration rules. Essentially, 245 HF (c) requires an
    applicant to have spent a continuous period of five years lawfully in
    the United Kingdom of which the most recent period must have been spent
    with leave as a Tier 2 migrant. The appellant cannot meet this rule
    because of the period when his residence was not lawful. The rule
    provides that if an applicant meets the requirements indefinite leave
    will be granted and if they do not, the application will be refused.
    There is no discretion within the rule. There is provision for
    disregarding an overstay of less than 28 days but this does not assist
    the appellant.

18. The respondent does have guidance for caseworkers as to the calculation
    of the five years. There is guidance as to the situation where serious
    or compelling reasons exist as to why the continuous residence has not
    occurred.

19. I have been provided with the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Pullig following the hearing on 15 January 2014 and 5 March 2014.The
    judge considered the appellant's explanation for the gap. At paragraph
    47 of the decision the judge refers to the respondent's guidance. The
    judge concluded at paragraph 52 that the respondent had not considered
    the exercise of discretion and so the decision was not in accordance
    with the law. The matter was then referred back to the respondent. The
    matter was reconsidered and the refusal maintained.

20. At paragraph 27 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Isaacs decision it was
    confirmed that both parties accepted the respondent did exercise her
    discretion. The respondent's letter of 12 January 2015 sets out the
    factors taken into account.



Conclusion

21. It is my conclusion that the situation arising is covered by what was
    said in AG and others (policies; executive discretion is; tribunal's
    powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082. The immigration rule sets out a
    clear requirement of five years continuous lawful residence. There is
    no discretion within the rule in relation to this. There is no dispute
    that this requirement is not met. The respondent has policy which gives
    guidance to caseworkers for the exercise of a limited discretion to
    cover exceptional circumstances. In the present instance that
    discretion has not been exercise in the appellant's favour. The
    tribunal has no power to substitute its own view for that of the
    decision maker in the exercise of the discretion. Consequently, First-
    tier judge Isaacs materially errs in law in purporting to do so. That
    decision cannot stand. I remake the decision was the only option being
    to dismiss the appeal under the immigration rules. No article 8 claim
    was pursued.



Decision.

The decision of First-tier judge Isaacs allowing the appeals materially
errs in law and is set aside. The decision is remade dismissing the
appeals.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
