

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04497/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 1st August 2016                          |On: 2nd August 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                          Ilaben Nileshkumar Patel
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India date of birth 26th  October  1977.
    On the 4th  November  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Telford)
    dismissed her appeal against a decision to refuse to vary her leave  to
    remain and to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


 2. The matter in dispute between the parties was set out in  the  'refusal
    letter' dated 21st January 2015.   Therein the Respondent decided  that
    the Appellant did not qualify for leave  to  remain  as  the  dependent
    partner of a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  The reason for that was
    because her husband was supposed to be studying at a  Higher  Education
    Institute, but he wasn't.  He had been studying at  the  'International
    School of Sikh Studies'.  He did not qualify for  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    Migrant, and therefore nor did she. The refusal  letter  makes  express
    reference to paragraph 319(c)(i) of the Rules.

 3. The Appellant brought an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. She did not
    attend the hearing and the Judge therefore proceeded to  determine  the
    matter on the basis of the written grounds. The  appeal  was  dismissed
    for the same reasons set out in the refusal letter.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and it was granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan who queried the terms of the refusal  letter  and
    the "disgraceful" drafting of the provision in  question.  In  granting
    permission Judge Jordan gave  directions  that  the  Respondent  should
    review her refusal letter.

 5. When the matter came before me the Appellant did not attend.  This  was
    no doubt because of certain developments in  her  case.  Following  the
    grant of permission by Judge Jordan  the  SSHD  withdrew  the  decision
    under appeal and issued a fresh refusal, against  which  the  Appellant
    has now lodged another appeal. That appeal is now pending in the First-
    tier Tribunal under reference IA/02340/2016.  I have received no formal
    request that the appeal has  been  withdrawn,  nor  do  I  consider  it
    appropriate to treat it as abandoned. In the circumstances  I  consider
    that the only appropriate disposal is to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  the
    grounds that it is no longer pursued by the Appellant.

      Decisions


 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  has  not  been  shown  to
    contain an error of law and it is upheld.


 7. There is no order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               29th July 2016
