
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04581/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                            |On 12 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               MRS BANI MITRA
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K. Reid of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a  citizen  of  India  born  on  15  July  1936.   She
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 19 December 2013 to
    refuse to vary leave to remain for a purpose  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules and to remove her by way of directions under Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Her appeal  was  allowed
    at first instance by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Walters  sitting
    at Taylor House on 24 September  2014.   The  Respondent  appeals  with
    leave against that decision and the matter therefore comes before me in
    the first place to decide whether there is an error of law in the first
    instance decision.  For the reasons which I set out below I have  found
    that there is and have proceeded to remake the decision in this appeal.
     I therefore continue to refer to the parties as  they  were  known  at
    first instance for the sake of convenience.

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a  visitor  on  11  January
    2012, returning to India on 8 December 2012.  She re-entered the United
    Kingdom as  a  visitor  on  26 December  2012  and  made  her  current
    application for indefinite leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules on 12 June 2013.

3.   The Appellant's application was based on the fact that her husband  had
    passed away on 6 November  2012  while  she  was  visiting  the  United
    Kingdom.  She and her son, Dr Mitra ("the  Sponsor")  had  returned  to
    India on 8 December 2012 to finalise  the  formalities.   Her  son  had
    accompanied the Appellant because she, the  Appellant,  was  unable  to
    look after herself physically and financially.

The Appellant's Case

4.   The Appellant had a number of medical conditions. In 1972 she had  been
    diagnosed with follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma which  was  subsequently
    treated with radiotherapy.  In 1995 she was found to have a large  mass
    involving kidney which was also a non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  She  had  been
    treated with six cycles of CHOP and a CT scan at the end  of  treatment
    showing that she had a complete  remission  but  had  scarring  to  her
    remaining kidney.  In 2001 she had developed a further  lymphadenopathy
    but further chemotherapy had achieved a complete  remission.   In  2009
    she developed further lymph nodes in her neck and chest.  In  2012  and
    2013 she had severe breathlessness from mitral valve disease which  had
    improved on diuretics.  She  had  chronic  renal  failure  and  was  on
    diuretic  medication  for  raised  blood  pressure.   Apart  from   her
    oncological problems  she  had  other  medical  problems  resulting  in
    multiple organ failure which needed  specialist  cardiology  and  renal
    specialist  input.   She  was  socially,  emotionally  and  financially
    dependent on her son the Sponsor.  She was physically unfit and  needed
    someone to help her.  She was unable to go to the shops to buy food for
    herself.  In India when she could not walk to the shops she had  to  go
    to bed hungry.  She was unable to clean and maintain her home in India.
     The Sponsor was her only child.

5.   The Sponsor said that he employed a housekeeper who  looked  after  his
    mother.  He accepted he could employ people in India to look after  his
    mother but she would  not  receive  the  same  quality  of  care.   The
    housekeeper cooked for the Appellant and washed her clothes.  In  India
    the Appellant had lived in a house  with  her  husband,  the  Sponsor's
    father, where they had one domestic servant.  Some treatment had  taken
    place in India.

6.   The Sponsor was concerned about his mother's fitness to fly  when  they
    both  went  back  on  8  December  2012.   He  had   had   considerable
    communication with Emirates Airways  about  her  and  they  would  only
    permit her to fly if he accompanied her.



The Decision at First Instance

7.   The Judge found that the Appellant could not  succeed  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules because  she  clearly  had  social  and
    cultural ties with India having lived there for 76 out of her 77 years.
     The Appellant's medical condition did  not  meet  the  high  threshold
    required for Article 3.  Whilst the Appellant had a family life in  the
    United Kingdom with the Sponsor and his wife and children there was  no
    more  than  normal  emotional  dependence  between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor.  The Sponsor had provided for the Appellant financially  while
    she was in India and continued to do so while she was in the  UK.   The
    removal of the Appellant would  amount  to  an  interference  with  the
    Appellant's right to respect for private and family life under  Article
    8.  It would, however, be in accordance with immigration law.

8.   The Judge carefully considered the relevant provisions in  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules in relation to entry  clearance  as  an  adult
    dependent  relative.   The  Appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  in
    Section E-ECDR.2.4 in that the Appellant "as a result of  age,  illness
    or disability requires long-term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday
    tasks".  However, the Judge found that the Appellant could not go on to
    meet the requirements of Section E-ECDR.2.5  which  provides  that  the
    Appellant "must be unable, even with the practical and  financial  help
    of the Sponsor, to obtain the required level of  care  in  the  country
    where they are living, because (a) it is not available and there is  no
    person in that country who can reasonably provide it; or (b) it is not
    affordable."

9.   The Judge found  that  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in India if the Sponsor employed a paid carer or
    carers and it was not in dispute that the Sponsor could  afford  to  do
    this. No adult dependent relative could succeed in an  application  for
    entry clearance where a paid carer could be employed in  their  country
    of origin and the Sponsor could afford to pay for it.  Paid care  by  a
    stranger defeated an application for entry clearance as long as it  was
    affordable.  Such an application would have to be made from abroad, not
    in country.  However much one sympathised with the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor it would be proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  being
    pursued to remove the Appellant.

10.  Nevertheless the Judge was concerned about one point and that  was  the
    state of the medical evidence as to whether the Appellant  was  fit  to
    fly.  Emirates Airways had only accepted the Appellant as fit to fly in
    December 2012 because she was accompanied by the Sponsor.  He could not
    be compelled to accompany the Appellant if she were to be removed  from
    the United Kingdom. As there was no-one who would be able to  accompany
    the Appellant it would be a breach of her physical and moral  integrity
    to remove her unless and until  the  Respondent  established  that  the
    Appellant was fit to fly.  The Judge allowed the appeal on human rights
    grounds, albeit dismissing it under the Immigration Rules.  He made  no
    fee award, finding that "the Respondent succeeded substantially on  the
    merits".



The Onward Appeal

11.  The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision,  arguing  that  the
    Judge's decision to allow the appeal was  misguided.   It  was  unclear
    what medical evidence had satisfied the First-tier that there  was  "no
    doubt that [the Appellant] is not  fit  to  fly".   The  evidence  from
    Emirates Airways stated that they would only accept  the  Appellant  on
    board if she was accompanied by her son the Sponsor but  this  was  not
    independent medical evidence of the Appellant's fitness or unfitness to
    fly.  The burden was on the Appellant to show that  she  was  unfit  to
    fly.  In any event the Respondent would not remove the Appellant  until
    such time as she  was  deemed  fit  to  fly  where  it  was  previously
    evidenced that she was unable to do so.  It was not open to  the  Judge
    to allow the appeal under Article 8.

12.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foudy  on  9  December  2014.   In  granting
    permission to appeal the Judge wrote that an arguable error of law  was
    disclosed by the Respondent's application.

The Hearing before Me

13.  The matter thus came before me in the first  place  to  decide  whether
    there was a material error of law in the Judge's decision such that  it
    fell to be set aside and remade.  If  not  the  decision  would  stand.
    Although the case was called on for hearing in the mid-afternoon  there
    was no  attendance  by  either  the  Appellant  or  the  Sponsor.   The
    Appellant was represented at the hearing before me by Counsel but there
    was no reasonable explanation given  for  the  absence  of  either  the
    Appellant or Sponsor.  In the absence of such a reasonable  explanation
    I decided that the matter would proceed.  There  was  no  objection  to
    this course by Counsel or any application for an adjournment.

14.  In  brief  oral  submissions  the  Presenting  Officer  reiterated  the
    arguments contained in the grounds of onward appeal that there  was  no
    justification for the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant  was  unfit
    to fly.  In any event, if a decision was taken to remove the  Appellant
    the Respondent could make whatever arrangements  were  needed  at  that
    time to facilitate removal.

15.  In reply Counsel accepted that she was in a difficult position  in  the
    light of the non-attendance of the Appellant and the Sponsor.  However,
    there was medical evidence of the Appellant's condition.   The  hearing
    at  first  instance  had  been  difficult  and  the  Judge   had   made
    observations about the inability to communicate with the Appellant  due
    to her hearing difficulties.  The Judge had considered that the removal
    of the Appellant to India was proportionate under  Article  8  but  had
    then considered  it  to  be  impossible  in  practice.   The  practical
    problems involved in removing the Appellant should  have  affected  the
    Judge's proportionality considerations.  He should have gone  into  the
    proportionality consideration in a more pragmatic way.

16.  It was argued that the removal directions could remain in  place  until
    such time as the Appellant was assessed as fit to  fly.   Counsel  made
    two observations on that.  The first was that better  medical  evidence
    would be required.  The Appellant suffered from a  permanent  condition
    which would not improve.  The second  was  that  Section  47  had  been
    applied by the Respondent because the Appellant was here unlawfully but
    the reason why she had become an overstayer was because she was not fit
    to leave the United Kingdom due to her illnesses.

The Error of Law Stage

17.  The first issue I have to decide is whether there was an error of  law.
     The Judge had decided that it was a  proportionate  interference  with
    the Appellant's private and family life in this country to require  her
    to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   She  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons given by  the  Judge  and  the  Judge
    evidently did not consider that there was any  reason  why  the  appeal
    should be allowed outside the Rules save that there was  the  issue  of
    the Appellant's fitness to fly.  Although the Judge  found  that  there
    were more than the normal emotional ties between the Appellant and  her
    son the Sponsor because of the Appellant's dependence on  the  Sponsor,
    the Judge also considered that the Sponsor could make arrangements  for
    the Appellant in India so that she did not need to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The only reason why she should remain in the  United  Kingdom
    was because of the practical problem in physically removing her.

18.  In doing so the Judge erred since that was not a relevant part  of  the
    proportionality test.  What the Judge had to do if he was to allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 was to establish whether there  were  compelling
    and compassionate circumstances such that  the  appeal  should  succeed
    outside the Rules (see Gulshan).  The Judge had accepted that Article 8
    was engaged.  The only  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstance  he
    considered to be relevant was the issue of fitness to fly.  It was  not
    a question of the Appellant's medical condition  or  what  arrangements
    needed to be made for her.

19.  The issue was thus a very narrow one.  Was it sufficient  to  allow  an
    appeal under Article 8 on the  basis  that  there  would  be  practical
    difficulties in removing the Appellant? It is difficult to see how  the
    arrangements which the Respondent might make for  removal  could  be  a
    matter for arbitration by the Tribunal.  It is well established that in
    the case of the removal of a minor  to  their  country  of  origin  the
    Respondent should make some  form  of  enquiry  as  to  what  reception
    arrangements there will be upon return.  That would not apply  in  this
    case even given the Appellant's medical condition because the Judge was
    satisfied that appropriate arrangements could be made for the Appellant
    once she returned to India.

20.  Similarly where there is a risk of self-harm by a person being  removed
    it is well established that the Respondent should make arrangements  to
    ensure that no such self-harm can occur when being removed.  That  does
    not apply in this case either since the Respondent would not remove the
    Appellant unless she was fit to fly.

21.  In fact it had not been established that the  Appellant  was  unfit  to
    fly.  The evidence if anything pointed to the fact that she was fit  to
    fly because she had flown both back  to  India  in  December  2012  and
    returned to the United Kingdom.   The  Respondent's  criticism  of  the
    Judge was that he had misinterpreted the Sponsor's evidence  (that  the
    Appellant could only fly if accompanied by the Sponsor)  to  mean  that
    she was not fit to fly at all.  That was an error although,  since  the
    issue of whether she was fit to fly or not  was  not  relevant  to  the
    outcome of the proceedings, it was not of itself a material error.  The
    important point was that the Judge had embarked on a line of  reasoning
    which was not properly open to him.  I therefore found there to  be  an
    error of law such that the decision of the First-tier fell  to  be  set
    aside and remade.

The Substantive Re-hearing

22.  I have indicated there was no further evidence  to  be  given  in  this
    case because of the non-attendance of the Appellant  and  the  Sponsor.
    Counsel for the Appellant properly drew the Tribunal's attention to the
    state of health of the Appellant but this does not in  my  view  affect
    the  issue  of  whether  there  were   compelling   and   compassionate
    circumstances such that the appeal should be allowed outside the Rules.
     The Judge at first instance did not find  that  to  be  the  case  and
    neither do I.  The Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules,  she
    was here unlawfully, she had shown that she was able to fly to and from
    India, arrangements could be made for her care in India.  The weight to
    be given to the fact that she could not meet the Immigration Rules  was
    such that the Judge was quite right when conducting the proportionality
    exercise to find that the appeal could not  succeed  either  within  or
    outside the Immigration Rules.

23.  The error the Judge made was a narrow one and setting that part of  the
    determination aside (but not the remainder of the Judge's findings  and
    conclusions) leads me to the view that as Article 8 was engaged in this
    case it was not a disproportionate interference with Article  8  rights
    to dismiss the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decisions.
    It was not argued that the Appellant could meet the Immigration  Rules.
    Any private life she had established here had  been  established  while
    her status was either precarious or unlawful. As such little weight was
    to  be  afforded  to  it  in  assessing  the  proportionality  of   any
    interference with it. Her family life with her  son  did  not  for  the
    reasons given by  the  Judge  go  beyond  normal  emotional  ties.  Any
    interference with that family life would thus be proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim being pursued.

24.  Having set aside  the  decision  at  first  instance  I  remake  it  by
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decisions to
    refuse to vary leave and to remove her.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.

I have remade the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal against  the
Respondent's decisions in this case.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Signed this 11th day of February 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Judge made no fee award in this case and I preserve  that  decision.   I
too make no fee award as I have dismissed the Appellant's appeal.



Signed this 11th day of February 2015


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

