
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA042002015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 May 2016                        |On 24 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                           Andreea Bianca Dumaitru
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs of Counsel instructed by Addison & Khan,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant, Andreea Bianca Dumaitru, is a citizen of Romania born on
    25 January 1988. She was issued a residence card on 5 March 2009 as  an
    EEA national exercising Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.   On  8
    November 2013 she married Gurdeep Singh, a citizen of India born on  11
    May 1988.

 2. On 30 May 2014 her husband applied for a residence card under Reg.7  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regs).

 3. On 7 October 2014 the Appellant and her husband were interviewed by the
    Respondent who on the same day refused to issue a residence card to the
    husband because she was satisfied that the marriage  of  the  Appellant
    and her husband was a marriage of convenience  within  the  meaning  of
    Reg.2 of the EEA Regs.

 4. On 16 January 2015 the Respondent served on the Appellant a Decision to
    Remove her under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  and
    Regs.19(3), 21B(2) and 24 of the EEA Regs. This is the  decision  under
    appeal.

 5. Although there is a letter giving reasons for refusal for the  husband,
    there is no similar letter in relation to the decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant.  It is clear what are the reasons from the grounds of appeal
    she lodged under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 as amended and Reg.26 of the EEA Regs.   These  refer  to  the
    Respondent's claim that her marriage was one of  convenience  and  that
    with reference to Reg.21B of the EEA Regs she had abused her  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom pursuant to the EEA Regs by entering  into
    a marriage of convenience or fraudulently assisting another to  attempt
    to obtain a right to reside.

 6. On 23 January 2015 the Appellant and her husband  also  lodged  appeals
    against the respective decisions to refuse him a residence card and  to
    remove her. CHECK

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 7. The two appeals were linked and on 18 September 2015  Designated  Judge
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Manuell  heard  them  and  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 29 September 2015  found  that  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband had entered into a marriage of convenience and  dismissed  both
    appeals.  He found both the Appellant  and  her  husband  were  neither
    reliable nor truthful witnesses.

 8. It appears that the husband, who  by  then  was  apparently  no  longer
    represented, submitted an application for permission to appeal.  In the
    absence of any documentary evidence to the contrary,  it  would  appear
    this was treated by the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  an  application  for
    permission to appeal by  both  the  Appellant  and  her  husband.   The
    grounds challenged Judge Manuell's finding  that  the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience.  On 4  March  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal A K Simpson refused permission to appeal.

Upper Tribunal Permission Application

 9. The husband appears to have taken no further action, but  on  22  March
    2016 the Appellant through her solicitors, a different  firm  from  the
    firm instructed in the First-tier Tribunal proceedings, applied to  the
    Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal.

10. The grounds assert the Judge erred in finding the Appellant's  marriage
    to have been one of convenience and refer to the Appellant's  child  by
    an EEA national with whom she had established a family life and  assert
    the Respondent's decision was a breach of the obligations owed  to  the
    Appellant and her  child  by  reason  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention and Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009.

11. On 6 April 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted permission to appeal
    on the basis that it was arguable the First-tier Tribunal had failed to
    consider whether the removal  of  the  Appellant  was  a  proportionate
    response in accordance with Reg.21B(2) of the  EEA  Regs  and  had  not
    considered the consequences of removal for her child.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The Appellant was present and  I  was  informed  that  the  Appellant's
    partner, not Gurdeep Singh, who was the father of her child was outside
    the hearing room  with  their  child.   I  explained  the  purpose  and
    procedure of an error of law  hearing.   The  Appellant  confirmed  her
    address was as shown in the Tribunal records.

Submissions for the Appellant

13. Mr Biggs submitted the Judge had failed to make an adequate  assessment
    whether the Appellant's marriage was a  marriage  of  convenience.   In
    particular, he had:-

      i) adopted the wrong approach to the issue  of  where  the  burden  of
         proof lay;

     ii) not applied the appropriate test for  a  marriage  of  convenience,
         namely whether its sole purpose was for the abuse  of  a  right  to
         reside; and

    iii) failed to consider the proportionality of the Respondent's decision
         under Reg.21B(2) to remove the Appellant.

14. The Judge had erred with regard to his approach to the burden of  proof
    at paragraph 14 of his decision.  He had relied on the jurisprudence of
    IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031.  Subsequent to
    the First-tier Tribunal's  decision,  the  correct  approach  had  been
    explained in Rosa v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  14.   I  notice  that  Rosa
    approved the approach described by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Papajorgji
    (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038  (IAC).
    I note also that Judge Manuell  referred  expressly  to  Papajorgji  at
    paragraph 14 of his decision.

15. Mr Biggs referred to paragraph 21 of the Judge's decision and submitted
    this contained an error of law because the Judge had found the marriage
    of the Appellant and Gurdeep Singh was:-

         "... a hollow shell and was entered into or predominantly to enable
         the First Appellant (the husband) to remain in the United  Kingdom,
         after he had become an overstayer."

    Mr Biggs submitted the test for  a  marriage  of  convenience  was  not
    whether the pre-dominant purpose was an abuse of a right to reside, but
    whether the sole purpose was to facilitate an abuse  of  the  right  to
    reside.  This submission did not mention but would  appear  to  reflect
    the provisions of Recital 28  of  the  Citizen's  Directive  2004/38/EC
    which provides:-

         'To guard against abuse of rights or fraud,  notably  marriages  of
         convenience or any other form of relationships contracted  for  the
         sole purpose of enjoying the right of free movement and  residence,
         a Member State should have the possibility to adopt  the  necessary
         measures.'

16. Mr Biggs then referred to Reg.21B(2) of the  EEA  Regs.   He  submitted
    that the removal directions must  be  a  proportionate  response.   The
    Judge had not  made  any  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision to remove the Appellant.  Proportionality  was  a  fundamental
    issue which needed to be addressed.  At most it could be said that  the
    Respondent had alleged the Appellant had abused the  right  to  reside.
    There needed to be a careful approach to such  an  allegation  and  the
    consequential decision of  the  Respondent  to  remove  the  Appellant.
    These were all material errors and the decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

17. Mr Melvin submitted the Judge had given adequate reasons to support his
    conclusion that the marriage of the Appellant and Gurdeep Singh  was  a
    marriage of convenience.  He had not mis-directed  himself  as  to  the
    burden of proof.  There was no evidence before the Judge to enable  him
    to assess the proportionality  of  removal.   The  Appellant  had  been
    complicit in abusing the right to reside by entering into a marriage of
    convenience and consequently the decision to remove her from the United
    Kingdom was appropriate and proportionate.  The decision  contained  no
    material error of law and should stand.

Response for the Appellant

18. Mr Biggs submitted it was far from clear  the  Judge  had  applied  the
    appropriate burden of proof and he had  referred  to  the  pre-dominant
    purpose of the marriage being an abuse of the right  to  reside  rather
    than the sole purpose as specified  by  Recital  28  of  the  Citizen's
    Directive.  The Judge had never assessed  the  proportionality  of  the
    decision to remove to the legitimate purposes to the relevant  criteria
    set out in the EEA Regs.  The Appellant claimed to have been exercising
    Treaty rights since 2008.  Mr Melvin interjected that it  was  accepted
    that she had arrived in 2008 but the Respondent had not  seen  evidence
    of her exercise of Treaty rights.

19. At the end of the hearing I informed the Appellant that for the reasons
    to be given in this decision I found there was a material error of  law
    in the Judge's decision.





Consideration and Conclusion

20. I do not find the Judge adopted the wrong approach  to  the  burden  of
    proof.  He referred to the determination in Papajorgji which subsequent
    to the hearing before him the Court of Appeal has approved.  He  relied
    on evidence supplied by  the  Respondent,  namely  the  record  of  the
    extensive separate interviews with each of the  Appellant  and  Gurdeep
    Singh.

21. The second ground of appeal argued that the Judge had erred in the test
    he had applied to assess whether the Appellant's  marriage  to  Gurdeep
    Singh was a marriage of convenience for purposes of the EEA  Regs.   In
    its judgment in Rosa v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  14,  handed  down  after
    promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  under  appeal  the
    Court of Appeal stated:-

         "9.  The EEA Regulations  implement  Directive  2004/38/EC  on  the
             right of citizens of the Union and  their  family  members  to
             move and reside freely within the territory of  Member  States
             ('the Directive'). There is no  suggestion  in  this  case  of
             incorrect or inadequate transposition of the Directive.  It is
             therefore unnecessary to set out the  detailed  provisions  of
             the Directive relating to the rights of  residence  of  family
             members or the issue of  a  residence  card  to  them.  It  is
             sufficient to note that in cases of abuse, including marriages
             of convenience, the Directive permits Member States to exclude
             the rights otherwise conferred by the Directive. Thus, Article
             35 provides:

                  'Member States may adopt the necessary measures to refuse,
                  terminate  or  withdraw  any  right  conferred   by   this
                  Directive in the case of abuse of rights or fraud, such as
                  marriages  of  convenience.  Any  such  measure  shall  be
                  proportionate and subject  to  the  procedural  safeguards
                  provided for in Articles 30 and 31.'

             Recital (28) of the preamble to the Directive  is  in  similar
         terms.

         10.   Neither  the  EEA  Regulations  nor  the  provisions  of  the
             Directive contain a definition of 'marriage  of  convenience',
             but in R (Baiai) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
             (Nos. 1 and 2) [2008] UKHL 53, [2009] 1 AC 287  at paragraph 6
             Lord  Bingham  said  it  was  difficult  to  improve  on   the
             definition (which the Secretary of State accepted in that case
             as apposite) in Article 1 of EC Council Resolution 97/C 382/01
             of 4 December 1997 on measures to be adopted on the  combating
             of marriages of convenience. That article defines  a  marriage
             of convenience as -

                  'a marriage concluded between a national of a Member State
                  or a third-country national legally resident in  a  Member
                  State and a third-country national, with the sole  aim  of
                  circumventing the rules on entry and residence  of  third-
                  country nationals  and  obtaining  for  the  third-country
                  national a residence permit or authority to  reside  in  a
                  Member State.' "

     For the purpose of a fuller exposition, it is to be noted that Section
    24(5) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 gives a  definition  of  a
    "sham marriage" (not a marriage of convenience) in the following terms:-



         " 'Sham marriage' means a marriage (whether or not void)-

         (a)  entered into between a person ("A") who is neither  a  British
             citizen nor a national of an EEA State other than  the  United
             Kingdom and another person (whether or not such a  citizen  or
             such a national); and

         (b)  entered into by A for the purpose of avoiding  the  effect  of
             one or more provisions of United Kingdom  immigration  law  or
             the immigration rules."

22. The Judge made a finding of fact at paragraph 21 of his  decision  that
    the marriage was a "hollow shell".  He went on to state it was  entered
    into or pre-dominantly as an abuse of the right to reside.   Given  the
    overwhelmingly  adverse  credibility  findings  against  each  of   the
    Appellant and her husband made by the  Judge  I  do  not  consider  the
    finding that the marriage was entered into  or  predominantly  for  the
    purposes of the abuse of the right to reside to amount  to  a  material
    error of law such that this aspect of the decision cannot be sustained.
     Further, having carefully considered the decision and other  documents
    in the  Tribunal  file,  together  with  the  Appellant's  grounds  for
    permission to appeal, I am satisfied that no different  Tribunal  would
    have come to a different  conclusion  even  if  it  had  expressly  and
    exclusively applied the "sole purpose" test.

23. The last ground was the challenge  to  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    decision to remove the Appellant.   Mr Biggs  submitted  Reg.21B(2)  of
    the EEA Regs. required that an EEA decision on the grounds of abuse  of
    rights must be proportionate.  The Judge had not  assessed  either  the
    proportionality of the decision to remove the Appellant in the  context
    of the EEA Regs. or whether she had any potential claim under Article 8
    of  the  European  Convention.  The  Judge  was  not  assisted  by  the
    Appellant, as he properly noted, extraordinarily little evidence  about
    her child or her relationship with the child's father who is now stated
    to be an EEA national.  Indeed at paragraph 18  of  his  decision,  the
    Judge noted there was no birth certificate and the Appellant's  account
    had emerged in the course of re-examination,  indicating  that  it  was
    coaxed out of her.  That the lack of evidence was unsurprising  led  to
    the Judge's comments at the start of paragraph 19 of his decision.   In
    this regard I would add that there is no evidence in the Tribunal  file
    of the Appellant's previous divorce.

24. I find the omission of the Judge to assess the proportionality  of  the
    Decision to Remove the Appellant and to  assess  whether  she  had  any
    claim under Article 8 of the European Convention to amount to  material
    errors of law, even if the Appellant failed to provide  much,  if  any,
    evidence  to  support  an  argument   that   her   removal   would   be
    disproportionate or an unreasonable interference with the  private  and
    family life of herself and her child.

25. I therefore set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appeal will need to be heard afresh because  the  basis  on  which  the
    Appellant is now putting forward her case would appear to  be  entirely
    different from that on which it was  put  before  the  Judge.   I  have
    considered the possibility that I should find that having regard to the
    evidence before the Judge and the case as presented for the  Appellant,
    the Judge did not make any material error of law. This would leave  the
    Appellant to make a further application under  the  EEA  Regs.  on  the
    basis of her present circumstances.

26. I have decided against such a robust approach  because  the  appeal  is
    against a Decision to Remove and involves  a  child.   Additionally,  I
    find it will be useful and relevant for the Judge re-hearing the appeal
    to have before him or her the documentation relating to the Appellant's
    marriage of convenience.  I therefore see no reason to  set  aside  the
    findings of fact, limited as they are because,  as  the  Judge  rightly
    noted, there was a dearth of evidence before him shall stand.   I  find
    the Judge made no findings of fact relating to the child; as he  stated
    at paragraphs 9-11 of his decision setting out the Appellant's evidence
    about the child and concluding he could make no findings because of the
    dearth of evidence about the child.

27. A full fact-finding exercise will be  required  on  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's now claimed circumstances  and  having  regard  to  Section
    12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice
    Statement 7.2 of 10 February 2010 as amended, I direct that the  appeal
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing before a Judge other
    than Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Manuell.

Anonymity

28. No request for an anonymity order was made and  having  considered  the
    appeal I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
    the appeal is remitted for re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

Not less than 10 working days before the next hearing the  Appellant  is  to
file and serve copies of:-

       . her certificate of divorce prior to her marriage to Gurdeep Singh

       . the full birth certificate for her child

       . payslips, forms P60 and if appropriate forms P45 and personal  bank
         statements showing receipt of wages from 2008 to date.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 23.v. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
