



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/04032/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 13th June 2016                          |On 15th June 2016              |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                   Between

                              Mr Jay-Ar Ilasin
                        (No Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman instructed by Paul John & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the  Philippines  born  on  4th  February
    1989.  He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 21st January
    2015 to refuse to grant him leave to remain in the  UK  pursuant  to  a
    claim made under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.



 2. On 6th June  2013  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oakley  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal albeit finding family life between the appellant and
    his mother.

 3. The appellant filed grounds for permission to appeal on the basis  that
    the judge erred in applying the wrong standard of proof and in  failing
    to take into account the human right of the mother  further  to  Beoku-
    Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39.

 4. Permission to Appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on both of the grounds identified above.

Conclusions

 5. Although Ms Ahmed referred to paragraph 31 of the judge's  decision  as
    indicating that the correct standard of proof was  used,  nowhere  does
    the judge refer to the standard of proof that he applied either to  the
    facts or to his conclusions.  That specific reference may not have been
    an error had the judge not referred to references  of   'certainty'  in
    the decision.  At [39] for  example  the  judge  states  'I  cannot  be
    certain that ...'  in  relation  to  facts  found.    Albeit  that  the
    decision appeared  well  reasoned  and  comprehensive,  this  error  is
    fundamental to the correct assessment of the facts and conclusions.

 6. In addition, although the judge gave consideration to the  reasons  the
    appellant's  application  was  out  of  time  and  because  the  mother
    overlooked the visa or  leave  requirements,  nowhere  does  the  judge
    specifically refer to the mother's statement in  order  to  assess  the
    strength of the family life.  This is an error.

 7. In passing I also note that the judge refers in  conclusion  that  'the
    paramount matter  for  consideration  must  be  the  right  to  control
    immigration' [41].  Although the Immigration  Rules  are  the  starting
    point and do reflect the position of the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    Article 8 balancing exercise with regards proportionality, they are not
    the paramount matter for consideration.   That  too  was  an  error  in
    assessing proportionality.

 8. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Signed                                             Date 13th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
