
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04702/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 August 2013                              |On 20 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                              mr Safdar hussain

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent has been granted permission to appeal the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio allowing the appeal of the  appellant
    against the refusal of the respondent on 24 January 2013  to  vary  his
    leave to remain in the UK and to remove him by way of directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The decision by the judge to allow the appellant's  appeal  in  respect
    of the decision under Section 47 as not being in  accordance  with  the
    law was not challenged by the respondent.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20 June 1979.  He  first
    entered the UK on 19 November 2009 with leave to  enter  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student from 30 October 2009 until 28 March 2011.  On 5 April
    he was granted further leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
    until 31 May 2012.  On 3 April 2012 he made an application for leave to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system (PBS).

4.   On 24 January 2013  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant's application on the basis that on the evidence provided, and
    confirmation from London College of Business, as of 23 January 2013  he
    had not been awarded his eligible qualification.  He was therefore  not
    awarded the 15 points claimed by him.

5.   The judge at paragraph 16 of his decision  noted  that  the  respondent
    had not received a notification of award as at the date of decision  to
    show that the appellant had a  qualification  of  Masters  of  Business
    Administration awarded by the University of Wales.  He also noted  that
    there was no satisfactory evidence  that  the  appellant  obtained  the
    eligible award within twelve months of the application  as  decided  by
    the case of Khatel and Others (S85A; effect of continuing application).
     The appellant received the notification of award on 18 February  2013,
    which was after the date  of  the  respondent's  decision.   The  judge
    concluded that in those circumstances the appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 245FD of the Immigration Rules.

6.   The judge then said at paragraph 17 that there was  another  aspect  to
    the appellant's case.  The case of Khatel clearly notes  that  evidence
    which was received before the date of decision should be considered  as
    a continuing application with regards to the  post-study  work  migrant
    application.  It was accepted by the HOPO below that the respondent had
    received a letter from the appellant's solicitors asking the respondent
    to take into account the very busy period of the Christmas and New Year
    holidays and that there was likely to be a two to three week  delay  in
    the results being published.  The judge found that the failure  of  the
    respondent to refer to this letter in the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    raised  the  issue  of  whether  the  respondent  had  been   fair   in
    consideration of  the  appellant's  case.   The  judge  said  that  the
    respondent may well have been within  her  rights  to  state  that  the
    appellant had been given enough time and therefore the letter was of no
    effect, however this was not the case here.  The respondent simply  did
    not consider the letter which was sent to request for extra time.

7.   The judge took the view that the college  let  the  appellant  down  by
    delaying its publication of his results.  It took an  excessive  amount
    of time to release the results for his  first  unsuccessful  thesis  as
    well as the second successful thesis.  However, in  view  of  the  fact
    that the respondent did not provide a reasoned decision with regard  to
    the request for an extension made by the  appellant,  the  judge  found
    that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  law  and
    allowed the appellant's appeal.

8.   The grounds on which permission was granted to  the  respondent  argued
    that there is no legal duty (and certainly no duty on fairness  grounds
    in decision-making) on the Secretary of State to consider a request for
    further time to provide evidence, let  alone  to  provide  reasons  for
    denying such a  request.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  would
    indicate  that  an  application  represents  a  door   which   can   be
    indefinitely propped open by an applicant by making requests  for  more
    time.  In this instance the Secretary of State's legal position is that
    the notice of award needed to have been provided with  the  application
    originally lodged, so a request for an extension of time was  bound  to
    fail anyway.

9.   Mr Parkinson relied on the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Raju  &  Ors
    [2013] EWCA Civ 754 which set aside the decision in Khatel.  The  Court
    of Appeal held that an applicant applying for leave to remain as a Tier
    1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant had to have submitted his qualification  at
    the date he made his application.  Mr Parkinson submitted that  as  the
    appellant did not submit his qualification at the date  of  application
    because he did not have  it,  the  judge's  determination  was  fatally
    flawed and the appellant's appeal could not succeed.  Mr Parkinson also
    relied on the grounds of appeal lodged on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

10.  The appellant, it appears had made  the  wrong  application.   What  he
    needed to do was to make an application for further leave to  re-submit
    his thesis.  He said he had sought advice from  the  college  and  they
    said he could make an application for  further  leave  to  remain  even
    though he did not have the required qualification.  I had some sympathy
    for the appellant.  However, because of the fact that he did not have a
    qualification which he could have submitted at the  time  he  made  his
    application for further leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant, his appeal cannot succeed in light of Raju.

11.  I find the judge's decision was materially flawed  in  light  of  Raju.
    The judge's decision cannot stand.  I set it aside and remake it.

12.  For the reasons given above, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
