
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04819/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13th October 2016                       |On 24th January 2017             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               MR JOHN D CRUZE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  18th
    July 1966.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision
    of the Respondent dated 27th January 2015 refusing his application  for
    a variation of leave to remain, on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had
    been a work permit holder, who had been in  employment,  in  accordance
    with the terms of his work permit, for the last five years.

 2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge C Clapham
    at Hatton Cross on 18th August 2015.  The overriding issue  before  the
    judge was as to whether the Appellant had been employed by  Kitchen  N1
    at 8 Caledonia Street in London under the work permit.  There had  been
    conflicting evidence.  An earlier letter of 6th September 2014  from  a
    Mr Delwar Matin, the managing director of  Kitchen  N1,  had  suggested
    that he was employed in the manner suggested.  A later letter  of  15th
    December 2014, which had followed an enquiry from the  Respondent  Home
    Office, suggested that he was not.  A third letter  dated  13th  August
    2015 suggested that he was indeed so employed, and  appeared  to  agree
    with the first letter of 6th September 2014.

 3. At paragraph 25 of the determination, the judge stated as follows:

         "I was told by the Appellant's representative that he had spoken to
         Mr Matin  and  in  the  circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that  the
         likelihood is that the letter of 13th August 2015 is genuine  which
         means that the letter of 6th September  2014  is  genuine  and  the
         Appellant was in continuous full-time employment  with  Mr  Matin's
         company from 18th March 2009 to 18th August 2013" (paragraph 25).

 4. The appeal was allowed.

 5. The Grounds of Appeal relied upon the president's ruling in BW (witness
    statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568 (IAC) that  "the
    roles of advocate and witness  are  distinct,  separated  by  a  bright
    luminous line.  An advocate must never  assume  the  role  of  witness.
    ..."

 6. The grounds state that the letters from Mr Matin were material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  The Appellant's representative  knew  that  the
    first and third letters were in dispute,  because  the  second  letter,
    which  had  been  written  by  Mr  Matin  following   a   request   for
    clarification from the Respondent Home Office, gave  a  contrary  view.
    If the judge were to consider the latest letter, he had to consider  it
    in the context that Mr  Matin  did  not  attend  the  hearing  to  give
    evidence, and was not the subject of cross-examination, with respect to
    the three letters written in his name.

 7. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills submitted  that  the  Appellant  had
    applied for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis  of  having  spent
    five years under a work permit, but his working under the terms of  the
    work permit was flatly contradicted in the letter from Mr Delwar  Matin
    of 15th December 2014.  He refers to the letter "supposedly  signed  by
    me stating continuous employment" and goes on to say that,

         "I can confirm the letter was not written by myself  or  authorised
         by any current employee of this company as it doesn't have our  new
         logo or correct letterhead format and the signature is not mine and
         the job title are all incorrect".

    Mr Mills also submitted that the third letter of 13th August 2015,  was
    faxed over at 10.25 p.m. on Friday night for a hearing to take place on
    the  following  Monday,  such  that  it  could  not  be   verified   or
    authenticated, and given that Mr Matin himself did not attend  to  give
    evidence, the judge was wrong to have  given  that  letter  controlling
    weight before allowing the appeal.

 8. For his part, Mr Singh submitted that, whereas it was the case that the
    judge  had  given  regard  to  the  statement  from  Mr  Hussain,   the
    Appellant's representative, that he had spoken with Mr Matin, such that
    this third letter could be treated as genuine, the fact was that it was
    not of material consequence because if the determination is  looked  at
    as a whole, and in the round, it was clear, that the judge  took  other
    evidence equally into account, before concluding that the Appellant had
    indeed been employed for five years under the work permit, such that he
    was entitled to ILR as he claimed.  Second, the  Home  Office  had  not
    been able to demonstrate that they had written to the Appellant to tell
    him that there had been a curtailment of his leave and  the  burden  of
    proof lay upon the Home Office.  Third, even if  the  letter  had  been
    faxed on the Friday before, it was open to the  Presenting  Officer  at
    the hearing to either object to its submission,  or  to  apply  for  an
    adjournment, such that this letter could be verified, in the  same  way
    that it was alleged the letter of 15th December 2014 had  been  subject
    to a verification, because it arose as a result  of  a  direct  enquiry
    from the Respondent Home Office.  Finally, the  judge  had  been  aware
    that to regard the latest letter to have been  concocted  would  be  to
    suggest that there had been a very elaborate fabrication because it was
    a letter written to the Appellant's solicitor, and there is no evidence
    of this.

 9. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that the plain fact  was  that  there  had
    been a procedural unfairness in the judge referring to the fact that Mr
    Hussain, the Appellant's representative had given a  statement  to  the
    court that he had spoken with Mr Matin, such that the judge  felt  able
    to rely upon that statement as being the basis of the veracity  of  the
    latest letter from Mr Delwar Matin.

My Consideration of the Appeal

10. I am satisfied, that on the  basis  of  the  decision  in  BW  (witness
    statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] 00568,  that  the  decision
    amounts to an error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCA 2007) such that it
    should be set aside.  This is so for the following reasons.

11. First, it is clear that there was a conflict  of  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal, and all of it coming from documentation written in  the  name
    of Mr Delwar Matin, the director of Kitchen N1.  As  the  judge  stated
    (at paragraph 25), he was "faced with three letters from Mr Matin" such
    that the judge even had to consider whether  there  had  "been  a  very
    elaborate fraud on the part of someone" (paragraph 25).

12. In these circumstances the judge resolved the situation by stating,

         "I was told by the Appellant's representative that he had spoken to
         Mr Matin  and  in  the  circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that  the
         likelihood is that the letter of 13th August is genuine".

13. Second, it is equally clear that the judge was also confronted with the
    situation where he had to say that, "on the face of it  the  Presenting
    Officer had a good argument that where leave was  curtailed  there  was
    then a gap in the Appellant's permission to work", such that the  issue
    needed resolving on the basis of evidence  that  could  be  subject  to
    cross-examination, which could not be done given that Mr Matin did  not
    attend to give evidence at the hearing (see paragraph 19).

14. Third, the absence of Mr Matin did clearly present  the  judge  with  a
    problem because he concluded that, "I find Mr Matin's confusion  to  be
    rather  unfortunate"  (paragraph  27).   All  of  this  suggested  that
    reliance upon what the representative of the Appellant had said assumed
    the decision in favour of the Appellant.

15. It is in one sense quite unnecessary to go this far because the  purity
    of the legal system demands that,  regardless  of  whether  controlling
    weight is placed by a decision maker on what the Appellant  states,  it
    is simply not consistent with the requirements of procedural  fairness,
    for a representative to turn witness and vouch  for  the  fact  that  a
    statement by Mr Matin is genuine quite simply  because  he  had  spoken
    with Mr Matin and had been assured of this fact.

16. I note that Mr Hussain has drawn attention  to  his  Rule  24  response
    where he states that the grounds are a misrepresentation of the  events
    before Judge Clapham.  He states that the First-tier Tribunal

         "was expressly told by  the  Respondent's  representative  that  he
         could not provide evidence and represent the matter when the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge enquired as to why the representative  did  not
         make any statement to confirm the source of the letter  dated  13th
         August 2015" (see paragraph 4).

17. Mr Hussain, who then represented the Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, is well-known in the Tribunals and there is  no  reason
    to believe that Mr Hussain was not acting with the utmost  probity  and
    propriety before Judge Clapham when he appeared on that  occasion.   It
    matters not.

18. What matters is that the  judge,  faced  with  the  statement  from  Mr
    Hussain concluded that "in the circumstances it seems to  me  that  the
    likelihood is that the letter of 13th August 2015 is genuine".  In this
    respect, the judge fell into error.

Remaking the Decision

19. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge C Clapham.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This matter is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other  than  Judge  C
Clapham.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd January 2017
