
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04731/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 February 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                           OLABODE OLUKAYODE SANNI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Nizami, instructed by To1Tops Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge K F
    Walters promulgated on 2 July 2014 which refused the appellant's appeal
    regarding his application for indefinite leave to remain.

 2. Judge Walters refused the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  with
    specific reference to paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules  which
    states as a ground for refusal:

         "The undesirability of permitting a person concerned to  remain  in
         the light of his or  her  character,  conduct  or  associations  or
         because of a threat to national security."

 3. The application of paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules  arose  in
    this matter as, whilst  considering  the  appellant's  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain, it came to the respondent's attention  that
    for the tax year 2010/11 the applicant had submitted an inaccurate  tax
    assessment to HMRC.  The tax assessment submitted by the applicant  and
    on which he paid tax at the relevant  time  omitted  his  self-employed
    earnings for the year 2010/11.  Thus far was common ground before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Walters and before me.

 4. The appellant maintained that he had not been responsible for or  known
    about the  incorrect  tax  assessment.  When  he  found  out  from  the
    respondent that incorrect tax had been paid for the tax year  2010/2011
    he contacted his previous accountants to complain and  also  instructed
    new accountants to reassess his tax.  He provided  documents  in  these
    regards and these were before First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters.

 5. At [10] Judge Walters summarised the evidence that he took into account
    which included the letters from the appellant's  previous  and  current
    accountants generated after the refusal of his application  for  leave.
    At [26] and [31] Judge Walters referred to page 25 of  the  appellant's
    bundle of evidence. This was a letter dated 20 January  2014  from  his
    previous   accountants,   TT   Accountancy   Services,   taking   "full
    responsibility" for the error in failing  to  declare  the  appellant's
    self-employed earnings in the 2010/2011 tax assessment.

 6. The appellant's main ground of appeal is that First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Walters did not deal correctly, or at  all,  with  this  key  piece  of
    evidence.

 7. Firstly, caution is needed before  concluding  that  is  so  where,  as
    above, he specifically mentioned this document twice.

 8. Secondly, Judge Walters was not obliged to  take  this  letter  at  its
    highest. He had a  number  of  concerns  about  other  aspects  of  the
    appellant's evidence. At  paragraphs 41 to 43 of his  determination  he
    stated:

         "41. I bear in mind the burden and standard of  proof,  throughout,
             and that, where dishonesty is alleged  or  found  proved,  the
             more serious the  allegation  the  more  cogent  must  be  the
             evidence for it.  To  avoid  any  room  for  misunderstanding,
             having regard to the documentary and oral evidence before  me,
             I am satisfied so that I am sure that, at the time material to
             this appeal, the appellant adopted an  entirely  cavalier  and
             dishonest approach to tax returns made by him to  HMRC,  which
             were to be submitted on a self-employed basis.  The  appellant
             was well aware of his immigration status and the importance of
             submitting  accurate  and   correct   documentation   to   the
             respondent, the more so given figures he has supplied  to  the
             respondent as to  his  level  of  income,  when  securing  his
             immigration status.  The appellant's ready concession  at  the
             hearing before me that he signed a blank  self-assessment  tax
             returns for completion by  his  previous  accountants,  to  be
             based  on  whatever  documents  the  appellant  provided,  for
             onwards  submission  to  HMRC  at  a   later   stage,   merely
             reinforces, in my judgement, his  cavalier  approach  and  the
             dishonesty he practiced.  I find that, further, the reason the
             appellant has  not  pursued  any  formal  complaint  with  his
             previous accountants' professional  body  is  because  he  was
             complicit, throughout, in all that occurred.

         41.  I am no position to judge whether the appellant has since made
             a full disclosure in his alleged self-employed  income  during
             the  relevant  period,  to  the  respondent  and   HMRC.   His
             disclosures by his current accountants,  Paperchase  Taxation,
             are not supported by any or any complete and reliable material
             documentation I have seen; and I  find  that,  moreover,  such
             disclosures  as  have  been  made  only  occurred  after   the
             appellant was placed upon notice of the discoveries which  led
             to the refusal of his application, the subject of this appeal.
             I find that, further and in the  alternative,  I  cannot  rely
             upon any dates provided by this  appellant,  nor  any  alleged
             self-employment receipts made to him, or submitted by  him  to
             HMRC.  In short, I find the account of  the  appellant  to  be
             unreliable, throughout.

         43.  Given my findings summarised  herein,  I  find  the  appellant
             plainly engages paragraph 322(5) of the Rules, which  in  turn
             engages paragraph 245CD(d) of the Rules,  in  that  I  am  not
             persuaded the appellant can  demonstrate  any  earnings  other
             than those from his employer at the material  time,  London  &
             South East Railway, and that he accordingly does not meet  the
             requirements of Appendix A to the Rules. I find that, taken in
             the round, and bearing in mind  the  burden  and  standard  of
             proof,  the  appellant  has  not  provided   any   basis   for
             challenging the assertions, analyses and  conclusions  in  the
             respondent's Notice of Immigration Decision,  and  her  letter
             giving reasons for refusal, and on the evidence before me I am
             satisfied that those assertions, analyses and conclusions  are
             valid and tenable, and I reach similar conclusions myself  for
             like reasons."

 9. Judge Walters went on at paragraph 45 of his determination to state:

         "45. Applying the relevant law to the established facts and on  the
             totality of the evidence adduced before me, I  find  that  the
             appellant has not discharged the burden of proof  and  reasons
             given by the respondent do justify the refusal."

10. Reading those paragraphs with the  two  clear  indications  that  Judge
    Walters was aware of  the  letter  admitting  responsibility  from  the
    previous accountants, it is  my  view  that  they  amount  to  adequate
    reasons as to why he did not accept the  appellant's  account  of  what
    happened or that responsibility lay only with the former accountants as
    asserted in the letter of 20 January 2014.

11. It is not my view, as suggested in the  grounds,  that  Judge  Walters'
    approach to the evidence is to "simply marginalise" or  fail  "to  give
    adequate  weight".   As  the  paragraphs  above  show,  Judge   Walters
    considered the relevant evidence, dealt with the  material  aspects  of
    it, including that the appellant's case was that he was not in any  way
    responsible for the incorrect tax return.  He took into account all  of
    the evidence that the appellant provided to explain the  incorrect  tax
    return but simply did not find that those matters  were  sufficient  to
    rebut the respondent's view that the appellant's character  as  someone
    who had provided incorrect tax assessments to HMRC meant that paragraph
    322(5) of the Immigration Rules applied.

12. It is also my view that Judge Walters  took  the  correct  approach  as
    regards the burden of proof in that assessment.  He was overtly  astute
    at paragraph 6 and at paragraph 41 as to the need for  cogent  evidence
    where there is an allegation of fraud or dishonesty.  I  did  not  read
    [45], as set out above, as stating otherwise, noting  as  it  does  the
    need for the respondent to "justify" the refusal and for the  appellant
    to discharge the burden arising thereafter, albeit paragraph [45] could
    have been somewhat  more  felicitously  worded.  Reading  the  decision
    fairly it is clear that Judge  Walters  considered  that  the  evidence
    before him showed to a more than sufficient degree that  the  appellant
    had been dishonest and unable to rebut the points made against  him  by
    the respondent.

13. Where that is so I do not find an error in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Decision

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error
    on a point of law and shall stand.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 4 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

