
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration               and                Asylum                Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA/04203/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
        Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              19th              August               2015
       On the 4th September 2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                              MR IRFAN SHAHZAD
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr Iqbal (Counsel)
For the Respondent:   Miss A Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Foulkes-Jones  that  was  promulgated  on  the   12th
      September 2014.

Background

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on the 15th August
      1992. The Appellant had initially applied for Leave to Remain  in  the
      United Kingdom as a          Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  on  the
      Points  Based  System  (PBS)  under  paragraph  245  ZX  (c)  of   the
      Immigration Rules and for a Biometric Residence  Permit.  However  the
      Appellant's application had been refused  by  the  Respondent  on  the
      basis that she was not satisfied that the Appellant had proved that he
      was competent in the English language at a minimum of level B1 of  the
      Common European Framework of Reference for Languages, or that he was a
      person who met an alternative requirement.




   3. The Appellant appealed that decision,  and  that  appeal  came  before
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones on the 15th August  2014,  who
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal. The full reasons for  that  decision
      are set out in the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-
      Jones. He found at [6] that as at the  date  of  application  on  29th
      December 2013, the Appellant had not achieved or exceeded Level B1  of
      the  Council  of  Europe's  Common  European  Framework  for  language
      learning in  all  four  components  (reading,  writing,  speaking  and
      listening) as the certificates were awarded on the 15th January  2013.
      He found at [7]  that  under  section  85(4)(a)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 he could only have regard to  evidence
      if it was submitted in support of, and  at  the  time  of  making  the
      application. He further found at [9]  that  even  if  the  Appellant's
      application had been put on hold until the replacement certificate was
      received by the Respondent, the Appellant  would  not  have  qualified
      under paragraph 245ZX(c). The appeal  was  therefore  dismissed  under
      paragraph 245ZX(c). The First-Tier Tribunal Judge went on  to  dismiss
      the appeal under Article 8.




   4. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is contended that  the  Appellant  had
      taken the requisite elements of his English language test  before  his
      application was lodged, but that due to  the  Christmas  holidays  the
      result was not declared until the 15th  January  2013.  The  Appellant
      claimed that he had submitted everything that he had received from the
      City and Guilds with whom he had taken his English Language  Test  and
      that he genuinely believed that he fulfilled the requirements  of  the
      English Language test and did not  know  about  any  missing  evidence
      until he received a  letter  from  the  Home  Office  dated  the  17th
      December 2013 requiring him to provide the original  City  and  Guilds
      Certificates. He says he  contacted  the  Examination  Centre  at  the
      London School of Global Business where he took his test, who told  him
      that he had to contact City and Guilds directly to get a  replacement.
      He says he contacted City and Guilds and was  told  it  would  take  6
      weeks to get a duplicate certificate. He asserts that  he  passed  the
      English Language test on the 15th January 2013,  before  his  CAS  was
      issued by the West City College Limited, but that due to an  error  on
      the part of City and Guilds only one part of the English Language test
      certificate had been provided to him. The Appellant says he asked  the
      Respondent to put his application on hold to give him at least 6 weeks
      so that he could receive and send the certificate to the Respondent in
      order that he could get a positive decision on his  Tier  4  extension
      application, but the Respondent not did not consider his  request  and
      refused the application on the 3rd January 2014.




   5. It is argued in the grounds of appeal that the decision of  the  First
      Tier Tribunal Judge breached the principle of common law fairness  and
      that it was one of the fundamental rules of  natural  justice  that  a
      person has a right to be informed of any point adverse to him that  is
      going to be relied upon by the Judge and to be  given  an  opportunity
      stating what his answer is to it  and  that  further  the  Immigration
      Judge failed  to  exercise  a  discretion  properly  and  refused  the
      application on mere technicalities. It was  further  argued  that  the
      Judge had failed to properly consider Article 8.




   6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge of the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Nicholson on  the  19th  December  2014,  but  the  Appellant
      appealed to the Upper Tribunal, and permission to appeal  was  granted
      by Upper Tribunal Judge King with the following reasons:

"The appellant submitted an application on the 28th December  2012  but  did
not submit the requisite English Language Certificate as required as at  the
time of the application pursuant to paragraph 245 ZX (c) of the  Immigration
Rules.

Seemingly the Appellant had sat the language  test  before  the  application
but for various reasons did not receive replacement certificates until  15th
January 2013.

It therefore seems that he falls foul of the strict requirements  under  the
Immigration Rules.

However, it is arguable that in the circumstances of this case there  was  a
degree of unfairness. On 17  December  2013  the  respondent  wrote  to  the
Appellant requesting the City & Guilds certificates which showed his  scores
for the ESOL listening, reading and writing. Notification was given  that  a
failure to reply by the 24th December 2013 would result in a decision  being
made. It is the case for the Appellant that  he  responded  to  that  letter
asking for time in order to produce the requisite certificates. That  letter
is to be found at page 12 of the Appellant's bundle as presented before  the
court. The letter is, however, undated. There needs to be clear evidence  as
to when in fact it was written and  sent.  The  certificates  were  acquired
shortly thereafter as replacement certificates.

It is arguable that if the appellant was given  an  opportunity  to  produce
the documents and sought to do so that it may be unfair or  disproportionate
in all of the circumstances to deprive him of the  benefit  of  his  action.
The merits are, however, finely balanced in relation to this matter"



Submissions

   7. The Appellant had submitted a skeleton  argument  in  support  of  the
      appeal. In the skeleton it is argued at [15] that  the  unfairness  in
      the present case arises from the fact that the  appellant  had  passed
      the requisite English language test at the time of his application. He
      met all the substantive requirements. The refusal arose solely from  a
      failure on the part of a third party-LSGB -to supply him with evidence
      of the same in a timely fashion". It was argued that failure  to  have
      regard to the confirmation of the Appellant's test results on the 15th
      January 2013, even though the full certificates had not been submitted
      in  respect  of  all  of  the  English  language   requirements,   was
      procedurally unfair. It was further argued that  the  period  of  time
      given to the Appellant to deliver  certificates  when  the  Respondent
      wrote on the 17th December  2013  of  just  2  weeks  was  unduly  and
      unfairly tight especially after the Appellant had  written  requesting
      more time and that by  ignoring  the  request  for  further  time  the
      Respondent is alleged to have departed from  her  discretion  to  take
      account of further evidence submitted, in a manner which is  said  was
      designed to prevent the Appellant from complying.




   8. The Appellant also produced a witness statement that had  been  signed
      and dated by him on the 18th August 2015 in response to Upper Tribunal
      Judge King's direction that there had to be evidence as  to  when  the
      Appellant had written to the Respondent asking for  the  extension  in
      this witness statement at [5] the Appellant says that he informed  the
      Home Office  on  the  27th  December  2013  about  his  situation  and
      requested them to  allow  him  extra  time  to  provide  the  required
      certificates.




   9. In his oral submissions on behalf of the Appellant,  Mr  Iqbal  argued
      that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge fell into error at paragraph  7  of
      his decision and reasons section of the Judgement in stating  that  he
      could only have regard to the evidence that was submitted  in  support
      of and at the time of the making  of  the  application  to  which  the
      Immigration decision related. The document  from  the  City  &  Guilds
      dated the 28th January 2014 post-dated the  date  of  application.  He
      argued that although the Judge may not have been able to take  account
      of such evidence, the Respondent in the exercise of her discretion was
      able to take account of such evidence and that  if  the  document  had
      been sent to the Respondent after the application had been  made,  the
      Secretary of State did have a discretion to consider it  and  that  in
      this case the CAS had post-dated  the  date  of  application  and  the
      original  City  &  Guilds  certificate  had  been  considered  by  the
      Secretary of State. He argued that section 85 A  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act only limited the  evidence  that  could  be
      considered by the Tribunal, rather than by the Respondent herself.  He
      argued that there was a  legitimate  expectation  that  the  documents
      would be considered by the Secretary of State if they were sent.




  10.  Mr Iqbal argued that the 7 day period was too short for the Appellant
      to comply with, given that it was beyond the Appellant's control  that
      he did not have access to the copy documents and that he had requested
      those documents which in his statement he says that  he  had  notified
      the Respondent that he done so and asked for the extension on the 27th
      December, asking for a 6 weeks extension, but that  the  decision  was
      made on the 3rd January. He argued that the Secretary of State  had  a
      discretion to extend the seven day time limit  and  he  argued  simply
      failed to consider or exercise that discretion. He argued that in such
      circumstances the decision made was not in accordance with the law and
      should be remitted back to the  Respondent  in  order  that  a  lawful
      decision could be made.




  11. Mr Iqbal argued that the First-Tier Tribunal Judge was wrong in law in
      finding that post application evidence could  not  be  considered  and
      that secondly the First-Tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed  to  consider
      whether or not the Respondent had exercised a  discretion  at  all  by
      failing to reply to the letter asking for an extension of time.




  12. Miss Everett on behalf of the Respondent argued that no material error
      of law was disclosed by the decision. She argued that the  case  being
      advanced today was that simply because  the  Secretary  of  State  had
      exercised  some  discretion  further  discretion  should   have   been
      exercised. She says that the Appellant's argument that it was not  his
      fault that he could not comply with the Immigration Rules did not make
      the Secretary of State's decision unlawful,  nor  did  it  render  the
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge's conclusion  that  the  Appellant  did  not
      comply with the Immigration Rules wrong. She argued that  irrespective
      of whether or not the  Respondent  had  replied  to  the  request  for
      further extension of time, that did not render the  decision  unlawful
      or procedurally unfair and that the Secretary of State had given  more
      time in any event. She argued that respondent did not  have  to  grant
      the request for further time or even consider the same and that  there
      was no procedure unfairness.




  13. I asked Mr Iqbal as to whether or not the issue  regarding  procedural
      fairness had in fact been raised at all as an argument  before  First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones, and as to whether or not  he  would
      have been required to deal with an argument  that  had  not  been  put
      before him. Mr Iqbal argued that it was  stated  within  the  original
      Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to   exercise
      discretion properly and that further at the bottom of page 32 and  the
      top of page 33 in the initial skeleton argument before the  First-Tier
      Tribunal in the Respondent's initial bundle it was asserted  that  the
      Respondent should have provided extra time to address the concerns  of
      the Respondent as alleged in the refusal  decision  and  that  as  the
      English language certificate is of vital importance to the outcome  of
      the Appellant's  application  therefore  the  Respondent  should  have
      afforded extra time to the  Appellant  to  address  the  concerns.  He
      further argued that in his witness statement at page 35 of the bundle,
      at paragraph 14 the Appellant said that the Respondent had treated him
      unfairly and harshly and the appeal could have been avoided should the
      Respondent have acted judiciously and fairly  by  providing  him  with
      extra time to deal with the required issue. Mr Iqbal argued that these
      documents were before the Judge, but he was not able to tell me as  to
      whether or  not  the  argument  was  actually  run  before  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones, as he himself had  not  represented  the
      Appellant at the First Tier Tribunal, and had only been instructed  he
      said yesterday.







My Findings on Error of Law




  14. After having carefully considered the evidence in this case, I am  not
      satisfied that the procedural unfairness argument that  is  now  being
      sought to be run by Mr Iqbal on behalf of the Appellant  was  actually
      fully and properly argued before First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foulkes-
      Jones. The original notice of appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal simply
      argued that the decision was against the Immigration Rules,  that  the
      Respondent did not pay proper consideration of the evidence  presented
      and the Respondent did not exercise a discretion properly. It was  not
      argued there, that the failure of  the  Respondent  to  reply  to  the
      Appellant's request for  further  time  to  submit  his  evidence  was
      procedurally unfair  or  that  the  decision  was  in  any  other  way
      procedurally unfair.




  15. Within the skeleton argument before the  First-Tier  Tribunal  it  was
      stated at page 32 of the Appellant's bundle that  the  Appellant  "the
      Appellant is providing the letter written to the Respondent before the
      decision was made requesting to give time to get his certificate  from
      City & Guilds. It is also important to mention that the Appellant  has
      provided sufficient evidence to corroborate his version that he passed
      the English-language test  on  the  15th  January  2013.  Please  find
      attached the English language test certificates issued by the  City  &
      Guilds. The Appellant asserts that the Respondent should have provided
      extra time to address the concerns of the Respondent as alleged in the
      refusal decision. Since the English language certificate is  of  vital
      importance to the outcome of the  Appellant's  application  therefore,
      the Respondent should have afforded extra time  to  the  appellant  to
      address concerns".




  16. Further, it was stated within the witness statement of  the  Appellant
      at paragraph 14 that:

"I submit to the Tribunal  that  the  Respondent  treated  me  unfairly  and
harshly and this appeal could have been avoided should the  Respondent  have
acted judiciously and fairly by providing me with extra  time  to  deal  the
required issue".



  17. However, after carefully considering the record of proceedings of  the
      hearing before First-Tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones, the  arguments
      were in  fact  put  forward  by  Mr  Butt  who  then  represented  the
      Appellant, did not in fact argue that any failure by the Respondent to
      consider the request for further time thereby  rendered  the  original
      decision unfair. This argument does not appear to have  been  actually
      pursued in the submissions made on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  before
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge by Mr Butt. Mr Butt in effect simply  argued
      that the  Appellant  had  taken  the  exam  before  he  had  made  his
      application and that there was a delay in obtaining the results  until
      the 15th January and that he had submitted the document  that  he  had
      received from the City & Guilds to the Respondent, and  that  when  he
      received the letter from the Respondent on the 17th December 2013,  he
      had contacted the collage and written to the  Home  Office  saying  it
      would take 6 weeks to obtain copies of this certificate. He relied  in
      this regard upon Article 8 and argued that the given  this  background
      the appeal should be allowed uner Article 8, rather than  specifically
      arguing that the decision of the Respondent was procedurally unfair.




  18. Given that the argument that appears was in fact pursued before First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones was on the basis that the  Appellant
      had submitted the evidence that he did have and that it was beyond his
      control that he was unable to submit the further  documents  requested
      by the Respondent within the seven-day  time  period  meant  that  his
      claim should  be  allowed  under  Article  8,  rather  than  it  being
      specifically and clearly argued before the First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      that  the  Respondent's  failure  to  deal  with  that   request   was
      procedurally unfair rendering it not in accordance with the law, I  do
      not consider that the First-tier Tribunal Judge could or should in any
      way be criticised for failing to deal with an argument  that  was  not
      argued before him in the way that is now being argued by Mr  Iqbal  on
      behalf of the Appellant before me. The argument at  First  Tier  level
      simply put on the basis of Article 8, rather  than  on  the  basis  of
      procedural  unfairness  rendering  the  original  decision   "not   in
      accordance with the law".







  19. However, even if I am wrong in that regard,  and  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Foulkes-Jones  should  have  considered  an  argument  that  the
      Respondent acted in a manner which was procedurally unfair such as  to
      render the decision "not  in  accordance  with  the  Law",  I  do  not
      consider that any failure on his  part  to  do  so,  was  in  any  way
      material. Mr Iqbal on behalf of the Appellant  sought  to  argue  that
      section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  only
      limited the discretion of the Tribunal in respect  of  the  admissible
      evidence on appeal and did not limit the discretion of the Respondent.
      However, the discretion of the  Respondent  in  terms  of  considering
      documents that was submitted after  the  application  under  what  was
      previously known as the "evidential flexibility policy" from July 2012
      has now been contained in paragraph 245AA  of  the  Immigration  Rules
      which states at paragraph  245AA  (A)  that  "where  Part  6A  or  any
      appendices referred to in Part 6A state that specified documents  must
      be provided, the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer  or  the
      Secretary of  State  will  only  consider  documents  that  have  been
      submitted with  the  application  and  will  only  consider  documents
      submitted after the application where they are submitted in accordance
      with subparagraph (b)".




  20. Under paragraph 245AA (b) it is stated that,  "if  the  Appellant  has
      submitted specified documents in which:

(i) Some of the documents in sequence had been omitted (for example, if  one
bank statement from a series is missing);

(ii) A document is in the wrong format (for example, if the  letter  is  not
on letterhead paper as specified); or

(iii) A document is a copy and not an original document; or

(iv) A document does not contain all the specified information;

The Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or Secretary of  State  may
contact the Applicant or his  representative  in  writing  and  request  the
correct documents. Requested documents  must  be  received  at  the  address
specified in the request within 7 working days of the date of the  request."


  21. However, in this case  the  Respondent  had  already  written  to  the
      Respondent on the 17th December 2013 asking for the  original  City  &
      Guilds certificate showing his scores for ESOL  Listening, Reading and
      Writing stating specifically that the aim was to make  a  decision  on
      the case promptly and that "to enable us to do this  it  is  essential
      that you use the enclosed return label and reply by the 24th  December
      2013. If you fail to produce information  requested  within  the  time
      that has been given, I must warn you  that  the  application  will  be
      considered on the basis of the information currently  available".  The
      Appellant had therefore been  given  an  opportunity  to  produce  the
      missing evidence in line with the evidential flexibility policy as set
      out in paragraph 245 AA of the Immigration Rules, the  Appellant  only
      having submitted a certificate at that time in  respect  of  his  oral
      language skills, rather than listening, reading and writing skills.




  22. Having already granted the Appellant an  opportunity  to  produce  the
      documents  that  were  missing,  I  do  not  consider  that   it   was
      procedurally unfair on part of the  Respondent  not  to  substantively
      reply or to deal with the request for further time that  was  made  by
      the Appellant, nor  do  I  consider  it  procedurally  unfair  of  the
      Respondent, as it is said that she would do in  her  letter,  deciding
      the application on the evidence presented, when the requested evidence
      was not provided within the timescale given.




  23. Paragraph 245AA does not provide for any further  extensions  of  time
      beyond the initial period of time  granted,  and  the  Respondent  was
      therefore not in breach of any Immigration Rules or policy by  failing
      to consider or allow a further period for the Appellant to obtain copy
      certificates. The obligation was on the Appellant to  ensure  that  he
      actually  had  all  of  the  requisite  documents  before  making  his
      application.




  24. As was confirmed by the Court of  Appeal  in  the  case  of  Rodriguez
      Mandalia & Patel v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]
      EWCA Civ 2, the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  is  not
      under an obligation to afford Applicants for Leave to Remain as Tier 4
      (General) Student Migrants in the United Kingdom  any  opportunity  to
      remedy defects in their applications, in  that  case  in  relation  to
      maintenance and funding requirements under her evidential  flexibility
      policy. The evidential flexibility policy was not designed to give  an
      Applicant the opportunity first to remedy all possible defects  in  an
      application  and  supporting  documentation,  so  as   to   save   the
      application from refusal after consideration.




  25.  The Respondent in this case having exercised to discretion to request
      the original documents in respect of the  other  three  parts  of  the
      Appellant's English language test, as she was  entitled  to  do  under
      paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules, she was not then obliged  to
      consider any further request by the  Appellant  for  further  time  to
      submit that documentation. Paragraph 245AA lays  down  the  period  of
      time in which such documentation has to be provided and the  Appellant
      did not provide documentation within  that  timescale,  and  the  fact
      simply that it would take six weeks because of the Christmas  holidays
      to obtain copy documentations, failed to explain why the Appellant did
      not in fact ensure that he had obtained all of the requisite documents
      prior to making his original application. The burden  was  on  him  to
      ensure that he actually had all  of  the  requisite  documentation.  I
      therefore do not consider that the Respondent has  acted  procedurally
      unfairly in determining the application on the evidence that she  had,
      when the Appellant had not provided the requested documentation within
      the time limit given. I  do  not  consider  that  the  Respondent  was
      required to deal with the request for further time, other  than  as  a
      matter of courtesy, but her failure  to  do  so  did  not  render  the
      decision procedurally unfair, nor did any failure  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent to grant the further six weeks requested by  the  Appellant
      render the decision procedurally unfair.




  26. Nor was it unfair of the Respondent to actually require  the  original
      test certificates to be submitted. As was properly found by First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Foulkes- Jones at [8] the CAS itself is  not  specified
      document and therefore the  fact  that  the  CAS  had  said  that  the
      Appellant's had passed the four components required, such that Mr Butt
      was arguing before First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Foulkes-Jones  that  the
      Appellant did not need to supply certificates, was  properly  rejected
      by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foulkes-Jones,   and   it   was   not
      procedurally unfair  that  the  Respondent  actually  to  require  the
      Appellant to produce the specified documents from the English language
      test provider pursuant to paragraph 118(b) (ii) (4) and paragraph 120-
      SD (a) of Appendix A. The Judge was perfectly entitled to find the CAS
      was not in itself sufficient.




  27. Further, the First-Tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled to  find
      on the evidence before him that the documents which were  produced  by
      the Appellant and submitted to the Respondent dated the  28th  January
      2014 from the City & Guilds especially stating that  "this  is  not  a
      certificate"  was not in itself a specified document as required under
      the Immigration Rules, such that even if the respondent had placed the
      Appellant's application on hold as requested, the specified  documents
      as found by First-Tier Tribunal Judge were not  provided  within  that
      requisite time. This was a finding open to him on the evidence  before
      him.




  28. Further, the suggestion in the original Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the
      decision was procedurally unfair on the basis that  an  Appellant  has
      the right to be informed of any adverse point to be taken against  him
      and not to be taken by surprise following the case of R (Anufrijeva) v
      Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  1AC604  does  not
      assist the Appellant. The Court of Appeal in Rodriguez confirmed  that
      the Appellant does not have to be notified of  every  reason  why  his
      application was going to be refused, and the First-Tier Tribunal Judge
      did not take a point adverse to him without giving him the opportunity
      of stating what his answers to it were. The Judge properly dealt  with
      the arguments raised by Mr Butt on behalf of the Appellant.




  29. Further, although within the original grounds it was argued  that  the
      Judge failed to consider Article 8, it is clear from the decision that
      the Judge fully and properly considered Article  8  between  [12]  and
      [15] inclusive of his decision.




  30. The decision of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  therefore  does  not
      disclose any material error of law and the appeal  is  dismissed.  The
      decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones is maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Foulkes-Jones  does  not  contain
any material errors of Law and the appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of
First-Tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones is maintained.



The First-Tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-Tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and no application for an anonymity order was made before me.  No
such order is made.



Signed
                                      Dated 20th August 2015

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

