
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04115/2014
     IA/04116/2014
     IA/04117/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 10th December 2015                         |On 31st December 2015         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                     (1)  MRS SHAHANARA AKHTER CHOWDHURY
                           (2)  Mr Muhammad AKRAM
                               (3)  MASTER M F
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Bazini (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Majid, promulgated on 1st June 2015,  following  a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 27th May 2015.  In the determination, the  judge  allowed  the
    appeals of Mrs Shahanara  Akhter  Chowdhury,  Mr  Muhammad  Akram,  and
    Master M F.  The Respondent Secretary of  State,  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants  are  a  mother,  father,  and  their  son.   The  First
    Appellant, the mother, was born on 17th January  1981,  and  she  is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh.  The Second Appellant, the father, was  born  on
    19th December  1975,  and  he  is  a  Pakistani  national.   The  Third
    Appellant, the son, was born on 1st February 2011, and  he  is  also  a
    Pakistani national.  They appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    dated 30th December 2013, refusing them leave to remain in the UK under
    the Immigration Rules.  The relevant Immigration  Rules  are  paragraph
    397 of HC 395.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge's findings are minimal, in a determination that  is  rich  in
    citation of the law, but has comparatively little  by  way  of  factual
    analysis.  The judge observes that the basis of the claim is  that  the
    First Appellant had been granted "discretionary leave," and given  that
    her circumstances remained unchanged, she was entitled to discretionary
    leave again.  The judge referred to the presence  of  "three  children"
    which is incorrect, and laid store  on  the  "best  interests"  of  the
    children, requiring them to be taken into  account  (see  para  10(a)).
    The judge also observed that the First Appellant was a Bangladeshi lady
    who was married to a Pakistani  national,  and  that  her  family  were
    opposed to the marriage, and this had been her  oral  evidence.   There
    had been difficulties in terms of the two of them being  able  to  live
    together in their home countries.  The judge then went on to  say  that
    the Appellant wished the case to be considered on the basis of  Article
    8 of the Human Rights Act.  The judge  then  returned  to  the  earlier
    statement  that  the   First   Appellant   was   the   beneficiary   of
    "discretionary leave" and that  it  would  be  inconsistent  with  past
    decisions to now deny her the same status (see para 26).

 4. The appeal was allowed.

The Grounds of Application

 5.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  two
    fundamental respects.  First, the judge  failed  to  give  reasons,  or
    adequate reasons, for allowing the appeals under the Immigration Rules,
    on human rights grounds, and on the  basis  of  existing  discretionary
    leave.  Second, the judge made material mis-directions of law, both  in
    relation to the Immigration Rules, and in relation to Article 8 and the
    Section 117 public interest considerations.

 6. On 25th August 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    it was arguable that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  identify  the
    relevant Immigration Rule under which the  appeal  was  being  allowed.
    The judge also erred in failing to give adequate reasons.  Second,  the
    judge did not  explain  how  the  Appellant's  Article  8  rights  were
    infringed.  Third, the judge did not explain how the Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8 and under paragraph 276ADE were relevant on the facts  of
    this case.  Third, he failed to show what the legal basis was for  past
    grants of discretionary leave.  Fifth, there was  no  analysis  of  the
    best  interests  of  the  children.   Finally,  the   public   interest
    requirement under Section 117A to B of the 2002 Act  was  not  properly
    evaluated.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me on 10th December 2015, Mr Bazini, appearing on
    behalf  of  the  Appellants,  submitted  that,  although  it  was   the
    Respondent's appeal, he had taken the opportunity to discuss the matter
    with Ms Holmes on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State,  and  it
    was agreed that the best course of action was for  this  matter  to  be
    remitted back to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision.  This was
    because, whilst it was accepted that  the  judge's  determination  fell
    into error for the reasons given by the Respondent in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal, there had been no decision with respect to the First Appellant,
    the husband, and the Third Appellant, the child.

 8. If there were decisions with respect to all three Appellants, then they
    could be properly  considered  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  upon
    appeal.  At this point in time, the applications had been fundamentally
    misunderstood by the Respondent Secretary of State,  because  her  view
    was that there is no jurisdiction with respect to the husband's  appeal
    and the child's appeal because the wife, the First Appellant, alone had
    been granted discretionary leave.

 9. Initially the Home Office view was that there was no  right  of  appeal
    even for the First Appellant, the wife, but a decision by UTJ Renton on
    30th May 2014, confirmed that,  given  that  the  First  Appellant  had
    applied for leave to remain during the currency of an  existing  leave,
    she had an in-country right of appeal and reliance was placed  upon  EA
    (Timeliness of Appeal Treated as Late) Ghana [2006] UKAIT 00036.

10. By the time that the First Appellant had been granted  an  acknowledged
    right  of  appeal,  there  were  still  no  decisions  for  the  Second
    Appellant, the husband, and the Third Appellant the child.  The  entire
    basis for the refusal of a further grant of discretionary leave to  the
    First Appellant, the wife, was on the basis that she had  not  produced
    evidence to show that she was  still  enjoying  family  life  with  her
    husband and son, but this  was  inaccurate,  because  it  was  not  the
    husband who had discretionary leave, and there was no child born to the
    First Appellant at that time.

11. For her part, Ms Holmes submitted that the proper course of action  was
    indeed now to remit the matter back to the Secretary of State  to  have
    three decisions with respect to these three parties  made  which  would
    then be the subject of a linked appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    should that prove necessary.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set aside  the  decision.   My  reasons  are
    those given in the  grant  of  permission.   The  factual  analysis  is
    incomplete and the recital of the law does not  show  how  it  is  that
    particular provisions apply to the facts of this case.

Re-making the Decision

13. I re-make the decision on the basis of the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted
    back to the Secretary of State for reconsideration, and for a making of
    specific decisions in relation to these three specific  parties  before
    me.  The reasons for this are  amply  set  out  by  UTJ  Grubb  in  his
    decision dated 18th November 2014 when he allowed an application for  a
    judicial review on the basis that, "there is  a  procedural  muddle  in
    these claims."

14. The First Appellant's appeal was rejected on the basis that she had  no
    right of appeal because no appealable  decision  had  been  made  under
    Section 82 of the 2002 Act.  It was said  that  this  was  a  "excluded
    decision."  The other two applicants, the husband/father and child, did
    not have a right of  appeal  as  they  did  not  have  leave  when  the
    application was made.  Their  only  redress  was  by  judicial  review.
    However, an appealable decision had been made in relation to the  first
    applicant, the wife/mother in this case.

15. In that  event,  the  second  and  third  applicants  fell  within  the
    exceptional circumstances category because the first applicant's  claim
    and theirs were intimately connected and required  resolution  together
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  UTJ Grubb had also held that there was
    some merit in the "discretionary policy" point made because this  would
    have a knock-on  effect  on  the  decisions  made  in  respect  of  the
    dependants of  the  First  Appellant,  namely,  the  Second  and  Third
    Appellants.

16. One must consider,  as  a  starting  point,  why  the  First  Appellant
    obtained discretionary leave in the first instance.   She  was  granted
    discretionary leave under the legacy  because  of  her  own  particular
    circumstances.  There is no evidence to suggest that it had anything to
    do with her husband and child (because had this been the case they  too
    also would have been granted discretionary leave)  but  they  were  not
    considered by the Respondent  to  be  a  factor  in  whether  to  grant
    discretionary leave back in 2010 to the First Appellant.

17.  To  suggest  then,  that  the  First  Appellant   would   be   refused
    discretionary leave now because she had failed to  show  that  she  was
    "still enjoying family life" with her husband and son,  was  irrational
    because this was not  the  reason  why  discretionary  leave  had  been
    granted in the first place in 2010.  The First Appellant's family  life
    in the UK had nothing to do with the grant of  discretionary  leave  in
    2010.  The matters have to be kept under active  review  and  had  this
    been done it would have transpired plainly that there is no  connection
    between the First Appellant and the Second and  Third  Appellants  with
    respect to discretionary leave to the First Appellant.

18. If anything, the facts that led to the grant of discretionary leave  in
    the first instance still persisted now.   All  the  evidence  indicated
    that the First  Appellant  was  enjoying  life  with  her  husband  and
    children and this is clear from the solicitor's letter of 10th December
    2013.  There are full birth certificates for both  children  indicating
    the Appellant's details and address.  These are  matters,  for  further
    consideration by  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  when  a  fresh
    decision is made.  It is not a matter for this Tribunal.

19. These issues are flagged up for now so as to make  the  decision  maker
    aware of the nature of the issues so that a proper focus  is  given  to
    the essential facts upon which a decision has to be made.  Since it  is
    agreed between Ms Holmes and Mr Bazani that the right course of  action
    is for this matter to be remitted back to the Secretary of State for  a
    fresh decision this is the decision of the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is  allowed
to the extent that it is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  the
Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  for  a  fresh  decision  with
respect to all three Appellants, this having been agreed by way  of  consent
between both representatives appearing before me, so that all three  matters
can be linked in a conjoined appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal,  should
that be the case.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2018



