
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04008/2013
     IA/10265/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th July 2013                               |On 17th July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                             MRS POOJA BHANDARI
                           MR KRISHNA PRASAD GAIRE
                                                                    Claimant

                                     and

                             Secretary of State

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Claimant:         Mr A H Badar (Farani, Javid, Taylor, solicitors)
For the Respondent:        Mr P Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of  State.  She  appealed  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Somal) who, in the determination promulgated on 24th May
    2013, allowed at the Claimants' appeals, to a limited  extent,  against
    the Secretary of State's decision to refuse them leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant and her dependent husband.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge noted that the basis of the Secretary of
    State's refusal was that she was not satisfied that the first  Claimant
    had produced satisfactory evidence that she had been in  possession  of
    the required sponsorship and salary and therefore had not achieved  the
    requisite number of points under appendix A of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Judge noted that  the  Claimants'  representative  had  produced  a
    letter from the first Claimant's employer in which they indicated  that
    that they  had  used  a  recruitment  agency  to  arrange  the  Tier  2
    sponsorship and an error had been  made  in  the  letter  sent  to  the
    Secretary  of  State  because  the  letter  had  given  the   incorrect
    employment  role  and  salary.  That  letter  was  produced  after  the
    Secretary of State's decision.

 3. The Judge noted that the representative had sent  a  letter  after  the
    decision  to  Secretary  of  State  asking  for  the  decision  to   be
    reconsidered on the basis of  the  mistake.   The  Secretary  of  State
    refused. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal  for  reasons
    of fairness to the limited extent only and required the  Respondent  to
    make a fresh decision in the light of the recently produced letter. She
    had previously said at paragraph 11 that the letter from  the  employer
    should be considered by the Secretary of  State  in  reconsidering  the
    decision  as  the  letter  appertained  to  the  matters   taken   into
    consideration when making the  original  decision  and  shed  light  on
    issues and in the interest of fairness should be  considered.  Then  at
    paragraph 11 the Judge found that the decision of  the  Respondent  was
    not in accordance with the law.

 4. The Secretary of State's grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  argue
    that the application was refused by  the  Secretary  of  State  because
    inadequate  evidence  had  been  provided  with  regard   to   salaried
    sponsorship. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
    therefore erred in allowing the appeal even to a limited extent.

 5. Before me Mr Badar provided a skeleton argument suggesting that section
    85A did not apply as the matter that the  Judge   was  considering  was
    whether the Secretary of State  should  have  considered  allowing  the
    application using her  discretion  rather  than  under  the  Rules.  He
    referred to the fairness policy. However, Mr Badar's skeleton  argument
    and submissions were misguided. The Secretary  of  State  received  the
    application as submitted by or on behalf of the Claimants.  There  were
    no obviously missing documents which would have,  in  the  interest  of
    fairness suggested further enquiries and she made a decision  based  on
    the documents submitted. It was only after the decision was  made  that
    the Claimants obtained further information. On that basis it cannot  be
    said, and in fairness Mr Badar accepted, that the  Secretary  of  State
    acted unfairly. If the Secretary of State had not acted  unfairly  then
    it could not be said that the decision was  unlawful.  That  being  the
    case it is quite clear that the Judge made a material error of  law  in
    finding that the decision was unlawful and allowing the appeal even  to
    the limited extent.

 6. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  for
    reasons which are clear from what I have  already  said  the  Claimants
    cannot succeed. S85A does apply, this being an  application  under  the
    Points Based System. The application was properly refused and there was
    no unfairness on the part of the Secretary of State.   Mr  Badar  quite
    rightly accepted that there  was  no  evidence  to  indicate  that  the
    decision was disproportionate and the Claimants could not succeed under
    Article 8. On the evidence submitted with the application the Claimants
    quite simply could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

 7. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed such that the Secretary  of
    State's original decision is upheld.



Signed                              Date 17th July 2013







Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


