
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04976/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st April 2016                       |On 15th July 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Symes of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Robertson allowing an appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds by SM (hereinafter referred to as "the Claimant").

 2. The Claimant was born on [ ] 1985 and is a national of  Pakistan.   She
    came to the UK as a student in September 2009.  In  February  2011  she
    applied for indefinite leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules.
    This application was refused but she was granted leave to remain  until
    13th June 2012.  Prior to the expiry of this leave  she  applied  again
    for leave to remain outside the Rules.  Her application was refused and
    a subsequent appeal was dismissed.  In August 2014  she  applied  again
    for indefinite leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules and it  is
    the refusal of this application which led to the present appeal.

 3. The Claimant suffers from serious health problems.   She  has  cervical
    cancer which has affected her bladder, rectum,  pelvic  side  wall  and
    ovaries.   She  has  undergone  multiple  cycles  of  chemotherapy  and
    surgical procedures, including a stoma and removal of her  bladder  and
    rectum.  She has regular six monthly reviews  with  an  oncologist  and
    three monthly blood tests.  She suffers from depression  and  has  been
    referred for counselling.  As a result of her condition she  is  unable
    to have children and would  find  it  difficult  to  marry  within  her
    culture.  She is unable to work and relies on others to cook  for  her,
    do her laundry and take her shopping.  Her mobility is limited.

 4. In the UK the Claimant lives in a property owned by her brother, Mr  S.
    She also has a married sister in  the  UK.   Altogether  she  has  four
    sisters and three  brothers,  none  of  whom  live  in  Pakistan.   Her
    remaining sister in Pakistan has recently moved to Dubai.  Her  parents
    reside in Ireland, where they have residence cards.

 5. In the decision under appeal the judge noted that it was  not  disputed
    that the Claimant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The judge observed that the starting  point  for  consideration
    was the determination made in the previous appeal by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Gillespie in February 2014, in accordance with Devaseelan
    [2012] UKIAT 00702.  Judge Gillespie found that the Claimant could  not
    succeed  under  Article  3.   Under  Article  8  he  found   that   her
    circumstances "did not fall within the small minority of rare and truly
    exceptional cases in which the imperative of proportionality demands an
    outcome in the Appellant's favour".  Judge Gillespie  took  account  of
    the medical evidence and the evidence regarding the Claimant's  family.
    At that time the Claimant's family in the UK had uncertain  immigration
    status.  Her parents and two of her siblings were overstayers and Mr  S
    had been refused leave.  Judge Gillespie concluded that they were  able
    to return to Pakistan to support the Claimant and  that  it  was  their
    first duty to do so.

 6. In the present appeal the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  observed
    that there was little more medical evidence available than  was  before
    Judge Gillespie.  The Claimant continued to be  monitored  and  treated
    and it was likely that this regime would continue for  the  foreseeable
    future.  There was nothing to indicate that Judge  Gillespie's  finding
    in relation to Article 3 should not still stand.

 7. In terms of Article 8, the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  observed
    that the Secretary of State did not accept that there were  exceptional
    circumstances.  The  Secretary  of  State  gave  consideration  to  the
    Claimant's state of health under Article 8 and concluded  that  medical
    care was available in Pakistan and  that  there  was  family  there  to
    support her.  At the time of that decision the  Claimant's  sister  was
    residing in Pakistan but the evidence at the hearing was that  she  had
    moved to Dubai.  There was further evidence that the Claimant's parents
    had moved to Ireland and there was no-one in Pakistan able to care  for
    the Claimant.

 8. Under Article 8 the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    Claimant is educated.  She came to the UK originally to  study  and  to
    improve her prospects.  She speaks English and is not reliant on public
    funds.  She has developed a private life  whilst  in  the  UK  lawfully
    although her immigration status has been precarious.  Her status  as  a
    student and subsequent leave to remain did not come with  a  guarantee,
    or expectation, of settlement.  While accepting that there was a public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration control and acknowledging
    that medical treatment was available in Pakistan,  the  judge  observed
    that the Claimant requires a significant amount of care and support  on
    a daily basis with regard to  both  her  physical  and  mental  health.
    Although difficult, it would  be  possible  for  the  Claimant  to  re-
    integrate into life in Pakistan but only if there  was  adequate  daily
    physical and emotional support, which was no longer available now  that
    her sister had left Pakistan.

 9. Although the Claimant had only been in the UK for a few years her  life
    had  changed  substantially  because  of  the  cancer   diagnosis   and
    subsequent invasive treatment.  She did not know the cause or extent of
    her illness when she arrived.  She had relied heavily on family support
    during this ordeal.  Her prospects of marriage in Pakistan were reduced
    as a result of her illness and she would be unable to work and  support
    herself.  On the basis of these  findings  the  judge  found  that  the
    decision to refuse to vary leave and to remove  the  Claimant  was  not
    proportionate.

Application for permission to appeal

10. In the application for permission to appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State
    contended first that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons  for
    findings on material matters.  In particular, at paragraph 26 the judge
    allowed the Claimant's appeal on the basis of her  specific  needs  for
    care and support.  It was not entirely clear from the decision who  was
    providing this care and support.  The judge noted that  the  Claimant's
    siblings provided her with support, but did not state what the  support
    entailed.  The judge stated that the Claimant  required  a  significant
    amount of care and support on a daily basis, but again it  was  unclear
    who was providing this.  The judge stated that the Claimant  no  longer
    had anyone in Pakistan to provide her with the  care  and  support  she
    required.  The judge had not considered  that  currently  the  Claimant
    might be receiving this assistance from an external agency rather  than
    from her family and that even if this was not the case now, this  could
    be an option for the Claimant in Pakistan.   The  judge  erred  by  not
    considering this possibility.

11. According to the Secretary of State's grounds,  the  judge's  reasoning
    was also unclear about the level of dependency the Claimant had on  her
    siblings.  Reference was made to Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ  31.   Where
    the level of dependency was unclear it was not shown whether this would
    outweigh the public interest in removal.

12. The second main ground relied upon by the Secretary of State  was  that
    the judge had failed to take into account or resolve conflicts of  fact
    or opinion in a material matter.  At paragraph 15 the judge found  that
    the Claimant's parents had moved to Ireland and therefore  she  had  no
    family to support her in Pakistan.  The Secretary of  State's  decision
    took the view that there were no obstacles to the parents returning  to
    Pakistan.  The judge had failed to consider  this  possibility  and  to
    resolve this conflict in opinion.

13. In the grant of permission to appeal it was observed that  even  if  it
    was open to the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to accept  that  every
    member of the family had indeed  left  Pakistan  by  the  date  of  the
    hearing, it was arguably wrong to start  from  the  premise  that  none
    could return to care for the Claimant.  The judge  had  not  identified
    any change to the care provided to the Claimant in  the  UK  since  the
    appeal decision in February 2014.  If in February 2014  the  Claimant's
    care needs could properly be expected to be provided by a  third  party
    in Pakistan, the key question was whether anything had changed in  that
    respect.  It was arguably wrong to start from  the  premise  that  such
    care could only be provided by close  family  members  rather  than  by
    extended family members or by a commercial organisation.  Arguably  the
    decision identified no such change and  failed  to  identify  a  proper
    basis to depart from the analysis  of  proportionality  made  by  Judge
    Gillespie.

14. A rule 24 response was provided on behalf  of  the  Claimant,  somewhat
    late, on 19th April 2016.   Permission  was  nevertheless  sought  for
    admission of the response on  the  basis  that  the  Claimant  was  not
    represented before the First-tier Tribunal but was now represented on a
    public access  basis  by  Counsel  and  it  had  taken  some  time  for
    preparation of the notice.

15. In the  rule  24  response  it  is  stated  that  the  grounds  of  the
    application for permission to appeal do not identify any errors of  law
    but were disagreements as to findings of fact.  There was no deficiency
    in the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal.  It was obvious  that  the
    Tribunal accepted that the Claimant  was  heavily  dependent  upon  her
    parents and siblings in the  UK  for  emotional  and  physical  support
    following the rapid onset and legacy of a life-altering  illness  which
    meant that she was unlikely to find a husband and had no expectation of
    having her own children.

16. It was within the range of responses to those findings to conclude that
    they disclosed facts representing a disproportionate interference  with
    the Claimant's private and family life.  The threshold  for  dependency
    in Kugathas was satisfied.  The statutory criteria in section 117B were
    expressly addressed, as was the policy of the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    all the relevant evidence was taken into account.

17. It was further submitted in the rule 24 notice that there  was  nothing
    irrational in not addressing the likelihood of the  Claimant's  support
    network relocating abroad.  This was not a case in which a  sole  carer
    of a child, or a partner, could relocate abroad with the person subject
    to immigration control in order  to  maintain  essentially  symmetrical
    relationships.  It was plainly within the range of  rational  responses
    for the Tribunal to give short shrift to the  notion  that  the  entire
    family support network in the UK and Ireland could relocate abroad.

18. It was further submitted that  there  was  no  failure  to  follow  the
    Devaseelan principles.  In the present appeal Judge Robertson used  the
    findings of Judge Gillespie as a starting point.  They were  repeatedly
    referenced  and  a  distinction  was   drawn   between   the   family's
    geographical locations at the time of the earlier hearing as opposed to
    their current locations.  The earlier finding had been  made  that  the
    Claimant's health experiences  had  left  her  "maimed  physically  and
    psychologically" and this was the starting point which plainly  lowered
    the hurdle for her claimed subsequent success if other factors moved in
    her direction.  Finally it was noted that the Secretary  of  State  was
    not represented before the First-tier Tribunal and made no  attempt  to
    develop any theory about the case.

Submissions

19. At the hearing before me, Mr Wilding for the Secretary of State  relied
    on the  grounds  of  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal.  He
    submitted that Judge Robertson had failed to give proper  consideration
    to the previous appeal and failed to give reasons  for  departing  from
    it.  The judge had not  shown  how  the  Claimant's  circumstances  had
    manifestly changed.  Mr Wilding queried what had changed in the one and
    a half years since the previous appeal.  In  terms  of  Devaseelan  the
    subsequent appeal was not an opportunity  to  re-litigate.   There  had
    been no engagement in the more recent appeal with the key  question  of
    what had changed.

20. Mr Wilding continued that at page 23 of the  decision  Judge  Robertson
    had said the Claimant needed a significant amount of care  and  support
    but he did not explain what  this  was.   This  was  important  to  the
    question of return to Pakistan and the possibility of care there.   The
    Article 8 analysis was incomplete and affected by material error.

21. Mr Wilding continued that Judge Robertson did not consider at  all  the
    question of whether the Claimant's parents could return to Pakistan  to
    care for her.  There was nothing to prevent support  for  the  Claimant
    being provided in this way.  The Claimant's parents were not  permanent
    residents of Ireland.  Only eighteen months previously Judge  Gillespie
    had found there would be  no  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    Claimant's right to respect for private or family life by  her  removal
    to Pakistan.  The status of the Claimant's parents in Ireland  was  not
    known.

22. For the Claimant, Mr Symes referred to  the  Claimant's  life  changing
    health problems.  This had required major surgery.   The  Claimant  was
    unable to bear children and this would  affect  her  social  status  in
    Pakistan.  Judge Gillespie's decision had  been  taken  as  a  starting
    point, together with the findings made about  the  Claimant's  physical
    and psychological  condition.   The  reason  the  appeal  before  Judge
    Gillespie failed was because at that time the Claimant  still  had  one
    sibling in Pakistan.  On the evidence before  Judge  Robertson  on  the
    balance of probabilities all the Claimant's  family  members  had  left
    Pakistan.  The Claimant's remaining sister in  Pakistan  had  moved  to
    Dubai.

23. Mr Symes observed that the Secretary of State did not attend  the  most
    recent appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find the Kugathas threshold was  satisfied.    It  was  not
    difficult to show a woman in the  Claimant's  position  exceeded  this.
    The judge referred to  Section  117B  and  the  precariousness  of  the
    Claimant's family life.  The judge also considered the  possibility  of
    integration into Pakistan.  There was an issue though of  the  complete
    lack of emotional support the applicant would have in Pakistan.   There
    was no error of law in the decision.

24. Mr Wilding  responded  in  relation  to  the  findings  made  by  Judge
    Gillespie.  These concerned the precarious nature of  the  position  of
    several family members.  Judge Gillespie found the position in 2014 was
    broadly the same as it was at present.  Mr Wilding reiterated that the
    status of the Claimant's parents in Ireland was not known.  He  further
    submitted that it was not  right  to  say  Judge  Gillespie's  decision
    depended on one sister being in Pakistan.  The decision was  about  the
    family in the UK.  The question Judge Robertson had to  assess  in  the
    more recent appeal was the actual situation.  The Claimant required the
    support of family members who were not lawfully in Ireland.

25. It was pointed out at this stage that according to paragraph 17 of  the
    decision by Judge Robertson all the Claimant's family had  now  settled
    outside Pakistan.  Mr Wilding responded that Judge  Robertson  did  not
    refer to Judge Gillespie's findings in terms of  Devaseelan  and  asked
    what had changed.

Discussion

26. I do not agree with the submission on behalf of the Secretary of  State
    that Judge Robertson did not follow the Devaseelan guidelines  and  did
    not identify a material change  in  circumstances  since  the  previous
    decision by Judge Gillespie in February 2014.  At paragraph 10  of  the
    decision Judge Robertson made direct  reference  to  Judge  Gillespie's
    findings as the starting point for consideration in the  later  appeal,
    in accordance with Devaseelan.  At paragraph 24 the judge said that  he
    accepted the Claimant's evidence regarding the difficulties she had  on
    a day-to-day  basis  and  with  mobility.   The  judge  concluded  that
    although difficult it would be possible for the Claimant to reintegrate
    into life in Pakistan.  This would only be possible, however, if  there
    was adequate physical and emotional support on a daily basis.  This was
    no longer available in  Pakistan  as  the  Claimant's  sister  had  now
    settled in Dubai.

27. It is significant here that the  judge  refers  both  to  physical  and
    emotional support, based on the medical evidence and  the  evidence  of
    the Claimant and of her brother, both of whom gave evidence before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State's  proposal  that  the
    Claimant could rely on care from a commercial organisation in  Pakistan
    provides no answer  to  her  need  for  emotional  support,  given  the
    difficulties she has gone through.

28. The Secretary of State sought to argue that  Judge  Robertson  had  not
    made adequate findings about the care  required  by  the  Claimant.   I
    consider that adequate findings were  made.   The  judge  accepted  the
    Claimant's evidence that she relies on others to cook for  her  and  do
    her laundry and her shopping.  The Claimant has  limited  mobility  and
    she suffers from depression.  On the basis of this  evidence,  together
    with  the  medical  evidence  relating  to  the   Claimant's   physical
    condition, the  judge  was  entirely  justified  in  finding  that  the
    Claimant requires physical and emotional support on a daily basis.   As
    Mr Symes submitted, this finding was also the basis on which the  judge
    was entitled to find that the Claimant satisfied the Kugathas threshold
    for dependency upon her siblings in the UK.

29. Mr Wilding appeared to suggest that some of  the  family  members  upon
    whom the Claimant is dependent in the UK had  themselves  a  precarious
    immigration status.  The evidence  does  not  appear  to  support  this
    assertion.  The unchallenged evidence before Judge Robertson  was  that
    the Claimant's brother, Mr S, in whose house she lives,  is  a  British
    citizen.  The Claimant's sister, Mrs A, who lives with her  husband  in
    the UK, is also a British citizen, as is her husband.   The  Claimant's
    third sister, Mrs M, is also  a  British  citizen  living  in  the  UK.
    Although Mr Wilding referred to the Claimant's  parents  as  having  no
    status in Ireland, the evidence before Judge Robertson  was  that  they
    had residence cards.  This may  not  mean  that  they  are  permanently
    settled but it does indicate that they  are  lawfully  present  in  the
    Republic of Ireland.

30. The further suggestion made on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  was
    that either the Claimant's parents or her sister in Dubai,  or  perhaps
    some other sibling, could return to Pakistan to look after  her.   This
    suggestion requires some further analysis.   Judge  Robertson  did  not
    find that the Claimant's dependency in the Kugathas sense was upon  her
    parents or upon her sister in Dubai.   This  dependency  was  upon  the
    Claimant's brother and sisters in the UK.  This is where the Claimant's
    private  and  family  life  has  its  existence.   This  is  where  the
    interference in the Claimant's private and family life arising from the
    Secretary of State's decision would have its impact.  The finding  made
    by Judge Robertson was that there was no family member in Pakistan in a
    position to care for the Claimant were she to return there.  This is  a
    finding based on the evidence as it was presented at the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal in August 2015.  There was no evidence from the
    Claimant's parents or from her sister in Dubai to say that they were in
    a position to return to Pakistan to  look  after  her  or  were  indeed
    willing to do so.  The Claimant's care and support is provided  by  her
    siblings in the UK.  Judge Robertson was  correct  in  looking  at  the
    interference which would arise were the Claimant to be removed from the
    UK and comparing this with the situation she would face at the date  of
    the hearing were she to return to Pakistan, where there was  no-one  to
    provide her with the physical and emotional support she required.

31. It was simply wrong,  and  contrary  to  the  findings  made  by  Judge
    Robertson,  to  suppose  that  the  complex  physical   and   emotional
    requirements of the Claimant which are met by her siblings  in  the  UK
    could be provided for in Pakistan either by a returning  family  member
    or by a commercial organisation.  The  question  should  be  framed  in
    terms of the proportionality of the interference  with  the  Claimant's
    private and family life in the UK and only when the  severity  of  this
    interference has been assessed  can  a  comparison  be  made  with  the
    circumstances in which the Claimant would find herself in  her  country
    of origin.  Judge Robertson was entitled to  find  severe  interference
    with the Claimant's private and family life in the UK and an absence of
    not only physical but also emotional  support  in  Pakistan.   On  this
    basis the judge was entitled  to  resolve  the  balancing  exercise  in
    favour of the Claimant.

32. Finally, to address Mr Wilding's point about the difference between the
    circumstances at the time of Judge Gillespie's decision and the hearing
    before Judge Robertson, I would emphasise the following  findings  made
    by Judge Gillespie.  At paragraph 28 Judge Gillespie found that at that
    time the Claimant's parents were living in Manchester  some  200  miles
    away from the Claimant.  They  were  overstayers,  as  were  their  two
    youngest children.  It seems that in 2011 the Claimant's brother, Mr  S
    had been refused leave to remain  and  one  of  her  sisters,  AM,  had
    returned  to  Pakistan.   Although  in  his  findings  Judge  Gillespie
    referred to Mr S as having been refused leave in 2011, he also noted in
    his record of the evidence that Mr S had become a  naturalised  British
    citizen in 2013.  It appears from the evidence before  Judge  Gillespie
    that the sister in Pakistan was married and had a family.  This  raises
    a further issue in relation to the Secretary of State's suggestion that
    the Claimant's sister in Dubai would be able to return to  Pakistan  to
    look after her.  At  paragraph  12  of  his  decision  Judge  Robertson
    referred to the immigration status of the Claimant's family as found by
    Judge Gillespie and, at paragraph 15, Judge Robertson referred  to  the
    changed circumstances of the family since the hearing in February  2014
    and the fact that there was no longer anyone in Pakistan able  to  care
    for the Claimant should she be forced to return there.

33. I am satisfied that the findings made by Judge Robertson in relation to
    both the evidence and the proportionality of the Secretary  of  State's
    decision were  properly  based  upon  the  evidence  and  supported  by
    adequate and valid reasons.  The judge was entitled to find that  there
    had been changes in the circumstances of the  Claimant's  family  since
    the hearing before Judge Gillespie.  On this basis, and for the reasons
    given, Judge Robertson was entitled to come to a  different  conclusion
    under Article 8 in the  current  appeal  from  that  reached  by  Judge
    Gillespie in the previous appeal.

Conclusions

34. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

35. I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

36. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and I  have
    not been asked to make such an order.  However, in view of the  medical
    evidence of a very personal nature I consider that in  this  appeal  it
    would be appropriate for an order to be made.  Accordingly pursuant  to
    rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I make an
    anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a  court  directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication
    thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  original  Claimant.
    This order applies to, amongst others, all  parties.   Any  failure  to
    comply  with  this  order  could  give  rise  to  contempt   of   court
    proceedings.




Signed   Date: 15 July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
