








Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04574/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                                         |
|                                  |Determination Promulgated                |
|On: 26 March 2015                 |                              On: 20     |
|                                  |April 2015                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Ms gifty Okailey Okine
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr B Owusu, Solicitor, BWF Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      secretary of state and to  the  respondent  as  "the  claimant."   The
      claimant also brings a counter appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The claimant is a national of Ghana, born on  30  November  1961.  Her
      appeal against the decision of the secretary  of  state  refusing  her
      application for the issue of a residence card as the family member  of
      an EEA national exercising Treaty rights was allowed by the First-tier
      Tribunal  Miles  under  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006 - 'the 2006 Regulations'.


   3. On  2  September  2014,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal against that decision  on  the
      basis that it was arguable that, in the light of TA and Others (Kareem
      explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC), the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      had  erred  in  not  considering  whether  the  marriage  between  the
      appellant and her spouse was valid for the purposes of Belgian law.


   4. At the hearing on 10 December  2014,  I  issued  directions  that  the
      secretary of state should consider the documentation in the claimant's
      bundle and any further written report or submissions on her behalf  as
      to whether, as she claimed, her proxy marriage celebrated in Ghana  on
      13 July 2013 and subsequently registered, was recognised in Belgium.


   5. The claimant also gave  notice  that  she  too  wished  to  apply  for
      permission out of time against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      for failing to consider in the alternative whether  the  she  and  her
      husband were  parties  to  a  durable  relationship  within  the  2006
      Regulations.


   6. On the 1 December 2014 she was granted permission by Judge Osborne  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Accordingly, there is the  secretary  of
      state's appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  a
      counter appeal by the claimant, also  against  that  decision  on  the
      basis that he did not consider the alternative claim before him  under
      Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


   7. At the hearing Ms Holmes submitted that the claimant had not  produced
      evidence that the proxy marriage celebrated in Ghana on 13  July  2013
      and subsequently  registered  on  22  July  2013,  was  recognised  in
      Belgium.


   8. She submitted in line with the written argument of Mr Tarlow  who  had
      represented the secretary of state at the  earlier  hearing  that  the
      information and evidence provided  indicated  that  a  proxy  marriage
      conducted in  another  country  is  capable  of  being  recognised  in
      Belgium, provided that the relevant conditions have been met.


   9.  Those  are  identified  in  Article  30  of  the  Code   of   Private
      International I13. In order to be  produced  in  Belgium,  'a  foreign
      judgment  or  authentic  instrument  has  to  be  legalised   in   its
      entirety..... in original or copy. That legalisation is  'done'  by  a
      Belgian diplomatic or consular agent who is accredited  in  the  state
      where the judgement is rendered or where the instrument has been drawn
      up'.


  10. In the absence thereof, the legalisation is done by  a  diplomatic  or
      consular agent of a foreign state who looks after the Belgian interest
      in that state; and in the absence thereof by the Minister  of  Foreign
      Affairs.  It  is  the  King  who  determines  the  specific  rules  of
      legalisation.


  11. In the decision by the Upper Tribunal in Kareem [2014] UKUT  24  (IAC)
      it is stated at paragraph  68(g)  that  it  should  be  assumed  that,
      without independent and reliable evidence about the recognition of the
      marriage under the laws of the EEA country and/or  the  country  where
      the marriage took place, the Tribunal is likely to be unable  to  find
      that sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the burden  of
      proof.


  12. Mere production of legal materials from the  EEA  country  or  country
      where the marriage took place would be insufficient  evidence  because
      they will rarely show how such law is understood or applied  in  those
      countries. Mere assertions as to the effect of  such  laws  will,  for
      similar reasons, carry no weight.


  13. At the hearing on 10  December  2014,  Mr  Owusu  submitted  that  the
      marriage certificate need not be authenticated under Article 30 as  it
      is not  "an  instrument."  However,  Ms  Holmes  submitted  that  that
      certificate  is  a  legal  instrument  which  evidences  the  marriage
      contract. That submission moreover is given  support  from  the  reply
      from the Belgian  Immigration  Office  contained  in  the  appellant's
      bundle at I6.


  14. That document contains the answers by the Immigration Office  relating
      to the letters served from BWF Solicitors. One of the conditions  said
      to apply is that the foreign act of marriage has to be validated to be
      presented in Belgium and the Belgian Embassy or the Belgian  Consulate
      or primarily qualified to  do  so  -  Article  30  Code  International
      Private Law. It will be investigated if the marriage meets  the  basic
      requirements that apply in Ghana and Belgium - Article 46 of the Code.


  15. Ms Holmes submitted that a marriage certificate  is  obviously  not  a
      foreign judgment.  Accordingly,  a  marriage  certificate,  if  it  is
      capable of being legalised at  all,  must  come  under  the  class  of
      document being an authentic  instrument.  This  follows  logically  as
      certain legal rights such as property ownership, inheritance  and  the
      like flow from  the  concept  of  marriage  as  an  institution.   The
      translated letter from the Immigration Office  refers  to  a  specific
      instance of a marriage  which  has  been  recognised  by  the  Belgian
      authorities which can be considered binding  in  Belgium.  Recognition
      requires legalisation.


  16. The word "validated"  at  the  second  bullet  point  of  I6  is,  she
      submitted, the same for evidential purposes as "legalised" within  the
      meaning of Article 30. It is the specific  marriage  that  has  to  be
      validated. Accordingly, the letter at I6  does  not  contain  anything
      about a general acceptance of proxy marriages and the requirements set
      out at paragraph 63 of Kareem to the effect that  the  appellant  must
      furnish evidence to show how the law is applied in  Belgium  have  not
      been met and satisfied.


  17. Proof of the law of another country is by evidence. Such evidence will
      not only have to identify  relevant  legal  provisions  in  the  other
      country, but identify how they apply in practice. A lack  of  evidence
      of relevant foreign law will normally mean that  the  party  with  the
      burden of proving it will fail.


  18. In this case, she submitted that "how they apply in practice" requires
      the legalisation process under Article 30 to have been  completed  and
      complied with. There is no evidence of the marriage certificate having
      been "legalised"  by  the  Belgian  embassy  or  consulate  in  Ghana.
      Accordingly, the document cannot be produced in Belgium under  Article
      30 of the Code.


  19. Mr Owusu  submitted  that  the  documentation  that  was  produced  is
      sufficient for the purpose of Kareem.  The  claimant  has  accordingly
      produced adequate evidence relating to the recognition by  Belgium  of
      the proxy marriage.


  20. In his Rule 24  response  to  the  secretary  of  state's  appeal,  he
      submitted that although the point in Kareem is not conceded, the First-
      tier Judge should have  proceeded  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
      claimant and her spouse are in a durable relationship.


  21. He relied on the authority of MDB and  Others  (Article  12,  1612/68)
      Italy [2010] UKUT 161 (IAC) which confirms that in EEA  family  cases,
      the Court has a duty to consider all strands of the  EEA  regulations,
      even if the first ground fails. He submitted that in  this  case,  the
      Judge had accepted that there  was  a  marriage  and  accordingly  was
      obliged to consider whether there was  a  durable  relationship  under
      Regulation 8(2).


      Assessment


  22. In TA and Others (Kareem explained),  supra,  it  was  confirmed  that
      following the decision in Kareem, the determination of  whether  there
      is a marital relationship for the purpose of the 2006 Regulations must
      always be examined in accordance with the laws  of  the  member  state
      from which the union citizen obtains nationality.


  23. In the case before me I find that there has been  no  proper  evidence
      adduced as to whether the  marriage  between  the  appellant  and  her
      spouse was valid for the purpose of Belgian law.


  24. I accordingly find from the lack of relevant  evidence  produced  that
      the marriage was valid for the purpose of Belgium law, that the First-
      tier Tribunal made a material error of law in the circumstances.  That
      decision is accordingly set aside.


  25. The secretary of state's appeal is accordingly allowed.


  26. As already noted, Judge Osborne found  that  it  would  be  unjust  to
      refuse  to  admit  the  application  for  a  counter  appeal  in   the
      circumstances.


  27. In granting permission to appeal, he found that it was  arguable  that
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider whether the  evidence
      disclosed  that  there  was  a  "durable  relationship"  between   the
      appellant and her partner, which may allow the issue  of  a  residence
      card under Regulation 7(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations  with  reference
      to Regulation 8(5). This would entitle her to obtain the card  on  the
      basis of her status as an extended  family  member  as  opposed  to  a
      spouse if her application were to be successful.


  28. Mr Owusu informed me that the alternative - Regulation 8(5)  ground  -
      was presented to the First-tier Tribunal by Mr Akaho, the solicitor on
      behalf of the claimant at that time. He is a member of the  same  firm
      of solicitors as Mr Owusu. Mr Owusu informed  me  that  Mr  Akaho  had
      expressly  submitted  that   the   Judge   should   consider   durable
      relationship as well as the validity of the proxy marriage.


  29. This was in any event referred to and set out in the statements of the
      appellant and her spouse that had been produced before the  First-tier
      Tribunal. There was accordingly a duty by the Judge to  consider  that
      evidence for the purposes of whether or not she  was  entitled  to  be
      issued with a residence card on that alternative basis.


  30. Ms Holmes accepted that there had been a  failure  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal to consider the alternative claim.


  31. In the circumstances, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal on that basis as well. I re-make the decision.


  32. As already indicated, I find that the marriage between  the  appellant
      and her spouse was not shown to be valid for the  purpose  of  Belgian
      law.


  33. With regard to the alternative claim, Mr Owusu called the claimant and
      her husband to give evidence. Her husband was outside court  when  she
      gave her evidence.


  34. Ms Tifty Okele Okine of [            ], Edgware, attended the  hearing
      and gave evidence. She adopted her witness statement dated 21 May 2014
      (paged 1-5). She arrived in the UK in February  2011  on  a  visitor's
      visa. This was to attend her stepfather's funeral.


  35. At that time, she was married to a Mr Abbey in Ghana. They had marital
      problems. She decided to remain here for a while. However, her husband
      signified the end of their marriage.


  36. She subsequently met Mr Ali Adamu Jawando on 11  February  2012.  This
      was at her sister's party. She was attracted to him.


  37. They later became acquainted. They exchanged telephone  numbers.  They
      then called on each other a few times.


  38. They got to know each other well. Mr  Ali  Jawando  was  keen  on  the
      relationship and persisted. She decided to  give  the  relationship  a
      try. It developed quickly and became sexual as well.


  39. He proposed to her in April 2012. In  due  course,  she  accepted  his
      proposal, having discussed the matter with her sister.


  40. They then made plans for the marriage. Both had Ghanaian parentage and
      they decided  to  get  married  under  Ghanaian  customary  law.  They
      informed their respective families in Ghana.


  41. She was finally divorced from her husband in April 2013.


  42. On 30 July 2013 the marriage ceremony took place in  the  presence  of
      the family members in Accra.


  43. After the  marriage  ceremony  was  performed  they  started  to  live
      together as a couple at the Edgware address and have been living there
      ever since. At the  hearing,  the  claimant  stated  during  her  oral
      evidence that they have continued to live there as husband and wife up
      until the date of  this  hearing  and  have  accordingly  been  living
      together for over a year and a half.


  44. In cross-examination, she stated that after the marriage ceremony  was
      performed, and they started to live together, Mr. Jawando  moved  into
      her apartment. She was living there with her  mother  as  she  is  her
      mother's carer " due to her old age."


  45. She said that her mother is 81 years old and has mobility issues.  She
      is unable to walk for a lengthy period. She has heart palpitations and
      once fell over on a bus and is frightened to go out alone.


  46. She was asked whether her husband did anything to  care  for  her.  He
      works. He assists her with money. She looks  after  her  mother.   Her
      husband gets on with her mother.


  47. She was asked what her husband would find to be the best  thing  about
      living with her, the claimant. He has told her that  she  is  a  great
      cook. She, too, has a lot of admiration for him.


  48. She was asked what the best thing for her was about  living  with  her
      husband. She likes the fact that he is not "picky" and helps her.


  49. There was no re-examination.


  50. Mr Ali Adamu Jawando  attended  the  hearing  and  gave  evidence.  He
      adopted his witness statement signed and dated on 21 May 2014.


  51. He was born  on  15  June  1978  in  Accra.  He  was  granted  Belgian
      nationality in 2004. He relocated to the UK in July 2011. His marriage
      to his first wife broke down. He then decided to relocate to the UK.


  52. He met the claimant at her half sister's party.  They  got  acquainted
      and commenced a relationship. This has developed  quickly  and  became
      sexual.


  53. He proposed to her in April 2012.


  54. In due course they began making plans for their marriage. His evidence
      in this respect is the same as that given by the claimant, to which  I
      have referred.


  55. After the marriage ceremony was performed on 13 July 2013, he moved in
      with the claimant and her mother at the Edgware address. The  claimant
      is the main carer for her mother. Her mother has  been  a  delight  to
      live with and gives no problems.


  56. He stated that the relationship is genuine  and  subsisting  and  they
      have every intention of staying married. Both of  them  have  children
      from previous relationships. They provide for their  children  to  the
      best of their ability. They speak to them on the phone all the time.


  57. His wife respects him. They compromise. She is a wonderful cook. He is
      always anxious to  come  home  after  work  to  enjoy  her  "wonderful
      dishes." She comforts him.


  58. He works as a care assistant, earning about �1200 a month.


  59. He said that he still lives with his wife at the same address and  the
      relationship is subsisting.


  60. In cross-examination, he was asked what he thought of  his  mother  in
      law living with him. He said she  is  elderly  and  wise.  She  is  no
      trouble at all.


  61. She stays with them because his wife is her carer. It was  his  wife's
      responsibility.


  62. He was asked what it is that she requires care for. She is an old lady
      who cannot do a lot for herself. She  needs  help.  For  example,  she
      cannot go out and get her own shopping. The shops are not  close.  She
      cannot walk for very long. She has pain in her legs. She feels  stable
      when the claimant is right next to her.


  63. He was asked what the best thing for him was  about  living  with  the
      claimant. He says she is a very good cook. In addition,  they  have  a
      very respectful relationship and they can resolve matters easily.


  64. She likes the fact that he takes  care  of  her  and  that  they  have
      misunderstandings which they resolve.


      Submissions


  65. Ms Holmes frankly submitted that there was nothing arising out of  the
      cross examination that  makes  her  question  the  evidence  of  their
      relationship. They have been living together  for  a  lengthy  period.
      There is no cause for concern.


  66. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Owusu  submitted  that  the  quality  of
      their relationship is good. They  satisfy  the  relevant  requirements
      under the 2006 Regulations.


      Assessment


  67.  I  found  the  evidence  of  the  claimant  and  her  husband  to  be
      straightforward  and  credible.  In  any  event,  there  has  been  no
      challenge to the substance of their evidence. They have been carefully
      cross-examined to establish that theirs is a genuine  relationship.  I
      accordingly accept that they are in a genuine relationship and  intend
      to live together as husband and wife permanently.


  68. I accordingly find that they have been in a relationship for a lengthy
      period since they met in February 2012. At  the  finalisation  of  his
      divorce, they set plans to marry in motion. The marriage took place in
      accordance with customary law in Ghana on 13  July  2013.  Since  then
      they have started to live together as a couple.


  69. I have had regard to the  provisions  of  Regulation  8  of  the  2006
      Regulations. One of the requirements is that the claimant must be in a
      durable relationship with her husband.


  70. There is no definition in  the  2006  Regulations  as  to  "a  durable
      relationship."  Whether  or  not  the  claimant  is   in   a   durable
      relationship is a matter to be considered on the basis of the evidence
      as a whole.


  71. I am satisfied from the evidence that the claimant and her husband are
      in a durable relationship for the purposes of Regulation 8(5).


  72. I accordingly find that the claimant is an extended family member  for
      the purpose of the 2006 Regulations.


  73. I have also had regard to Regulation 17(4) of  the  2006  Regulations.
      This provides that the secretary of state "may" issue a residence card
      to an extended family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is
      not an EEA national on application if the  relevant  EEA  national  in
      relation to the extended family member is a  qualified  person  (which
      the claimant's husband is); and in all the circumstances it appears to
      the secretary of state appropriate to issue a residence card.


  74. Accordingly, Regulation 17(4) provides a discretion to the  respondent
      relating to the issue of a residence card in these circumstances.


  75. In the claimant's case, the secretary of state has not considered  the
      exercise of such discretion having dismissed her application.


  76. Accordingly, the secretary of state is in the first instance  required
      to consider the exercise of discretion before the Tribunal  is  itself
      entitled to consider the exercise of discretion: FD (EEA Discretion  -
      Basis of Appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 49.


  77. I accordingly find that the secretary of state's decision was  not  in
      accordance with the law.


            Notice of Decisions


             I allow the appeal of the secretary  of  state  to  the  extent
that I set aside  the  decision           of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
substitute this decision allowing the appeal of the                 claimant
against the decision of the secretary of state under Regulation 8(5) of  the
            2006 Regulations to the extent that her application for  an  EEA
Residence card              remains  outstanding  before  the  secretary  of
state.


            No anonymity direction is made.


            Signed                                      Date:  16/4/2015


            Judge C R Mailer


            Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




