
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04001/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent          |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd July 2014                                |On 5th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES

                                   Between

                             MS ARMINE MASHADIAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum instructed by Howe & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Russia born on 13th February 1971.

 2. On 22nd January 2013 the Respondent refused to issue a  residence  card
    to the Appellant as confirmation of a right of residence as the  family
    member of a British citizen who was previously working or self-employed
    in another member state.  The refusal was under Regulation  9(2)(b)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. The Appellant exercised her right of appeal under  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  Her appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Tully on 22nd March 2013.



 4. An application for permission to appeal was held to be out of time, and
    not admitted, by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Fisher  on  20th  May
    2013.  The reasons for decision refer to the application being  out  of
    time by one day.  However there was no explanation for  the  delay  nor
    any application to extend time.  On that basis the application was  not
    admitted.  It  seems  to  me  that,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the
    application was out of time, no reasons for  lateness  were  given  and
    there was no application to  extend  time,  the  First-tier  Judge  had
    little option but to refuse to admit the application.

 5. Nevertheless, a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted in the Upper Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge  Taylor  on  26th
    June 2013.  Judge Taylor was satisfied that time ought to  be  extended
    since the delay in making the application was short.  Little  prejudice
    was caused and she considered that the grounds had merit.  Judge Taylor
    further noted  that  the  grounds  challenged  the  First-tier  Judge's
    interpretation of the proper approach  to  be  taken  when  considering
    Regulation 9 of the  2006  Regulations  and  she  considered  that  the
    arguments should be explored further, if possible  before  a  panel  of
    Upper Tribunal Judges.

 6. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal on 4th March 2014.
     On that occasion the Appellant was represented  by  Mr  Jesurum.   The
    Respondent was represented by Miss  C  Johnstone,  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.

 7. A number of preliminary issues were raised.  The first was a  query  by
    letter from the Appellant's representative as to whether the matter was
    listed for a substantive hearing or whether  it  was  in  fact  a  Case
    Management Review.  I noted from  the  file  that  directions  to  that
    effect had been given on 29th November 2013 by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McClure.  The file was endorsed by Judge McClure with a direction
    for a further CMR to be listed at the beginning of February 2014.  This
    was to await the judgment of the European Court on two cases which  are
    said to be relevant to the issue in this appeal.  It was unclear to  me
    whether Judge McClure's direction was  overlooked  or  whether  someone
    else had directed that a further CMR was not necessary.

 8. Mr Jesurum, for the Appellant, said that he was in a position  to  deal
    with the error of law issue because, even though the European Court had
    not issued the judgments, an opinion of the Advocate General  had  been
    issued which Mr Jesurum said  was  sufficient  for  his  purposes.   He
    handed in a copy of the Advocate General's  opinion  together  with  an
    undated  skeleton  argument.   However,   Miss   Johnstone,   for   the
    Respondent, was not ready to deal with the error of law.  She said that
    she had come to the hearing on the basis that it was going to be a Case
    Management Review and she was not prepared to deal with  the  error  of
    law issue.



 9. A further point which concerned me was Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor's
    grant of permission dated 26th June 2013.  I have  already  noted  that
    Judge Taylor indicated in the  grant  of  permission  that  the  matter
    should, if possible, be listed before a panel of Upper Tribunal  Judges
    and I shared Judge Taylor's opinion in that respect.  It seemed  to  me
    that  the  matter  was  complicated  and  Counsel's  skeleton  argument
    referred to the provisions of EU law overriding  national  legislation.
    It was further  argued  that  a  compatible  interpretation  should  be
    deployed so as to give EU Directives their required result.

10. Eventually, with the agreement of both advocates, I  decided  that  the
    appropriate course was for the matter to be adjourned and re-listed, at
    Field House if possible, before a panel of the Upper Tribunal.

11. However, that did not happen because directions were given on 19th  May
    2014 by Principal Resident Judge Latter who directed  that  the  appeal
    should be listed for hearing before any Upper Tribunal Judge or  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge on the first available date.

12. An application for an adjournment was refused in the Upper Tribunal  on
    2nd July 2014.  The reasons for refusal state that  Principal  Resident
    Judge Latter gave instructions, in full knowledge of the history,  that
    this matter was to be  listed  for  hearing  and  it  has  been  listed
    accordingly.  The request for transfer to Field House  and  effectively
    for an adjournment was refused.  Notice of  hearing  was  sent  to  the
    parties on 28th May 2014.  No explanation has been forthcoming for  the
    extremely late request put forward for transfer to  Field  House.   The
    Upper Tribunal directed that the  hearing  could  proceed  but  in  the
    circumstances would be limited to error of law only.

13. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal for  an  error  of
    law hearing on 3rd July 2014.  Representation was as  mentioned  above.
    The Appellant was not present.

14. The factual background to this appeal is not disputed.   The  Appellant
    met the Sponsor, Mr Alan Hawkes, in France in 2009.  The Appellant  was
    in the country  as  an  asylum  seeker.   The  Sponsor  was  in  France
    exercising treaty rights and had been living  there  for  a  number  of
    years.  The Sponsor and the Appellant  began  to  cohabit  in  February
    2010.  The Appellant's asylum claim was subsequently refused.

15. It appears that the Sponsor decided to return  to  the  United  Kingdom
    alone.  On 26th May 2011 the Appellant entered the  UK  illegally  (and
    without the knowledge of the Sponsor) and made an application for leave
    as the partner of an EEA national on the basis that the Sponsor  was  a
    returning national who had been exercising treaty rights  in  a  member
    state.  Her application was refused on 30th August 2011 and  an  appeal
    against that refusal was dismissed on 2nd November 2011.  Permission to
    appeal was refused.

16. On 4th  May  2012  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  were  married  in
    Nottingham and on 23rd May 2012 the Appellant made an application for a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national.  The Appellant and the
    Sponsor have a son who was born in the UK in September 2012.  Her fresh
    application for a residence card was refused on 22nd January 2013.   It
    was the Appellant's case that she was entitled to be granted  leave  as
    the spouse of a British citizen returning to the  UK  after  exercising
    treaty rights in accordance with Regulation 9 of the 2006  Regulations.
    The application was refused because the Respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the Appellant met the  criteria  for  Regulation  9  in  that  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Sponsor was  a  worker  or  self-
    employed person at the date when he returned to the UK.   Nor  was  the
    Respondent satisfied that the parties had been married whilst living in
    France.

17. Judge Tully records in her determination that at  the  commencement  of
    the hearing the Presenting Officer conceded that the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor were married and it was further accepted that the Appellant had
    a child who was born in the UK and that the  Sponsor  was  the  child's
    father.

18. Notwithstanding the Appellant's actions in entering the UK illegally in
    the back of a lorry, Judge Tully made  positive  credibility  findings.
    She found both the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  to  be  credible  and
    consistent within their evidence.   She  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    entered the UK illegally but did not accept that this necessarily means
    that her evidence was not credible in general.  Judge  Tully  found  it
    telling that since the previous decision the Appellant had married  the
    Sponsor and they had a  child  together.   The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor met in 2009  and  had  lived  together  since
    early 2010 as claimed.  She accepted that the Sponsor returned  to  the
    UK in 2011 and that the Appellant followed  him  and  they  have  lived
    together as a couple ever since.

19. The determination then discloses a correct  application  of  the  well-
    known Devaseelan guidance in taking the previous appeal decision as the
    starting point for consideration of the same or similar issues.   Judge
    Tully accepted, as  did  the  previous  judge,  that  the  Sponsor  was
    exercising treaty rights when he left France in 2011  but  he  had  not
    established that he was a worker or  was  self-employed.   He  did  not
    therefore comply with the strict wording of Regulation 9 which requires
    that he must be one  or  the  other  in  order  to  benefit  from  that
    provision.

20. The determination then refers to a submission by Mr  Jesurum  that  the
    Appellant falls within the provisions of Regulation 15A as the  primary
    carer  of  a  British  citizen  child.   Counsel  submitted  that   the
    Appellant's circumstances as a whole were relevant to  her  application
    and that included the existence of her child.  The  Presenting  Officer
    objected to this line of argument.  She said that the  matter  was  not
    raised in the application, not discussed in the decision or  raised  in
    the Grounds of Appeal.  The first time that issue was raised was in the
    skeleton argument produced by Mr Jesurum on the  day  of  the  hearing.
    Judge Tully found that it would not  be  reasonable,  fair  or  in  the
    interests of justice  to  expect  the  Respondent  to  deal  with  this
    entirely difficult claim to a right to a residence card at  the  appeal
    hearing without prior warning.  The Appellant was  not  facing  removal
    and it would be open to her  to  make  a  fresh  application  on  those
    grounds.

21. Dealing briefly with Article 8, Judge Tully noted  that  the  Appellant
    entered the UK illegally in the back of a lorry.  She did not accept  a
    submission from Mr Jesurum that, as a person who  had  no  status,  the
    Appellant would be committing a criminal offence unless she leaves  the
    UK.  Judge Tully did not accept  as  credible,  given  the  Appellant's
    immigration history, that refusal would result in her feeling compelled
    to leave the UK.  The judge did not accept that Article 8 was engaged.

22. In submissions before me, Mr Jesurum relied  upon  a  revised  skeleton
    argument  dated  1st  July  2014.   The  arguments  put   forward   are
    technically complex but may be summarised as follows.

23. The first ground alleges a  failure  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to apply the guidance given in OB  (Morocco).   It  is  argued
    that there is no requirement that the Sponsor has been a worker or self-
    employed person at the date of his return.  A broad  approach  must  be
    applied to Regulation 9 and it is satisfied if there is a link  between
    the employment and the return: OB (EEA Regulations 2006 - Article  9(2)
    - Surinder Singh spouse) Morocco [2010] UKUT 420.

24. The term "was so residing" for the purposes of Regulation 9(2)(a)  does
    not have to be immediately before returning to the United Kingdom.   It
    is sufficient that there be "some link between the exercise  of  treaty
    rights" in the host member state and the return of the  spouse  to  the
    United Kingdom.

25. The grounds argue that Regulation 9(2)(b) is contrary to European Union
    law and is of no effect.  The provisions of EU  law  override  national
    legislation.  Compatible interpretation should be  deployed  so  as  to
    give EU Directives their required result.

26. Mr Jesurum's second  ground  alleges  reverse  discrimination.   It  is
    argued that the right to freedom of movement for  those  exercising  EU
    treaty rights must be broadly construed.  If Regulation 9 is limited to
    those who were workers or self-employed, then returning nationals would
    be disadvantaged compared to EEA nationals who now enjoy greater  scope
    as to the exercise of treaty rights under the Citizenship Directive.

27. Counsel's third and final ground refers to  Article  7  CFREU.   It  is
    submitted that the First-tier Judge erred in considering Article  7  of
    the Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  European  Union  not  to  be
    engaged.  The decision is one which requires the Appellant to leave the
    United Kingdom (severing her  family  life  with  her  husband  British
    citizen child).  Article 7  of  the  Charter  (and  Article  8  of  the
    Convention) protect positive as well as negative obligations.  There is
    no logical difference between an application for a  family  permit  and
    the instant application.  The effect on the free movement rights of the
    persons affected must be taken into account.

28. Mr Jesurum's conclusion is that the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is vitiated by error of law and the Upper Tribunal is  invited
    to remake the decision.  Should the Tribunal find that the scope of the
    application of OB to the present cases unclear  then  the  Tribunal  is
    respectfully invited to refer  three  questions  which  follow  to  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal so that they may  be  referred  to  the
    Court of Justice of the European Union.

29. After  the  appeal  hearing  had  been  concluded,  Mr  Jesurum  kindly
    submitted to me an application to the Upper Tribunal to refer questions
    to the Court of Justice.  This consists of  an  introduction,  law  and
    procedure and the proposed questions in a document dated 4th July 2014.



30. Mr McVeety began his submission by taking a materiality point.  He said
    that the decision in Surinder Singh is of no application to  non-family
    members.  A family member should be  contrasted  with  extended  family
    members, which includes unmarried partners.

31. Turning to the three grounds raised  by  Mr  Jesurum  in  his  skeleton
    argument, Mr McVeety pointed out that in OB (Morocco) the period  since
    the returning residents had ceased working was  eight  weeks.   In  the
    instant case it was three years since the Sponsor had ceased employment
    in France and therefore there  was  no  longer  any  significant  link.
    Nowhere in the decision is there any reference to Surinder Singh having
    been wrongly decided.

32. Mr McVeety accepted that Article 8 had not been considered in detail by
    the First-tier Judge but he submitted that any error was not  material.
    The fact that the Sponsor and the Appellant were now  married  was  not
    relevant.  They  were  not  married  at  the  time  when  he  had  been
    exercising  treaty  rights  in  France.   In  conclusion,  Mr   McVeety
    suggested that the grounds submitted by Mr Jesurum were an  attempt  to
    unnecessarily over complicate the matter.

33. Having given the matter careful thought, I am not  persuaded  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination discloses  any  material  error  of
    law.   The  wording  of  Regulation  9  is,  in  my  view,  clear   and
    unambiguous.  There is nothing  which  needs  to  be  referred  to  the
    European Court in order to decide the issues raised in this appeal.   I
    therefore decline to make any such reference.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  determination  and
dismiss the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 30th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates









