
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/04888/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 29 October 2014                   |On 21 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                            MR EVANS KWASI AMOAKO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Warburton, (LIR), Walthamstow Immigration Advice
For the Respondent:    Tony Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  24  February  1985.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 14  January  2014
    refusing to grant him leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph 322(1) of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  refusal  was  issued
    because a variation of leave to remain was being sought for  a  purpose
    not covered by the Rules.  His appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Handley on  24  April  2014.   The  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a
    determination promulgated on 6 May 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Molloy on 15 July 2014.   However,
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 23  September
    2014.  The grounds of application state  that  there  must  be  a  Home
    Office policy on the position of carers such as the present  appellant,
    that extra limited leave to  enable  the  appellant  to  care  for  his
    brother in the United Kingdom is not against the Rules or  recent  Home
    Office practice; and that evidence concerning the  appellant's  brother
    and medical evidence had been overlooked  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination.   Upper  Tribunal   Judge   Gleeson   found   that   the
    determination contains no specific consideration of a  relevant  letter
    from Dr Mervin Tyrer, an Associate Specialist in the Department of  HIV
    Medicine at the Royal Free London Hospital, concerning the  appellant's
    brother's health.  She found that the grounds of appeal are arguable.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response from the respondent on file.   This  states
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself  appropriately  and
    considered all the evidence before him.  It points out that the hearing
    was determined on the papers at the behest of the appellant  who  chose
    not to take advantage of the appellate  system  and  thus  further  his
    opportunity to argue his appeal before the Tribunal, which in this case
    was particularly important because of the  scant  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal as identified by the judge.   The  response  states  that  the
    grounds have no merit and merely disagree with the adverse  outcome  of
    the appeal.

 4. The appellant's representative submitted that on the internet there  is
    now clear guidance relating to carers but at the date of the First-tier
    hearing he had been unable to find this guidance.  He referred  to  the
    IDI, a copy of which is now on file.  The Presenting Officer  submitted
    that this IDI is dated 4 December 2013.  The  representative  submitted
    that no one has considered whether the appellant's brother, for whom he
    is caring, is receiving care from social services as if he is  not  and
    is only being cared for by the appellant, this has  to  be  taken  into
    account and there should have been a concession made  relating  to  the
    appellant's application.  He asked for an adjournment on this basis.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that this is an error of  law  hearing
    and it is clear from the determination that the letter  from  Dr  Tyrer
    was  considered  by  the  First-tier  Judge  at  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  been  granted
    exceptional leave outside the Rules. the reason for this  was  that  he
    had donated a kidney to his brother for  whom  he  is  caring  and  the
    exceptional leave was granted to enable him to have check  ups  on  his
    own health. The appeal  is  now  being  raised  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant being a carer.  He submitted that this has been addressed  by
    the judge.  He objected to the adjournment request.

 6. I explained to the representative that this is an error of law  hearing
    and the points raised in the permission can be dealt with based on what
    I had before me. I did not grant an adjournment.

 7. The appellant's representative made his submission referring  to  Judge
    Gleeson's permission.  He submitted that she found  that  the  doctor's
    letter had not been properly assessed.

 8. He referred to the determination by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Clapham promulgated on 4 April 2014.   He  made  directions  that  both
    parties should lodge supplementary submissions within 14 days,  dealing
    with the applicability of the Immigration Rules and the position  under
    Article 8 of ECHR.  He submitted that the respondent had  not  complied
    with this direction although he had on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  and
    because of this the hearing before Judge Handley  is  flawed.  He  also
    submitted that the relevant IDI was not available.  He  submitted  that
    IDIs form a body of law and because he was unable to find the  relevant
    one, the appellant's case was weakened.  He submitted that the  carer's
    position was not clear and because of this it would be unjust to accept
    the judge's decision of 6 May 2014.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant had chosen  not  to
    attend the First-tier hearing.  He submitted that  the  position  of  a
    carer is in the public domain and should have been able to be found  by
    the appellant's representative.  He submitted  that  in  any  case  the
    application was not made on this basis.  Leave was  previously  granted
    to the appellant so that he could get  his  own  health  checked  since
    donating his kidney to his brother.

10. He submitted that because of this the IDI is  not  relevant  and  Judge
    Handley made his determination based on all the  relevant  issues.   He
    submitted that Judge Gleeson's permission has an error as in  paragraph
    11 of Judge Handley's  determination,  he  specifically  refers  to  Dr
    Tyrer's letters, finding that the life expectancy  of  the  appellant's
    brother will not be reduced if the appellant is required to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and finding that the  medical  letters  state  that  the
    appellant's brother is making progress.  The PO then suggested that the
    appellant's brother will be able to receive support from  the  NHS  and
    social services if he requires this.

11. He submitted that there is no error of law in the judge's decision.

12. The appellant's representative submitted that the appellant's claim was
    prejudiced because the Home Office did not comply with  the  directions
    made by Judge Clapham.  He submitted that an  extra  12  months'  leave
    based on the IDIs on file should be granted to enable the appellant  to
    care for his brother.  He submitted that he  has  been  told  that  the
    Appellant's brother receives no support from social services so because
    of the terms of the IDI it would be unjust to leave the decision as  it
    stands.

13. I have carefully considered the  determination  and  the  Upper  Tier's
    grant of permission.

14. Paragraph 11 of the determination makes it clear  that  the  judge  has
    considered all the evidence before him including the  letters  from  Dr
    Tyrer.

15. With regard to the Home Office policy it is in the  public  domain  and
    having considered the documents on file, I find that the appellant  was
    granted leave to remain outside the Rules in connection  with  his  own
    health because of donating a kidney to his  brother.   The  application
    was not made on the basis that the appellant is his brother's carer and
    so the IDI  referred  to  by  the  Appellant's  representative  is  not
    relevant.

16. Judge Handley has considered all the evidence which was before him  and
    was entitled to come to the decision he did.

                                  DECISION

17. There is no material error of law in the judge's determination.



Signed        Date 21 November 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




