
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04908/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 April 2016                               |On 3 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                  NAWAZ GUL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr W Malik
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 29  November  1988.   On
    19 August 2014 he applied for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student under the points-based system.  This application was refused on
    21 January 2015.

2.   The appellant appealed against the decision and his appeal came  before
    First-tier Judge  Mill  on  27  August  2015  when  the  appellant  was
    unrepresented.  The judge sets out the material facts and his  findings
    in the following extract from his determination:

         "9.  At pages D1-D3 of the Respondent's bundle the  Certificate  of
             Acceptance of Studies (CAS) check carried out as at  the  date
             of the Respondent's decision (21 January  2015)  is  produced.
             There are two issues which arise from this.  Firstly, the  CAS
             has been  marked  as  "WITHDRAWN".   There  is  also  a  clear
             indication that as at  that  date  the  Sponsor's  licence  is
             revoked.


         10.  The Appellant's Appeal was based upon the fact that  erroneous
             information had been provided by Newcastle Academy of Business
             & Technology.  The said Organisation had issued  a  letter  in
             August 2014 confirming the Appellant was enrolled to study  on
             a full-time basis, a course entitled OTHM Level 7  Diploma  in
             Tourism & Hospitality Management.  This  had  been  the  basis
             upon which the Appellant's Application had been made.


         11.  In the Appellant's bundle he had lodged  a  subsequent  letter
             from the said Organisation which is  dated  26  January  2015.
             This purports that the information which  the  Respondent  had
             received  upon  checking  the   CAS   was   based   upon   "an
             administrative   clerical   error"   for   which   they   took
             responsibility.


         12.  Even if I am to accept at face value  that  there  had,  as  a
             matter-of-fact, been such an administrative clerical error and
             that  the  CAS  was  not  withdrawn  as  the  Respondent   had
             identified upon carrying out the CAS  check  at  the  date  of
             their  decision,  there  remains  in  my  view  a  significant
             difficulty for the Appellant.


         13.  The Newcastle Academy of Business and Technology had had their
             licence revoked as at the date of the  Respondent's  decision.
             Similarly, as at the date that they wrote the  letter  seeking
             to take responsibility for an apparent administrative clerical
             error on their part they did not have the required  status  to
             issue any CAS.


         14.  Paragraphs 116 onwards of Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules
             set out the formal requirements for a CAS to  be  valid.   The
             CAS is not valid if it has been withdrawn and it  requires  to
             be issued by an Institution with a Tier  4  (General)  Student
             Sponsor Licence.


         15.  I am somewhat sceptical about the veracity of  the  suggestion
             made by the Organisation that the withdrawn status  was  as  a
             result of an administrative clerical  error.   No  detail  has
             been provided or specification given as to how the error  came
             about.  Even if am wrong about that then  the  fact  that  the
             Organisation did  not  hold  an  appropriate  Student  Sponsor
             Licence as at the date of the Respondent's decision means that
             the CAS would not be valid anyway.  In these circumstances the
             Respondent would have been obliged to refuse  the  Appellant's
             Application regardless of any administrative error.   This  is
             an unarguable conclusion and fact.


         16.  The Appellant was unable to advise of any further steps  taken
             by him to pursue any studies, now for some 9 months.  It  does
             not appear that he is a genuine student.


         17.  In the above circumstances the Appeal must fail.   The  Appeal
             was based upon the Immigration Rules.   There  were  no  other
             grounds of Appeal."

3.   Accordingly the judge dismissed the appeal.

4.   The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  referring  to  Patel
    [2011] UKUT 00211.  Permission to appeal was  granted  on  25  February
    2016 by the First-tier Tribunal.  It was said to be unclear whether the
    Sponsor's licence was revoked prior to the application  or  during  the
    application process.

5.   A response was filed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  1  March  2016
    submitting that the appellant's CAS was withdrawn by his Tier 4 Sponsor
    before the college licence was revoked.  If  the  CAS  was  erroneously
    withdrawn by the college that was a matter between the student and  his
    college and not the Secretary of State.  The respondent referred to  EK
    (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.

6.    At  the  hearing  Mr  Bramble  lodged  a  document  showing  that  the
    revocation of the licence had taken place  on  16  December  2014.   Mr
    Malik objected on the basis that a request  for  this  information  had
    been made eleven days previously.   He  acknowledged  that  an  earlier
    request could have been made.  He submitted  that  the  licence  having
    been revoked, 60 days notice should have been given.

7.   Mr Bramble pointed out that the date of decision was 21  January  2015.
    The document attached to the respondent's bundle at page D1 showed that
    the CAS had been withdrawn on  6  October  2014.   Following  that  the
    licence had been revoked on 16 December 2014.  Mr Bramble  referred  to
    paragraph 35 of EK (Ivory Coast):

         "In my view, the circumstances in which the  PBS  applies  are  not
         such that it would be fair,  as  between  the  Secretary  of  State
         (representing, for these purposes, the general public interest) and
         the applicant, to expect the Secretary of State to have to  distort
         the ordinary operation of the PBS regime to  protect  an  applicant
         against the speculative possibility that  a  college  has  made  an
         administrative error in  withdrawing  a  CAS  letter,  rather  than
         withdrawing it for reasons which do indeed indicate that  no  leave
         to  enter  or  remain  ought  to  be  granted.   The  interests  of
         applicants such as the appellant are not so pressing  and  of  such
         weight that a duty of delay and enquiry as  contended  for  by  the
         appellant can be spelled out of the obligation to act fairly."

8.   The Court of Appeal had considered the Tribunal  cases  including  that
    of Patel in paragraph 38 of the decision.  Mr  Bramble  submitted  that
    the Court of Appeal had disagreed  with  what  had  been  said  by  the
    Tribunal in Naved [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC) at paragraph 40 of its decision.
     The position was quite clear in this case.  The sponsor had  withdrawn
    the CAS on 6 October  2014.   The  college  licence  had  been  revoked
    subsequently on 16 December 2014.

9.   Mr Malik referred to guidance to the effect that  the  college  had  no
    power to revoke the licence.  I pointed out that  this  point  had  not
    been taken in the grounds of appeal and moreover the guidance  referred
    to in the grounds was to the effect that the CAS could be withdrawn  or
    cancelled at any time by either the respondent or the Tier 4 sponsor.

10.  I reserved my decision.  It is quite clear on the chronology  that  the
    sponsor withdrew the CAS and as a result of that  the  respondent  took
    her decision to withdraw the licence.  It  is  immaterial  whether  the
    sponsor had withdrawn the CAS in error or not.

11.  Paragraph 35 of EK (Ivory Coast) which I have set out above deals  with
    the issue of fairness where it is said  that  a  college  has  made  an
    administrative error in withdrawing a CAS letter.  The Court of  Appeal
    distinguished the circumstances in Patel and the other  cases  referred
    to in paragraph 38 of its decision.  As is pointed out by the Court  of
    Appeal

         "... the Secretary of  State  had  no  means  of  knowing  why  the
         appellant's CAS letter had been withdrawn and was  not  responsible
         for its withdrawal and the fair balance between the public interest
         in the due operation of the PBS regime and the individual  interest
         of the appellant was in favour of simple operation  of  the  regime
         without further ado."

12.  As I have said above the Court of Appeal disagreed with what  had  been
    said in Naved finding in paragraph 40 that what had been said left  out
    of account:

         "...the highly  modulated  and  fact-sensitive  way  in  which  the
         general public  law  duty  of  fairness  operates.   It  also  pays
         insufficient attention to the issue which lies at the heart of  the
         cases in this area, which confirms the fair balance  to  be  struck
         between the public interest in having the PBS regime operated in  a
         simple way and the interest of a particular individual who  may  be
         detrimentally affected by  such  operation.   The  public  interest
         here, of course, includes the interests of the Secretary  of  State
         as administrator, of the taxpaying public (who fund the immigration
         system and would like it to run efficiently)  and  of  the  general
         body of applicants for leave  to  enter  or  remain  (who  have  an
         interest in the PBS regime operating in a fair and  efficient  way,
         with a minimum of delay)."

13.  There was no obligation on the respondent to do more than act  on  what
    the college had done, mistakenly  or  not.   It  was  argued  that  the
    college had no power to do what it had done but this was  not  a  point
    taken in the grounds  as  I  have  mentioned.   The  grounds  refer  to
    different guidance and the guidance to which I was taken  by  Mr  Malik
    says on its face that it was to be used from 12 November 2015, which is
    of course after the respondent's decision.

14.  It may also be  pertinent  to  observe  that  the  judge  was  somewhat
    sceptical about what the appellant's college had said and  in  addition
    took the view that the appellant did not appear to him to be a  genuine
    student.  I can see no basis for an argument that there was  unfairness
    in this case bearing in mind the observations of the Court of Appeal in
    EK (Ivory Coast) and the points made by Mr Bramble.

15.  The decision of the First-tier Judge was not affected by  any  material
    error of law and  accordingly  it  is  confirmed  and  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity Order

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.





Signed                                  Date 13 April 2016

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

