
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04148/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2014                          |On 23 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                          MOHEUDDIN KHAN CHOWDHURY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was represented before the First-tier Tribunal but is not
    represented before the Upper Tribunal.  The solicitors who  represented
    him below and assisted with the grounds of appeal wrote to the Tribunal
    to say that  they  were  without  instructions.  It  follows  that  the
    appellant clearly has a  constructive  knowledge  and  probably  actual
    knowledge of the hearing and I decided to continue in his absence.

 2. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision   of   the
    respondent to refuse him permission to remain in the United Kingdom  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal decided that the appeal  had  to  be  dismissed
    because the appellant did not have sufficient money in his bank account
    for the prescribed period.

 4. There appeared to be a possible error of law on the part of the  First-
    tier Tribunal because this was a case where  the  Rules  permitted  the
    appellant to rely on funds provided by his father.  There  is  evidence
    that his father had funds on which the  appellant  could  have  relied.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen noticed this when he gave  permission
    to appeal but he explained in paragraph 3 of his  grant  of  permission
    that this might not help the appellant.

 5. There  is  no  evidence  that  such  reliance  was  ever  part  of  the
    appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal. Still  less  is  there
    any evidence that the existence of those funds was made known when  the
    application was made  and  so  the  appellant  failed  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Rules by producing with his  application  proof  of
    his income.

 6. It must be exceedingly annoying for the appellant if in fact  he  could
    have produced that evidence but he did not  and  the  error  cannot  be
    repaired on appeal.

 7. It follows therefore that it seems that,  as  indicated  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brunnen when he gave permission to appeal, although  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in that he gave  a  legally  inadequate
    reason for his  decision,  he  made  the  right  decision  because  the
    evidence before him could only support one conclusion. The  appellant's
    appeal had to be dismissed because he had not produced  the  prescribed
    evidence at the required time.

 8. I dismiss the appeal.  There was no material error.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 October 2014                |






