
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04937/2015
                                                               IA/32622/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 8 June 2017                      |On 21 February 2018                     |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                            BS (FIRST appellant)
                            OS (SECOND appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Popal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal comes back before me after a hearing  on  5  December  2016
    whereby I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  in
    respect of each appellant for error of law.

 2. The appeal was originally re-listed for hearing on 5  April  2017,  but
    was not able to proceed on that day.  After the hearing on 8 June  2017
    I consented to the respondent's request for the opportunity to  provide
    closing submissions in writing, after  the  oral  submissions  made  on
    behalf of  the  appellants.   Written  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent were received  but,  through  error,  not  provided  to  the
    appellants' representatives. I gave further directions in that  respect
    on 25 October 2017, allowing a period of 21 days for any reply  to  the
    respondent's submissions. In the event, no reply was received on behalf
    of the appellants, but as I had  made  clear,  such  a  reply  was  not
    mandatory because I had already heard oral submissions on behalf of the
    appellants at the hearing on 8 June 2017 and had been provided  with  a
    skeleton argument on their behalf.

 3. In order to put my decision  on  these  appeals  into  context,  it  is
    convenient to reproduce certain parts of  the  error  of  law  decision
    (entitled Decision and Reasons) which followed from the  hearing  on  5
    December 2016.  In that decision I said as follows:

          "2.     The first appellant arrived in the UK  on  13  March  2011
             with entry clearance as a Tier 4 student  until  26  September
             2014. During his period of leave  he  contracted  Tuberculosis
             Meningoencephalitis on 26 June 2013.  This  has  resulted,  to
             summarise, in significant mental and physical disabilities.

         3.   The second appellant arrived in the UK on 20 August 2013  with
             entry clearance as a visitor, with  leave  until  16  February
             2014. He was granted a period of  further  leave  outside  the
             Immigration Rules from 20 April 2014 until 8 May 2014.

         4.    On  26  September  2014  the  first  appellant  applied   for
             indefinite leave to remain  ("ILR")  on  the  grounds  of  his
             medical condition. That application was refused in a  decision
             dated 26  January  2015.  The  second  appellant  applied  for
             further leave to remain on  7  May  2014,  again  outside  the
             Rules,  in  order  to  care  for  the  first  appellant.   His
             application was also refused, the decision being dated 24 July
             2014, although there is another decision which is dated 25 May
             2014. Nothing turns on the precise date and if there  are  two
             decisions in respect of the second appellant,  the  appeal  to
             the FtT will have included both decisions,  in  the  light  of
             section 85(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
             2002. Neither party raised any issue before me, and  none  was
             raised before the FtT, in relation to the precise date of  the
             decision.

         5.   The appeals of both appellants came before First-tier Tribunal
             Judge Bart-Stewart ("the FtJ") at the same  time  on  10  June
             2016. She allowed the appeal of the first appellant, seemingly
             with reference to Article 8 of the  ECHR,  and  dismissed  the
             appeal of the second appellant on the same basis.

         6.   The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal
             against the FtJ's decision allowing the appeal  of  the  first
             appellant,  and  the  second  appellant   has   been   granted
             permission to appeal in  respect  of  the  FtJ's  decision  to
             dismiss his appeal.

         ...

             The First-tier Tribunal's decision

         23.  The FtJ heard evidence from the second appellant and from  one
             Gareth Hankin  of  the  Richardson  Partnership  for  Care  in
             relation to the assistance that the first appellant needs. The
             second appellant's evidence was that the family would  not  be
             able to care for the first appellant in India as they live  in
             a village which is close to the border. There is  no  hospital
             in the vicinity. The only relation  is  an  uncle,  and  their
             father had died. Their mother was old.  The  uncle  had  taken
             over their land by fraud. The second appellant also said  that
             there was no toilet in the house and that they had to use  the
             fields for that purpose. Their house had just  two  rooms.  He
             gave evidence as to the difficulties that the  family  had  in
             India in terms of the ill-health of  their  mother  and  their
             grandmother. There is a sister who  helps  but  only  supports
             their mother and the grandmother's necessities. He  said  that
             she would not be able to support the first appellant.

         24.  The second appellant said that he  attends  all  meetings  and
             tries to fulfil  "all  his  requirements".  He  said  that  he
             supported the first appellant emotionally and stayed with  him
             during the night to look after him.

         25.  His evidence was that the first appellant's flight to  the  UK
             and course fees (in computers) were paid for by their  father.
             The first appellant was able to work and pay his  rent.  Their
             father had not needed to provide much  by  way  of  funds  for
             maintenance. The flight to the UK was paid for by  his  sister
             and relatives. The  second  appellant  himself  does  not  pay
             anything towards  utilities  and  he  is  given  clothing  and
             financial help.

         26.  The nearest hospital was 20 to 30 miles away  from  the  local
             village. There are  dispensaries  two  or  three  miles  away.
             Although the care plan did not mention the second  appellant's
             input, he gives additional family support to his brother. That
             could not be provided where they live in  India  because  they
             needed money to live. Their father passed away on 24  November
             2014.

         27.  His sister lives in the same state in India as  their  mother.
             She is a housewife and her husband is a farmer. She is aged 33
             to 34 years old. Both his mother and grandmother live  in  the
             family home which is where he and the  first  appellant  lived
             before they came to the UK. It is four or five kilometres from
             the nearest town.

         28.  Gareth Hankin said in evidence that if left without  prompting
             the first appellant would spend all day in bed and not eat  or
             drink for long periods. Because of his cognitive  difficulties
             he needs prompting to shower, brush  his  teeth,  change  into
             clean, appropriate clothes and to leave his room to eat meals.
             He requires picture prompt cards as well as verbal prompts. He
             is not confident walking on his own and  tends  only  to  walk
             around the house with staff over any distance. It  is  further
             recorded that he said that due to  communication  difficulties
             and cognitive deficit there are many barriers to his being  in
             a different environment. He had an  unrealistic  view  of  his
             condition and limitations  and  could  become  frustrated  and
             aggressive  when  challenged  over  his  opinions  or  welfare
             choices. He believed that the first appellant  would  struggle
             to integrate well with others due to his "low initiation"  and
             fluctuating moods. He is stubborn and  lacks  the  ability  to
             reason. He had at times neglected his health and  cleanliness,
             refusing to shower for more than two days in a row and without
             staff support would not take his medication.

         29.  In relation to the involvement of  the  second  appellant,  he
             said that the second appellant visited regularly  and  brought
             regional food, as the first appellant is rigid about the  food
             he likes. He provided money for the first  appellant  when  he
             went out, as well as a mobile phone and other  belongings.  On
             occasion he would stay overnight and assist with  the  morning
             routine, although does not do so regularly every week. He said
             that this happens multiple times a month. The first  appellant
             speaks to his family  in  India  using  a  mobile  and  laptop
             provided by his brother.

         30.  In her  findings,  at  [17]  the  FtJ  referred  to  what  she
             described  as  a  six-weekly  review  from  East  London   NHS
             Foundation Trust. That is an assessment dated 13  April  2016,
             which is in effect a care plan. She summarised the evidence in
             that document to the effect that the  appellant  continued  to
             demonstrate severe cognitive deficits, lack  of  insight  into
             his abilities and care  needs,  very  challenging  behavioural
             difficulties and speech impairments. Those  placed  the  first
             appellant at a high risk in a number of areas and he continued
             to require close supervision. He  required  24  hour  care  to
             minimise risks associated with his current  circumstances  and
             is said to require long-term supervision. He required 24  hour
             support in a residential home for persons with a brain injury,
             and the weekly cost of the package was �2,783.

         31.  With reference to a report from a consultant psychiatrist,  Mr
             Richard Seamark, dated 9 July 2015, he  had  stated  that  the
             first appellant's behaviour can escalate to the requirement of
             restraint or even police involvement. The report refers to the
             second appellant remaining  supportive  and  states  that  the
             first appellant does not have capacity and  the  hospital  was
             applying for him to be held  under  the  Mental  Capacity  Act
             2005, 'deprivation of liberty safeguards'.

         32.  Other reports are referred to, including a report which states
             that he is at high risk of injury and  is  vulnerable  to  the
             risk of exploitation, as well as social isolation.

         33.  At [21] the FtJ said that there was nothing in the  background
             reports that suggests that the first appellant's condition  is
             one that can be treated. The evidence was that he needed to be
             controlled or taught to control himself, and it was his  total
             lack of insight into his condition and inability to  care  for
             himself that required him to live in a facility where care  is
             available 24 hours a day.

         34.  The FtJ concluded that not only was the first appellant unable
             or unwilling to care for himself, he was also at risk  due  to
             his  lack  of  awareness  of  danger,  and  because   of   his
             unpredictable, challenging behaviour. He also required a large
             amount of medication on a daily basis. She then stated at [22]
             that she was not satisfied on a balance of probabilities  that
             the intense level of care required by the first  appellant  is
             available to him in his home country such as would  allow  him
             to reintegrate, which is the requirement that has to be met at
             paragraph 276ADE. She stated that he left his home country  as
             a young man embarking on studies abroad and would be returning
             as a  person  effectively  suffering  from  dementia  with  no
             suggestion of any cure.

         35.  As regards the second appellant,  she  noted  that  the  first
             appellant required 24 hour care and that the oral and  written
             evidence was to the effect that  this  was  provided  by  paid
             carers. She  concluded  that  there  was  little  evidence  of
             practical support provided by the second appellant,  save  for
             visits which Mr Hankin described as not consistent, not  every
             day nor even once a week.

         36.  She found  that  there  was  little  in  the  medical  reports
             referring specifically to the second appellant, and there  was
             nothing in the reports that suggested that his presence in the
             UK was necessary for the first appellant's long-term progress,
             or that his presence has any impact on the  first  appellant's
             care needs. She concluded that the second appellant was making
             no financial contribution, because he stated that he  had  not
             been working, and he  himself  relied  on  the  generosity  of
             others who provide him with money and free accommodation.  She
             noted that the second appellant accepted  that  there  was  no
             reason that he would not be able to work  if  he  returned  to
             India.

         37.  She found that the first appellant could maintain contact with
             the second appellant in the same way in which he is in contact
             with the rest of the  family,  by  telephone  and  Skype.  She
             concluded therefore, that the condition of the first appellant
             does not require the presence of the second appellant  in  the
             UK.

         38.  At [24] she said that she did not accept that there was family
             life  between  the   first   and   second   appellant.   Their
             relationship was not "over and above" the normal  family  ties
             that  may  be  expected  between  adult  siblings.  The  first
             appellant was already ill when the second  appellant  arrived.
             He was initially in hospital and then went into rehabilitation
             and specialised accommodation. There was no evidence  of  them
             living together in the UK. He did not even see  the  appellant
             every week, although he claimed not  to  be  working,  and  so
             seeing the first appellant should  have  little  call  on  his
             time.

         39.  She concluded that the second appellant had only established a
             limited form of private life in the UK since his arrival,  and
             that such interference as there would be  in  his  removal  in
             terms of his private life was proportionate."

 4. At the hearing before me on 8 June 2017 I heard further  oral  evidence
    of which the following is a summary.

    The oral evidence

 5. Ms Helen Petrie adopted in examination-in-chief her  witness  statement
    dated 6 June 2017.  She said that she was the manager of the care home.
     She used to be a registered mental health nurse but  her  registration
    lapsed.  She last worked as a nurse in 1986.  She has NVQ's  in  Health
    and Social Care and Management.

 6. In cross-examination she said that the first appellant had  been  known
    to have outbursts if he does not get his way and he previously had  1:1
    24-hour care.  His behaviour had however, calmed down quite a bit.   He
    used to spend a lot of time in bed but now is able to socialise  if  he
    feels like it.  His English has improved and now he can communicate  in
    English fairly fluently.

 7. His engagement with therapies is inconsistent.  He only engages  if  he
    wants to.  Sometimes he has memory problems.  That  situation  has  not
    changed in the last twelve months and she could not predict what  would
    happen in the future.

 8. As to what she describes in her  statement  as  the  first  appellant's
    'perseveration', she said that that  means  he  becomes  obsessed,  for
    example in relation to his mobile phone.  He might smash  his  old  one
    until he gets given a new one.  At the multi-disciplinary team  meeting
    the previous week (June 2017) they were unable to say what  the  future
    would hold.  He had made very little progress in 12 months.

 9. She works Monday to Friday and the second appellant visits at weekends.
     Today (at the hearing) is the first time that she had seen the  second
    appellant.  She knows that he came last weekend.  Staff  had  told  her
    that he has visited three or four  times  in  the  last  four  or  five
    months.  They speak daily on the phone.  They had to request the second
    appellant to visit three weeks prior  to  last  weekend  as  the  first
    appellant needed money for toiletries  and  so  forth.  She  had  never
    spoken to the second appellant about his brother's care.

10. The duration of the second  appellant's  visits  vary.   For  the  last
    appearance before the Tribunal, the second appellant stayed  overnight.
    Otherwise, as far as she is aware, he  stays  for  a  couple  of  hours
    during the day.  Unbeknownst to them, the second appellant  had  stayed
    overnight  in  his  brother's  room.   They  told  him  that  that  was
    inappropriate and suggested that he stay in bed and breakfast.

11. In re-examination she said that she understood that he does  not  visit
    more often, because of financial restrictions.

12. In answer to my questions, she said that the  first  appellant  is  not
    sectioned under the Mental Health Act 1983.  She believes  his  brother
    deals with his financial matters.  She does not know whether the  first
    appellant  is  provided  with  any  state  support,  apart   from   his
    accommodation.  She is  not  aware  of  whether  the  second  appellant
    receives any on his behalf.  It is the local authority  that  pays  for
    his accommodation.

  13. In examination-in-chief  the  second  appellant  adopted  his  witness
      statement dated 8 May 2017.  In  cross-examination  he  said  that  he
      visits sometimes two or three times  a  month  and  sometimes  once  a
      month, depending on his money.  He visited last Sunday.  In  the  last
      three or four months he visited on very few occasions because  he  did
      not have the money.

14. When he visits he would take his brother food that he had  prepared  at
    home, as well as other things that he might want.  Sometimes  the  care
    home would want to give his brother a shower but he  would  refuse.  He
    would then give him a shower himself.  They also phone their mother and
    sister and talk about domestic things and old memories.  His mother and
    sister do not live together.

15. The phone calls are free because they are  made  through  the  internet
    from the care home.  Otherwise he would use his  own  money  from  some
    savings.  Some friends give him money and another family  supports  him
    financially.  They have to pay to phone their mother but phoning  their
    sister is via the internet and is therefore free.

16. There is a lot of difference between when he  first  saw  him  when  he
    visited for the first time and now.  When  he  first  saw  him  he  was
    unable to speak and could not recognise him.  He did not know he was in
    England.  Two months later he started speaking.  At first his left  arm
    was not working and he was unable to stand.  He did some exercises with
    the hospital, and he also did some with him, and used to take him for a
    walk.  He is now much better than before.  Physically, he is  not  much
    different but when he went to the care home  he  could  not  climb  the
    stairs without support.  Now he can climb four  or  five  steps  alone,
    going slowly.

17. As to his witness statement saying that the local hospital is 20 or  30
    miles away from their village, whereas a letter from H & M's Solicitors
    dated 18 September 2014 refers to the hospital and doctors being up  to
    two kilometres away, he said that the hospital that is  two  kilometres
    away is very small.  They can help if someone gets a fever or a  little
    sickness.  The hospital that is 20 or 30 miles away can deal with  more
    problems like those that his brother has, although he is not sure.

18. If, as has been suggested, his brother is not going to improve  in  the
    UK, he was asked why they could not return to India and his brother  be
    looked after there.  He said that the conditions in their  house  would
    not suit him and there would also be financial problems.  His mother is
    also ill and is 60 years of age.  She has a heart problem.  He may have
    forgotten to say in his witness statement that their mother is ill.

19. Despite the fact that they spend  time  talking  about  the  past,  his
    brother would not improve if they returned to  India  simply  by  being
    with family members.  He needs care and medical treatment.  Their house
    has no toilets and where would he get the medicines  that  his  brother
    needs.  They only have a hand pump for a shower in an open place.  They
    have to bring water from the pump to  the  house.   Cleanliness  is  an
    issue but most importantly there is the financial issue.  Their  father
    used to arrange the financial matters but now he has passed away.

20. As to whether the family could share the care of his  brother,  and  he
    himself could go to work, he said that he could not earn  enough  money
    there to support him and his brother.

21. In re-examination he said that he had not visited the hospital which is
    30 kilometres away.  He had only searched for it on the  internet.   He
    had no idea of the cost  of  treatment,  even  if  the  hospital  could
    provide it.

22. His mother and their grandmother  live  in  their  house.   As  to  his
    father's brother, they have no connection with him.  He and his  mother
    are not educated enough to be able to  give  the  correct  medicine  to
    their brother.  They only have electricity on a few occasions.

23. There are two bedrooms.  The  food  is  kept  in  one  room  and  their
    grandmother stays in that room.  His mother lives in the  second  room.
    At the front of the house is an open shed and in the afternoon they sit
    there and spend their time there.

24. He would only be able to earn 200 rupees a day.

25. Their mother and grandmother would not be able to look after the  first
    appellant  because  it  is  very  difficult  for  them  to  look  after
    themselves.

26. He is not working in the UK as he is not allowed to.

27. In answer to my questions he said that he came to the UK as a  visitor.
    His father paid for his brother's studies.  His father did farming.  As
    to what has happened to the farmland, he said that the land was in  the
    name of his grandfather.  Although his father's will said that the land
    should be divided between the three brothers, two of the brothers  kept
    the land and put it in their name.

    The oral and written submissions

28. Ms Popal adopted her skeleton argument dated 8 June 2017.  The issue of
    what findings made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge ("the  FtJ")  could
    be preserved was canvassed and agreed between the parties.

  29. It was submitted that returning the first  appellant  to  India  would
      amount to a breach of Article 3.  The decision in Paposhvili v Belgium
      (Appeal No. 41738/2010) was relied on, amongst other  decisions.   The
      Article 3 assessment needs to be undertaken in terms of his  situation
      whilst in the UK, and also when  removed  to  India.   The  'domestic'
      threshold for a breach of Article 3  is  lower  than  in  relation  to
      foreign cases.  Reliance was also  placed  on  the  decision  in  J  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and the
      five-stage test in respect of which it was said that  stages  1-3  all
      apply to the first appellant.  It was  submitted  that  there  was  no
      practical, or feasible way that he could be removed without  a  breach
      of Article 3.  When  he  is  told  about  his  removal  he  would  not
      understand.  Reference was made  to  aspects  of  the  evidence  which
      suggested that he would be at risk and vulnerable and  that  therefore
      pre-removal detention would give a rise to a breach of Article 3.




  30. It was contended that during transit  to  the  receiving  country,  it
      comes within the domestic sphere.  There was no evidence that  he  was
      fit to fly, and that is a finding  that  could  be  made.  However,  I
      indicated that I would not make a finding to the effect that the first
      appellant was unfit to fly or that he would  not  receive  appropriate
      care during the removal process, given the lack of evidence to support
      those contentions.

31. It  was  submitted  that  policy  guidance  on  vulnerable  adults  was
    relevant, although it was accepted that no copy of  that  guidance  has
    been provided and there is no reference to it in the skeleton argument.



32. It was further contended that the Secretary of State's suggestion  that
    treatment would be available for  the  first  appellant  in  India  was
    wrong.

33.  In  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  the  issue  of   very
    significant obstacles to integration, it is not a case of  whether  the
    first appellant has the ability to integrate.  Were it otherwise,  that
    aspect of  the  Rules  would  be  discriminatory  in  relation  to  any
    individual who was unable to integrate.  The  question  is  whether  he
    could integrate on the basis of his medical condition.   His  inability
    to integrate, it was submitted, was therefore irrelevant.

34. In the  respondent's  written  submissions  (received  post-hearing  as
    indicated above)  certain  preserved  findings  made  by  the  FtJ  are
    referred to, and reference is made  to  aspects  of  my  error  of  law
    decision.

35. The reasons for refusal letters  in  respect  of  both  appellants  are
    relied on on behalf of the respondent.  In terms  of  very  significant
    obstacles to integration, it  is  argued  that  the  first  appellant's
    ability to integrate is as much an issue in the UK as it  would  be  in
    India.  The first appellant can hardly be said to  have  integrated  in
    the UK.  None of the evidence  suggested  that  his  condition  can  be
    cured.  However, there was some evidence to  indicate  that  the  first
    appellant may potentially be more capable of re-integration into Indian
    as opposed to  English  society.   In  that  context,  the  'record  of
    activities' in the appellants' bundle is referred to in  terms  of  the
    first appellant missing his mother's cooking, and enjoying Indian films
    and music.  Reliance was also placed on the reference to his being very
    close to his family and the daily  telephone  calls  he  makes  to  his
    mother and the visits from his brother.  The evidence  at  the  hearing
    was to like effect, it is submitted.

36.  Furthermore,  the  External  Review  Report  refers  to  his  speaking
    reasonably fluent English but also speaking Hindi and  Punjabi.   There
    was evidence that he did not go out unescorted  in  the  community  and
    that his cognitive and executive functioning difficulties  and  limited
    communication in English would place him at high risk of  exploitation.
    His English language  ability  was  also  a  factor  in  terms  of  his
    engagement with activities.  Furthermore, there was evidence  from  the
    East London NHS at page 14 of the bundle before the FtT that  he  would
    benefit from contact with Punjabi speakers  and  with  the  local  Sikh
    community.

37. In relation to Article 3, it is  submitted  that  all  the  authorities
    relied on on behalf of the appellant indicate that his case  could  not
    succeed on Article 3 grounds.

38. It is argued that the decision in Paposhvili is not binding on  the  UK
    courts.  It is the domestic authorities that apply.  The threshold  for
    an Article 3 case to succeed is very high.  The first appellant is  not
    suffering from a terminal illness but from an  acquired  brain  injury,
    secondary to TB Meningitis.  His condition is not comparable to that of
    the appellant in Paposhvili.

39. Even though  the  first  appellant's  mental  health  difficulties  are
    serious, they could not  be  said  to  meet  the  very  high  threshold
    required for a breach of Article 3.  Furthermore, there was  no  reason
    why he should experience a decline in his health on  return  to  India.
    It is even possible that he might experience an improvement  in  mental
    health since he will be restored to the  family  and  country  that  he
    clearly loves and misses.  That is so particularly if he were to return
    with the second appellant.  Any suffering he might experience would  be
    very much reduced, therefore.

40. It is also submitted that care is available for the first appellant  in
    India.  The respondent's submissions refer to  background  material  in
    terms of the extent to which he would be able to obtain such  treatment
    and appropriate medication.

41. In terms of the appellants' reliance  on  the  decision  in  J,  it  is
    pointed out on behalf of the respondent that that was  a  suicide  case
    and is therefore not applicable  in  the  circumstances  of  the  first
    appellant.  Furthermore, it is submitted, to summarise,  that  adequate
    safeguards would be in place to  prevent  a  breach  of  Article  3  on
    communication of the decision and during the removal process.

42. Notwithstanding that the first appellant is subject to the  Deprivation
    of Liberty Safeguards (under the Mental Capacity Act 2005),  that  does
    not necessarily mean that he is a danger to  himself  or  others.   The
    evidence does not suggest as such.

43. In relation to Article 8 outside the Rules, the decision in GS  (India)
    V Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40  is
    relied on to the effect that the absence of medical  treatment  in  the
    country of return is insufficient by itself to engage Article 8.

44. Furthermore, the public interest considerations set out  in  s.117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  are  relied  on,  in
    terms of the first appellant's English language ability and his lack of
    financial  independence.   Furthermore,  the  cost  of  his   care   is
    highlighted.

45. In relation to the second appellant, it is contended that he  does  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE and has been in the UK for  a
    shorter time than the first appellant on whose claim he depends.

46. Even if  the  first  appellant  was  to  succeed  in  his  appeal,  any
    interference with their family life would be proportionate on the basis
    that they could maintain contact.

    Assessment

47. Whilst self-evidently the appellants' cases  are  inextricably  linked,
    the case for each appellant requires  separate  consideration.   Having
    said that, it has not been suggested on behalf of the second  appellant
    that in his own right,  independent  of  the  situation  of  the  first
    appellant, he has any valid claim to entitlement to remain in the UK on
    any basis.  In the circumstances, it makes good sense to  consider  the
    appeal of the first appellant first.

48. I have already referred to the fact that some findings of fact made  by
    the FtJ can be preserved.  They can be summarised as follows:

       . There is nothing in  the  reports  that  suggests  that  the  first
         appellant's condition is one that can be treated.

       . The first appellant needs to be controlled  or  taught  to  control
         himself.

       . His total lack of insight into his condition, and inability to care
         for himself, requires him to live  in  a  facility  where  care  is
         available 24 hours a day.

       . The first appellant is unable or unwilling to care for himself.  He
         is also at risk due to his lack of  awareness  of  danger  and  his
         unpredictable, challenging behaviour.

       . He requires a large quantity of medication on a daily basis.

       . The second appellant has provided the first appellant with a mobile
         phone and laptop, and the first appellant speaks to his  family  in
         India regularly using Skype.

       . The second appellant relies on the generosity of others who provide
         him with money and free accommodation in the UK.  He would be  able
         to work if he returns to India.

       . The second appellant has established a limited private life in  the
         UK.

49. The situation in relation to the first appellant, and indeed the second
    appellant, is very similar to, if not the same as, that which prevailed
    at the time of the hearing before the FtJ.  There are  more  up-to-date
    reports but they simply confirm that the  first  appellant's  cognitive
    function has not improved, that the prognosis is uncertain and that  he
    continues to benefit from the relatively intense care and support  that
    has been provided to date.  There is a need for significant support  in
    terms of his daily living needs, and  he  remains  vulnerable.   It  is
    plain that left to his own devices in the community  he  would  not  be
    able to function, seek treatment independently or manage his own  basic
    needs.  He would be unable to manage or administer the medication  that
    he needs.

50. It is also to be noted that he suffers from Type 2 diabetes  for  which
    he requires medication and management of his diet.  He would be  unable
    to manage that condition on his own, because of his lack of insight and
    cognitive deficits.

51. It is evident that the second appellant visits his brother  frequently.
    I accept that his visits are necessarily  limited  in  frequency  as  a
    result of  financial  constraints.   I  accept  also  that  the  second
    appellant is not working in the UK and relies on others, as indeed  was
    found by the FtJ.

52. It is not necessary for me to make a precise finding as  to  how  often
    the second appellant visits his brother,  and  indeed  there  was  some
    inconsistency in the oral  evidence  before  me  on  this  issue.   For
    example, Ms Petrie said that she was told that there had been three  or
    four visits in the last four or five months  (prior  to  the  hearing),
    although the second appellant said that  he  sometimes  visits  two  or
    three times a month and sometimes once a month.  I am satisfied that he
    visits when he can.  In that context, I note that the  first  appellant
    lives in residential supported accommodation  in  Northampton  and  the
    second appellant lives in London.

53. There was no challenge to  the  second  appellant's  evidence  that  he
    prepares Indian food for his brother, brings him items that he wants or
    needs and sometimes attends to his personal care, such as  helping  him
    shower.  He also facilitates the first  appellant  speaking  to  family
    members in India on the phone.

54. There was similarly no challenge to the second appellant's evidence  in
    relation to his family's living arrangements in India,  to  the  effect
    that his mother and grandmother live together in a house with two rooms
    and where the electricity supply is intermittent.  He  also  said  that
    there is no toilet or bathroom in the house.  Again, that evidence  was
    unchallenged and I accept it.

55.  Although  it  was  suggested  in  cross-examination  that  there   was
    inconsistency in relation to the  second  appellant's  claim  that  his
    mother, aged 60, was ill with a heart problem, because that  is  not  a
    matter referred to in his witness statements, it is a matter  that  the
    appellants' former solicitors, H & M, referred to in their letter dated
    18 September 2014 to the UKBA.  There it is stated that the appellants'
    mother is a heart patient.  Again, I accept what the  second  appellant
    says about his mother's health.

56. The background reports or information put before me by the  parties  in
    relation to the availability of treatment for the  first  appellant  in
    India do not specifically address the question of whether the care  and
    treatment that the appellant is receiving in his residential  placement
    in the UK can be replicated, or near-replicated in India.   However,  I
    do not understand the respondent to be suggesting that it can, even  if
    there is some place in India that, at no doubt significant cost,  could
    provide the same level of  care.   The  arguments  on  behalf  of  both
    parties are focused on the availability of at least some  treatment  in
    the appellants' home area.  In that context, again the respondent  does
    not  suggest  that  there  is  any  equivalent  facility  or  placement
    available to the appellant in his home area.

57. That treatment is available for mental  disorder  in  India  is  common
    ground  between  the  parties.   The  appellants'  case  is  that  such
    treatment is limited and/or out of reach of the first  appellant.   The
    respondent's skeleton argument focuses  on  the  issue  of  medication,
    which, with reference to background information provided by the Country
    Policy and Information Team, and a web link, suggests that  psychiatric
    care and the medication that the  first  appellant  is  receiving,  are
    available in India and indeed in Punjab in particular, from  where  the
    appellants come.

58. Of course, it is clear that medication is not  the  only  issue  to  be
    considered.  In his report dated  21  March  2017  Dr  Pedro  Grilo,  a
    Consultant Clinical Psychologist in Adult Neuropsychology, states  that
    the first appellant is diagnosed with an Acquired Brain Injury,  second
    to TB Meningitis.  In his 'Conclusion' paragraph  he  states  that  the
    matters he refers to "are suggestive of cognitive impairment, which  is
    related with an organic condition".

59. The second appellant's evidence has been broadly consistent in terms of
    the availability of medical care in the family's locality in India.  In
    his evidence before the FtJ he said there was no hospital around  where
    they live, later stating that the hospital was  20-30  miles  from  the
    local village.  He referred to there being "dispensaries" close to  the
    area where they live, being about 2-3 miles away.  In  evidence  before
    me he said that there is a very  small  hospital  two  kilometres  away
    which, as I understood his evidence, was a place where  minor  ailments
    would be dealt with, but that the hospital itself was 20-30 miles away.
     He did in fact say that that hospital could deal  with  more  problems
    like those that his brother has, although he did also say that  he  was
    not sure about that.

60. In the appellants' skeleton argument it asserts that  the  respondent's
    Country of Origin Information report  of  March  2012  in  relation  to
    medical facilities, referred to in the refusal  letter  of  26  January
    2015, is out of date and therefore irrelevant.  In relation to the  web
    link provided in the refusal letter, it indicates that there  are  only
    three mental health hospitals available in Punjab and that none of them
    has any beds or a pharmacy.  An appendix with details  in  relation  to
    those hospitals is attached to the skeleton argument.  Also provided is
    an extract from the WHO Mental Health Atlas, dated  2005,  although  no
    particular aspect of it is referred to on  behalf  of  the  appellants.
    The COI report for 2012 is also provided on behalf of  the  appellants,
    although again, no aspect of it is specifically referred to in  support
    of the appellants' cases.

61. It is not entirely clear why the WHO extract  from  the  Mental  Health
    Atlas is provided on behalf of the appellants given its  date  of  2005
    and the criticism made of the respondent's  background  information  as
    being out of date, albeit that that COI report is dated 2012.

62. It seems reasonably clear that medication for mental health  conditions
    is available in  India.   That  has  some  limited  relevance  to  this
    appellant  in  the  sense  that,  for  example,  he  is  receiving   an
    antipsychotic, Olanzapine, and Citalopram, an antidepressant.  Both are
    referred to in the extract from the background information set  out  in
    the respondent's  skeleton  argument  at  [24].   Likewise,  Metformin,
    prescribed for diabetes, is also available.  General  psychiatric  care
    is evidently also available, although on behalf of the appellants it is
    not explained which, if any, of the three hospitals in  Punjab  dealing
    with mental health are in the vicinity of where the appellants live.

63. Nevertheless, as I have already suggested, it  seems  to  be  tolerably
    clear that the precise package of care  that  the  first  appellant  is
    receiving would not be available to him  on  return  to  India.   I  am
    satisfied however, that some treatment would be available in  the  form
    of medication and general psychiatric care.   I  accept  however,  that
    such treatment is likely to be significantly inferior to that which  he
    is receiving in the UK, at least in the area in  which  the  appellants
    would be living.

64. As regards Article 3 in relation to the first appellant, the  threshold
    is a high one (see N v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] UKHL 31).

65. On behalf of the first appellant the decision in Paposhvili  is  relied
    on.  However, since the  hearing  before  me  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    considered the application of Paposhvili to Article 3 cases in the  UK,
    in EA & Ors (Article 3  medical  cases  -  Paposhvili  not  applicable)
    [2017] UKUT 00445 (IAC).  After  careful  analysis  the  Tribunal  said
    this:

         "31. It is not permissible for the Tribunal  to  depart  from  this
             authority and, in particular, cannot do so  by  reliance  upon
             the Paposhvili enlargement set out in  paragraph  183  of  the
             ECtHR's  judgment  (see  paragraph  6  above).    Hence,   the
             recasting of Article 3 to include  'situations  involving  the
             removal of a seriously ill person in which substantial grounds
             have been shown for believing that he or she, although not  at
             imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account  of
             the absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving  country
             or the lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a
             serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her state of
             health resulting in intense  suffering  or  to  a  significant
             reduction in life expectancy' is not part  of  United  Kingdom
             domestic law".

66. It also went on to state at [32] as follows:

         "32. Furthermore,  there  is  an  internal  logic  in  setting  the
             threshold very high.  Ms Chapman took forensic offence to  the
             emotive language contained in  paragraph  20  of  Mr  Hansen's
             skeleton argument in which he quoted the expression  that  the
             parties to  the  Convention,  including  the  United  Kingdom,
             cannot be turned into 'hospitals  for  the  world'.   However,
             avoiding any emotive language, if  the  effect  of  a  lowered
             threshold is to impose a burden that is disproportionate  upon
             the receiving state such that it damages its  own  efforts  to
             provide  healthcare,  accommodation  and  services  then  that
             disproportionate effect can properly be taken into account  in
             construing what is meant by the humanitarian obligation not to
             cause suffering.  Ms Chapman submitted that if this is what is
             the nature of the obligation imposed by  Article  3,  then  it
             matters not whether the effect is a burden too great to  bear.
             We agree.  But this begs the question as to what is the nature
             of the obligation.  If the invaluable scheme  of  humanitarian
             protection is to operate, it must be made to work.  It can and
             does work if a high threshold is maintained.   Conversely,  if
             the demands upon it cannot be met, it will not work.  Further,
             it runs the risk of becoming arbitrary  if  the  threshold  is
             over-elastic and  ill-defined.   That  is  precisely  why  the
             Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal set the threshold  at  a
             level which is  both  high,  intelligible  and  ascertainable,
             thereby avoiding the injustice of a test which is as  long  as
             the judge's sleeve".

67. I respectfully agree with and adopt the reasoning in EA & Ors. I reject
    the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant  in  reliance  on  the
    decision in Paposhvili. In any event, I cannot see that  even  applying
    the decision in Paposhvili the first appellant comes within  its  terms
    as set out at [183] of that decision (and now see also the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) & Anor v The  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 6).

68. It is clear that the first appellant's circumstances do not come  close
    to establishing that his return to India would amount to  a  breach  of
    his Article 3 rights on the basis that he would be exposed  to  inhuman
    or degrading treatment.  He is unlikely to get the treatment that he is
    receiving in the UK, but by no means could it be said that he would  be
    left to his own devices, to manage on his own with all that that  would
    entail for his mental and physical health.  If his brother returns with
    him he will have the support of a young, able-bodied family  member  to
    assist him, quite apart from what other assistance can be  provided  by
    the appellants'  mother  and  grandmother,  even  if  only  limited  to
    emotional support and encouragement.

69. In this I have not overlooked the age of the appellants' grandmother or
    the fact that the appellants' mother is  not  in  the  best  of  health
    herself.  There  will  undoubtedly  be  significant  challenges  to  be
    overcome,  or  at  least  managed.   However,  it  is  plain   that   a
    differential in treatment, care  or  rehabilitation  cannot  of  itself
    establish a viable Article 3 case.  Neither that differential, alone or
    in  combination  with  the  first  appellant's   other   circumstances,
    establish that the first appellant's return would amount to a breach of
    Article 3.

70. The reliance on behalf of the appellants'  on  the  decision  in  J  is
    misconceived.  That was a case dealing with a  potential  violation  of
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR in terms of the risk of suicide.  No  such
    feature  is  present  in  the  circumstances  of  this   appeal.    The
    distinction between 'domestic' and 'foreign' cases in terms of  Article
    3 have little, if any, bearing on the circumstances of  these  appeals.
    Apart from anything else, the evidence does not suggest that the  first
    appellant has, or would have, the capacity to understand, or react  to,
    information provided to him to the effect that he was to be removed  to
    India.

71. For the avoidance of any  doubt,  there  is  no  basis  from  which  to
    conclude that the first appellant is unfit to  fly,  or  would  not  be
    provided with appropriate support during the course of the  journey  to
    India.  Furthermore, if the second appellant was also removed, he would
    return with the first appellant.

72. So far as Article 8 is concerned, the central argument under the  Rules
    is to the effect that there are very significant obstacles to the first
    appellant's integration in India (paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)).  At [42] of
    my error of law decision I said as follows:

         "42.     As the grounds point out, there was no  evidence  that  he
             was able to integrate into the United Kingdom. In the  context
             of what the very significant obstacles to his  integration  in
             India would be, the FtJ did not consider the extent  to  which
             the first appellant would be desirous of, or have the  ability
             to, integrate anywhere. On one view, it could not be said that
             there are very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  if  a
             person  is  unable  to  integrate.  There  are,  in  fact,  no
             obstacles that need to be overcome or  circumvented  to  allow
             for integration. Likewise, if the  extent  of  integration  is
             likely to be minimal, the obstacles to  that  integration  are
             going to be correspondingly small."

73. It is evident that the first appellant's integration in the UK is  very
    limited  indeed,  and  is  confined  to  his  relationships  with   the
    professionals that provide him with care and treatment.  That care  and
    treatment is of course very significant in terms of his wellbeing,  but
    it has little purchase on the question of integration in the UK.

74. The issue of  integration  as  expressed  in  the  Rules  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) is plainly directed toward the assessment of  the  extent
    to which an individual is able to establish, or re-establish, a private
    life in the country of return.  Thus, a person  who  is  substantially,
    significantly  or  completely   integrated   into   UK   society,   but
    correspondingly establishes that there are very  significant  obstacles
    to integration in the country of return will, under the Rules,  subject
    to other qualifications, be able to establish a breach of his Article 8
    rights.  That person's private life would  suffer  such  disruption  on
    removal as to make that disruption disproportionate. Article 8 in terms
    of private life, and its expression  under  the  Article  8  Rules,  is
    designed to protect, foster or promote an individual's rights  in  this
    respect.

75. In terms of his private life, the evidence simply  does  not  establish
    that such a private life as he is able to develop is such  as  to  mean
    that there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  in
    India. He does not have the capacity to be desirous of integrating, and
    from a cognitive perspective his limited ability to establish any  form
    of private life is unlikely to have any impact on his view of  himself,
    his surroundings or his place in society.

76. Furthermore, there is merit in what is said on behalf of the respondent
    in the written submissions on this issue.  There is evidence to suggest
    that the first appellant may be better able to  integrate  into  Indian
    society, within his close family network, than he is able to in the UK.
     Thus, the record of his daily activities (starting at page 63  of  the
    appellants' bundle) refers to his  having  stated  that  his  favourite
    activity is listening to Indian music, and watching cricket, especially
    when India are playing.  It also refers to his liking to  watch  Indian
    films on his laptop.  There is reference to his  missing  his  mother's
    cooking.  In the External Review Report dated 2 May 2017 it  states  on
    page 5 that the first appellant had spoken  of  wanting  to  return  to
    India, stating that he missed his mother, although also stating that he
    wanted to return to East London.  The Occupational Therapy Report dated
    10 May 2017 on page 2 refers to  him  perseverating  on  the  topic  of
    wanting to call his mother.  At page 65 of  the  activities  report  it
    refers to his daily  telephone  calls  to  his  mother.   This  is  all
    consistent with the evidence before me in terms of the second appellant
    preparing Indian food for his brother and the  phone  calls  that  they
    make to their family and discussions about their past.

77. The evidence in relation to the  first  appellant's  ability  to  speak
    English is to some extent  inconsistent.  The  External  Review  Report
    refers to his limited communication ability in  English,  as  does  the
    Occupational Therapy Report.  At page 4 of that report it refers to his
    limited English and states that he struggles to  communicate  with  the
    staff.  He does however, speak Hindi and  Punjabi,  and  presumably  he
    speaks to his mother in either one or both of those  languages.  Having
    said that, the evidence before me from Helen Petrie was that the  first
    appellant's English has improved and now he can communicate in  English
    fairly fluently.

78. The facts of this case are outside the usual paradigm of an  assessment
    of the issue of very significant obstacles  to  integration.   However,
    having considered the matter conceptually, and assessing the  facts  of
    this appeal, I am not satisfied that it is established that there would
    be very significant obstacles to the first appellant's  integration  in
    India.  I note that Dr  Grilo  states  on  page  4  under  the  heading
    'Conclusion' that:

         "Mr Singh seems to benefit from the relational,  environmental  and
         procedural support offered by the unit.  It is my opinion  that  if
         plans are going to be discussed in order for Mr Singh  to  move  on
         they would be detrimental for him  and  would  impact  on  risk  to
         himself (vulnerability) and risk to others".

79. However, that conclusion  does  not  mean  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in India, where he would  have
    the close support of his family, and whatever treatment can be obtained
    for him.

80. I accept that the unusual circumstances of this case  indicate  a  need
    for an assessment of Article 8  outside  the  confines  of  the  Rules.
    Thus, the issue of physical and moral integrity requires consideration.
     However, in GS and EO (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012] UKUT 397
    (IAC) it was said at [85(8)] that where an individual has no  right  to
    remain in Article 3 terms it would be a very rare case indeed  where  a
    claim could succeed under Article 8.  The Tribunal did nevertheless say
    that an Article 8 proportionality  analysis  might  yield  a  different
    outcome in other cases, "possibly  where  the  claimant  had  a  lawful
    permission  to  reside  in  the  host  state  before  the  disease  was
    diagnosed".

81. More significantly, in MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 279 at [20] the Court referred to dicta from
    R (Razgar) v Home Secretary [2004] 2 AC 368 to the effect that  it  was
    not easy to think of a foreign healthcare case which would  fail  under
    Article 3 but succeed under Article 8.   At  [23]  the  Court  said  as
    follows:

         "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance, with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage Article  8.   Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing medical treatment here, coupled with  his  dependence
         on the family here for support, together establish  'private  life'
         under Article 8.  That conclusion would not  involve  a  comparison
         between medical facilities here and  those  in  Zimbabwe.   Such  a
         finding would not offend the principle  expressed  above  that  the
         United Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to provide medical
         treatment here when it is not available in the country to which the
         appellant is to be deported".

82. In terms of the first  appellant's  physical  and  moral  integrity,  I
    cannot see that the outcome in relation to a proportionality assessment
    under  Article  8,  assuming  one  reaches  the  point   of   assessing
    proportionality, demands an outcome in his favour, either alone  or  in
    combination with the other factors pertinent in his case.

83. As was said in Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT  00400
    (IAC), all material considerations need to be taken  into  account  but
    that one has to recognise that the countervailing  public  interest  in
    removal will outweigh the consequences for the health of the individual
    in terms of a disparity of healthcare facilities, in all but a very few
    rare cases.  The public interest in ensuring that the limited resources
    of this country's health service are used to the best  effect  for  the
    benefit of those for whom they are intended speak cogently  in  support
    of the public interest in removal.

84. In the wider Article 8 assessment, one has to consider the very limited
    private life, if it  exists  at  all,  that  the  first  appellant  has
    established  in   the   UK.    The   countervailing   public   interest
    considerations include the cost of his care  which,  according  to  the
    External Review report dated  2  May  2017,  amounts  to  approximately
    �2,531 per week.  That is plainly a weighty factor  to  be  taken  into
    account.

85. I bear in mind that the first appellant came to the  UK  lawfully,  but
    that hardly diminishes the weight of the public interest in his  return
    in the particular circumstances of this  case  where,  aside  from  the
    arguments advanced in relation to his health, he has no basis  of  stay
    in the UK.

86. Whilst Dr Grilo suggests that it would  be  detrimental  to  the  first
    appellant for him to be removed, if the paragraph that I have quoted at
    [78] above is understood to be to that effect, Dr Grilo has not had the
    benefit of hearing and examining evidence in relation to the extent  to
    which the first appellant would be able to benefit from  the  emotional
    support of his family in India, and from the practical support  of  his
    brother, even accepting that his living circumstances would be far from
    ideal.  The first appellant has demonstrated challenging behaviour when
    frustrated or unable to  achieve  his  relatively  simplistic  demands.
    However, Ms Petrie said in evidence before me that  his  behaviour  has
    calmed down quite a bit. No doubt this is in part because of the  skill
    of those caring for him, but it is evident that  the  second  appellant
    has a close connection with his  brother,  that  they  understand  each
    other and that the second appellant is able to  manage  his  day-to-day
    care.

87. Considering all the circumstances, I am not satisfied  that  the  first
    appellant's removal would amount  to  a  disproportionate  interference
    with his private life.

  88. It is not argued, nor could it  be,  that  the  respondent's  decision
      amounts to a disproportionate interference with his family life.  Such
      family life as he has in the UK is with his brother and that would  be
      able to continue on return  to  India.  Indeed,  it  may  even  become
      stronger the more closely the second appellant becomes involved in his
      care. The first appellant would  also,  of  course,  be  able  to  re-
      establish his relationships with his family in India.




  89. There also remains the possibility that the appellants' sister may  be
      able to  provide  accommodation  or  some  assistance  for  the  first
      appellant.  It has not been suggested on behalf of the appellants that
      this would not be possible. It appears from the  evidence  before  the
      FtJ that she lives in the same state in India as their mother and  the
      first appellant's flight to the UK was paid  for  by  his  sister  and
      other relatives.  No doubt, as it would be if the first appellant were
      living  with  his  mother  and  grandmother,  accommodating  him   and
      providing for his needs would present considerable challenges  to  all
      family members.  That however, is not a basis from which  to  conclude
      that he could not receive care and support on return to India.

90. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the respondent's decision  amounts
    to a breach of the first appellant's Article 3 rights or his Article  8
    rights in any respect.   That  being  the  case,  his  appeal  must  be
    dismissed both in relation to Article 3 and Article 8.

91. The second appellant has no  claim  to  remain  in  the  UK  except  in
    relation to his brother.  With the first appellant's removal, there  is
    no arguable case on behalf of the second appellant which could lead  to
    his appeal being allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  Its decision is set aside in respect  of  both  appellants.
The decision is re-made, dismissing the appeal of the  first  appellant  and
of the second appellant.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 16/02/18
