









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/04371/2015
                                                              IA/04380/2015
                                                              IA/04385/2015
                                                              IA/04390/2015
                                                              IA/04393/2015
                                                              IA/04397/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 22 February 2016                   |on 14 April 2016                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                    A. B.
                                    F. Y.
                                    W. F.
                                    T. F.
                                    S. A.
                                    W. l.
                        anonymity direction continued

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellants:    Dr Anton van Dellen, counsel (instructed by Abbott
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I continue the anonymity direction made. This direction is  to  remain
      in place unless and until  this  Tribunal  or  any  other  appropriate
      court, directs otherwise. As such,  no  report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants or any  of  them.
      Failure to comply with this direction could amount to  a  contempt  of
      Court.


   2. The appellants are a family unit. They are  husband,  wife  and  their
      four  children.  I  shall  refer  to  the  first  appellant  as   "the
      appellant."


   3. The appellants appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge promulgated on 17 August 2015 dismissing their  appeals  against
      the refusal by the respondent of their applications for further  leave
      to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 student and his dependants.


   4. In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale  found
      that the Judge's findings on paragraph 276ADE  and  Appendix  FM  were
      accompanied by sustainable reasons open to the Judge on  the  evidence
      before him. Accordingly, no error arose on that ground.


   5. However, she found it arguable that  the  Judge  fell  into  error  by
      failing to have regard to s.117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 as amended. She granted permission to appeal  on  that
      ground alone.


   6. The background to the appeal was that the appellant applied for  leave
      to remain as a Tier 4 (General) student and his wife and four children
      applied as his dependants.  Their  applications  were  refused  on  15
      January 2015. It had been contended that the appellant used  deception
      as part of his application, by using a proxy to complete  his  English
      language test.


   7. The Judge however was not satisfied that the respondent had  shown  to
      the required standard that the appellant had used deception as part of
      his application [16-18].


   8. The fact remained however that the appellant was still without a valid
      English language test certificate  as  his  score  was  cancelled.  He
      therefore failed to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  245ZX(a)  -
      [19].


   9. He further found that the appellants could not meet  the  requirements
      of Appendix FM [20]. Nor could  they  meet  the  various  requirements
      under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The longest that  any
      of the children had lived in the UK since they  re-entered  in  August
      2010 was five years. Nor could  the  appellants  show  that  they  are
      between the age of 18 and 25 and have lived in  the  UK  for  half  of
      their lives [21].


  10. The Judge considered the argument under paragraph 276  ADE  (vi)  that
      they have been in the UK for less than 20 years  and  there  would  be
      significant obstacles to their integration on return. He considered it
      relevant that the appellant has spent a considerable length of time in
      the UK and  it  is  therefore  reasonable  to  conclude  that  he  has
      established private life here. However he had no expectation  that  he
      would be permitted to remain here permanently or indefinitely [22].


  11. He found that the appellant and his family still retain strong ties to
      Pakistan including parents, siblings  and  other  family  members.  He
      noted that his wife and  children,  who  have  not  been  away  for  a
      significant period of time, would not find it  too  difficult  to  re-
      settle, as they did  on  the  last  occasion  when  they  remained  in
      Pakistan for 17 months before returning to the UK in 2010 [23].


  12. The Judge then considered as a primary consideration the  position  of
      the minor appellants. Three of them were born  in  Pakistan,  and  the
      youngest was born in the UK. Two of them entered the UK  in  2007  and
      returned to Pakistan as a family in 2008.  They  remained  there  with
      their mother until they returned to the UK in 2010. According  to  the
      appellant, their eldest child did not attend school during this  time.
      The Judge considered that this pattern of travel between  the  UK  and
      Pakistan constituted evidence of their adaptability [24].


  13. Although they have been in education in the UK they  are  entitled  to
      and would receive an education in Pakistan. Although there may be some
      initial disruption during the transition they would  eventually  adapt
      to life in Pakistan and would settle down. Their eldest child, who was
      out of education for 17 months when she was in  Pakistan,  experienced
      no difficulty adapting to education in the UK  on  her  return.  In  a
      similar way, the children  will  before  long  settle  into  life  and
      education in Pakistan. To aid the process, they will have the  benefit
      of their parents, grandparents and wider family members at  hand.  The
      transition will be aided by the fact that the children speak both Urdu
      and English so the language will not be an obstacle [25].


  14. He was thus satisfied that it is in the  best  interests  of  all  the
      children to return with their parents and remain  as  a  family  unit.
      There are no significant obstacles  to  their  integration  on  return
      [26].


  15. Although  the  initial  transition  may  be  unsettling  for  all  the
      appellants, they have  failed  to  show  that  there  are  significant
      obstacles to integration [27]. With regard to Article 8 of  the  Human
      Rights  Convention,  he  found  that  there  is  nothing  sufficiently
      compelling about the case requiring consideration outside the rules.


  16.  In  his  submissions  Dr.  van  Dellen  noted  that  the  appellant's
      application for a Tier 1 visa was granted until 15 September 2011. His
      wife joined him in 2010 along with the children.


  17. The appellant has been in the UK for ten  years  and  has  established
      family life here. The children are  attending  school  and  have  also
      developed private and family lives here. They  would  not  affect  the
      economic well being of the UK as there would be no recourse to  public
      funds.


  18. He noted that permission to appeal was limited to the grounds that the
      Judge had failed to have regard to s.117 of the 2002 Act.


  19. He referred to the full text of s.117A which applies when  a  Tribunal
      is required to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration
      Act breaches a person's right to respect for private and  family  life
      under Article 8 and as a result would be unlawful  under  s.6  of  the
      Human Rights Act 1998.


  20. In considering the public  interest  question  the  Tribunal  must  in
      particular have regard in all cases to the  considerations  listed  in
      s.117B.


  21. Part 5A of the Act only applies to Judges. Home Office  officials  are
      under no duty to follow the scheme of  Part  5A  but  Judges  are.  He
      submitted in his written argument that Judges 'may  well  treat  cases
      more generously than Home Office officials'.


  22. He referred to the paragraph. He submitted that it  was  incumbent  on
      the Tribunal to consider the appellants' Article 8 rights, given  that
      any decision made  by  the  Tribunal  would  potentially  engage  such
      rights,  whether  or  not  such  rights   were   explicitly   pleaded.
      Accordingly, the First-tier Judge should have considered s.117 of  the
      Act.


  23. He referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Forman (ss. 117A-
      C considerations: United  States)  [2015]  UKUT  412  (IAC)  at  [17].
      Section 117B requires identification  and  analysis  of  each  of  the
      provisions concerned.   If not carried out by the Judge and it was not
      possible to infer that it was conducted, that constitutes an error  of
      law [18].  In the same paragraph, the Tribunal also noted  that  while
      the Judge in Forman  did  not  adopt  the  sequential  and  structured
      approach to all the elements of s.117B  this  is  not  fatal  per  se.
      Indeed, the Tribunal has held in appeals that the provisions of s.117B-
      C were applied in substance and hence without  error  of  law  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


  24. What was required was identification and analysis (however  brief)  of
      each of the provisions concerned. In that case, it was not possible to
      infer that it was conducted.  In that case,  where  the  secretary  of
      state was the appellant before  the  Tribunal,  the  Judge  attributed
      substantial weight to the claimant's private life. This assessment  is
      prompted by the  detailed  rehearsal  of  the  evidence  as  a  strong
      emphasis on various facets of his private  life  as  set  out  in  the
      decision appealed against [19]. It  was  incumbent  on  the  Judge  to
      explicitly acknowledge that the entirety  of  the  claimant's  private
      life in the UK was established during a period  when  his  immigration
      status was precarious and having done so,  to  conduct  the  balancing
      exercise accordingly. Neither this acknowledgement nor  this  exercise
      was contained in the decision.


  25. Dr. van Dellen also relied on Bossade (ss. 117A-D -  interrelationship
      of Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC). There it was held at  [50]  that  the
      coming into force of Part 5 A of the 2002 Act has not altered the need
      for a two stage approach to Article 8 claims, but  that  s.117  has  a
      direct  role  in  the  context  of  a  proportionality  assessment  in
      accordance with Articles 8(2). Considerations set out in s.117A-D  are
      not determinative of whether or not a person qualifies  on  Article  8
      grounds; they do not set  out  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions.
      Rather, they are obligatory  (non  exhaustive)  considerations  to  be
      applied when addressing the  "public  interest  question"  [38].   The
      Tribunal rejected any suggestion that a general balancing act  is  co-
      extensive with the proportionality assessment [42].


  26. Dr. van Dellen contended that the Judge had failed to  consider  s.117
      of the 2002 Act  on  the  basis  that  each  consideration  should  be
      identified and analysed; this was an obligatory process.


  27. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response.
      The ground of appeal failed to disclose any material error of  law  in
      the determination of the First-tier Tribunal. The Judge  did  consider
      Article 8  at  paragraphs  [20-28].  He  took  into  account  relevant
      factors, arriving at sustainable and well reasoned conclusions.


  28. In particular, the Judge found that the appellant  had  not  committed
      deception. He considered the fact that the appellant  and  his  family
      retain strong ties to Pakistan and would be able to  re-integrate.  He
      has had regard in substance to the provisions of s.117B.  Accordingly,
      any failure explicitly to have regard to s.117 of the  2002  Act  does
      not constitute a material error in the circumstances.


     Assessment


  29. The Judge was obliged to have regard  to  all  of  the  considerations
      listed in s.117B of the 2002 Act. Other considerations  can  be  taken
      into account, provided that they are relevant in the sense  that  they
      properly bear on the public interest question.


  30. The First-tier  Judge  found  that  as  the  appellants  have  neither
      qualifying partners nor children in  the  UK,  they  cannot  meet  the
      requirements of Appendix FM [20]. The Judge also considered  paragraph
      276ADE of the Rules relating to private life in the UK. He  considered
      whether there would be significant obstacles to their  integration  on
      return. The appellants still retain strong ties to Pakistan  including
      parents, siblings and other family members. Nor  had  the  appellant's
      wife and children been away for a significant  period  of  time.  They
      would accordingly not find it too difficult to resettle, having regard
      in particular to the fact that on the last occasion, they remained  in
      Pakistan for 17 months before returning to the UK in 2010. [23]


  31. He noted that the children speak both Urdu and English [25].  Further,
      the appellant himself did not obtain his English language  certificate
      by means of deception. (I was also informed that  the  appellant  gave
      his evidence before the Tribunal in English).


  32. The Judge noted that the appellant had applied for leave to remain  as
      a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant [12]. Accordingly,  the  Judge  was
      required to give little weight to a private life established at a time
      when the person's immigration status is precarious. That  was  clearly
      the position that applied in this case.


  33. The Judge had regard to the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  spent  a
      considerable length of time here [22]. He also noted that the children
      had been in education in the UK.  There was no  contention  that  they
      were not financially independent or a burden on the taxpayers.


  34. The Judge has considered the best  interests  of  the  children  as  a
      primary consideration in the case [24-25]. Two children entered the UK
      in 2007 and returned to Pakistan as a family in 2008, remaining  there
      with their mother until returning in 2010.


  35. The Judge accordingly considered that the pattern  of  travel  between
      the UK and Pakistan was evidence of their adaptability [24].  He  also
      considered that there would  be  no  significant  obstacles  to  their
      integration on return [26].


  36. Having regard to the decision as  a  whole,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge has in substance had proper regard to the relevant provisions of
      s.117B of the 2002 Act.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. The decision  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      Anonymity directions continued.






      Signed                             Date  8 April 2016






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

