
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04384/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2 June 2016                           |On 5 July 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL



                                   Between

                               Mr BOLADE OTEJU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  him  with
    a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence ("the judge") in a  decision  promulgated
    on 1 October 2015.  Having assessed the evidence, the  judge  concluded
    that the appellant had not shown  that  he  and  his  partner,  an  EEA
    national, were in a durable relationship, for the purpose of Regulation
    8 of the 2006 Regulations.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on several grounds and  granted  on  12
    April 2016, by an Upper Tribunal Judge.

3.   In a Rule 24 response from the Secretary  of  State,  made  on  11  May
    2016, the appeal was opposed.  The response mainly concerned the  first
    ground, which was not pursued by the appellant,  as  made  clear  in  a
    letter to the Upper Tribunal from his solicitors, dated 27 May 2016.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.   Mr Mackenzie said that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  and
    assess all the evidence before him.   In  dismissing  the  appeal,  his
    focus had been a small number  of  incorrect  or  inconsistent  answers
    given by the appellant and his partner, following an interview arranged
    by the Secretary of State.  However, the appellant's  stepdaughter,  Ms
    Elizabet Nduka, his partner's daughter from  a  previous  relationship,
    attended  and  gave  evidence,  as  did  another  of  the   appellant's
    relatives.  The judge noted Ms Elizabet's attendance at paragraph 3  of
    the decision but gave no consideration at all to her evidence  in  what
    followed.  Ms Elizabet's evidence supported the appellant's  case  that
    his relationship with his partner was entirely genuine.

5.   The decision showed that the judge highlighted one or two  errors  from
    a total of some 117 questions put to the appellant and his  partner  in
    interview,  and  appeared   to   downplay   the   consistent   answers,
    overwhelmingly  the  majority  of  those  given.   The   stepdaughter's
    evidence supported the appellant's case but was simply not  considered.



6.   In a further ground, it was contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    treatment of supporting photographs. Having noted in the decision  that
    the appellant gave detailed evidence about them, the judge  found  that
    they might have been "staged".  This suggestion  was  not  put  to  the
    witnesses, which was a clear error as it suggested possible  dishonesty
    on their part. All the evidence fell to be weighed and  balanced.   The
    judge was required to take into account the consistent answers given in
    interview, the  evidence  of  the  stepdaughter  and  the  photographic
    evidence.   At paragraph 14 of the decision, the judge  considered  the
    evidence of events on the day that the  appellant  moved  in  with  his
    partner, finding that what appeared to be  inconsistent  accounts  from
    the appellant, his partner and his cousin undermined the credibility of
    the overall case.  That amounted to inflating what was, in truth,  only
    a small and peripheral issue.  Overall, the judge failed to give proper
    weight to the evidence supporting the appellant's case.

7.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller said that the burden  fell  on  the  appellant  to
    establish his Regulation 8 case. The decision showed that the judge was
    alert to all the evidence and recorded, at paragraph 3 of the decision,
    the witnesses who gave evidence.  He considered the photographs and the
    oral evidence relating to them  at  paragraph  19  and  considered  the
    appellant's relationship  with  Ms  Stella,  another  stepdaughter,  at
    paragraph 16.  At paragraphs 8  and  17  of  the  decision,  the  judge
    recorded that the appellant and his partner gave the  same  or  similar
    answers to questions about their personal or joint histories.   He  was
    entitled to assess the accounts of events  on  the  day  the  appellant
    moved in with his partner as significant and meriting careful scrutiny.
     Evidence given by the cousin was wholly  inconsistent  with  what  the
    appellant and his partner said.  There were also  inconsistent  answers
    about the appellant's working patterns.  After a holistic analysis, the
    judge concluded that the appellant had not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof.

8.    I indicated that I did not need to hear further from Mr Mackenzie.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   The decision shows that the  judge  carefully  assessed  parts  of  the
    evidence, including the  discrepant  answers  given  in  the  interview
    arranged by the Secretary of State.   I  was  taken  to  the  interview
    record and it is apparent that the overwhelming majority of the answers
    given  were  consistent,  the  appellant   and   his   partner   giving
    substantially  the   same   account   of   their   relationship.    The
    discrepancies were few in number.   In  assessing  that  evidence,  the
    judge has obviously given what appears to be  determinative  weight  to
    the different answers regarding recent events but it  is  difficult  to
    see what weight he has  given  to  the  consistent  answers.  They  are
    mentioned at the beginning of paragraph 8 and  his  overall  conclusion
    shows that he felt that any support they gave to the  appellant's  case
    was outweighed by the small number of inconsistent  answers.   However,
    as Mr Mackenzie submitted, it is difficult to see  how  the  consistent
    answers fell to be assessed as having inherently less weight  than  the
    inconsistent ones, as they concerned  normal,  everyday  aspects  of  a
    relationship, including gifts brought by one partner  for  another  and
    the overall development of the relationship.

10.  Significant is the absence of any assessment of the weight to be  given
    to Ms Elizabet's evidence.   Her  attendance  and  the  fact  that  she
    adopted her witness statement  and  was  then  cross-examined  and  re-
    examined, is noted at  paragraph  3  but  nowhere  else  is  there  any
    engagement with what she said, which undermines the overall conclusions
    and amounts to an error of law.

11.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller quite rightly  pointed  to  paragraph  14  of  the
    decision and  the  apparent  inconsistencies  which  emerged  regarding
    events on the day that the appellant moved in with  his  partner.  That
    part of the evidence was certainly capable of weakening the appellant's
    case but it fell to be  taken  into  account  with  all  the  evidence,
    including the including the evidence of Ms Elizabet.    Similarly,  the
    judge's finding that the photographs might have been staged  and  could
    not be looked at in isolation (paragraph 19 of the  decision)  required
    him to take into account  all  the  evidence  before  making  it.   For
    example, Ms Elizabet's evidence might well have had an  obvious  impact
    on the assessment of the weight to be given to the photographs.

12.  In summary, the judge erred in failing to engage  with  and  take  into
    account all of the evidence before him, and particularly  the  evidence
    given by  the  appellant's  stepdaughter,  Ms  Elizabet.  That  failure
    undermines the conclusion that the appellant had not shown that he  and
    his partner were in a durable relationship.  The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside  must be remade.

13.  Having taken into account the views of  representatives  regarding  the
    appropriate venue, I conclude that the appeal should be remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Extensive fact finding will  be  required  and  in
    view of the importance,  or  potential  importance,  of  Ms  Elizabet's
    evidence, none of the findings of  fact  made  by  the  judge  will  be
    preserved.  The hearing will be de novo.

DECISION

14.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside. It shall be remade in the First-tier Tribunal, at
    Hatton Cross, before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K
    Lawrence.

15.  There has been no application for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
    proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.





Signed                                  Date: 5th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


