








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04926/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 20 January 2015                  |On: 27 January 2015                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                        Mr Obinna Uzochukwu Agwuncha
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr G Franco, counsel (instructed by Caulker & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 22  October  1987.  His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent refusing his  application
    for limited leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his private  life
    in accordance with  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  LK  Gibbs  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 14  October  2014.  Having  considered  the  appellant's
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE (vi) she found  that  the  appellant  had
    spent the majority of his life in  Nigeria  and  that  his  mother  and
    siblings continued to live there. It could not  be  said  that  in  the
    light of the family members there that the appellant only has remote or
    abstract links to Nigeria. In fact he has very real,  flesh  and  blood
    links there. She thus dismissed the appeal under the Immigration  Rules
    [16].

 2. Judge  Gibbs  stated  that  she  was  sympathetic  to  the  appellant's
    situation. She also considered  that  there  was  not  an  overwhelming
    public  interest  in  his  removal,  having  regard  to  s.117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 [17].

 3. Judge Gibbs was also "asked" to consider the appeal  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.  She  accepted  that  the
    appellant had ties in the  UK  and  that  he  provides  practical  help
    through childcare as well as emotional and physical  support  which  he
    offers his brother when he is unwell. His removal  would  not  lead  to
    unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.  His  brother   has   hypertension.
    Although his heart is being investigated, there is no diagnosis of  any
    problem. He is able to go to work.

 4. Further, Judge Gibbs found that the appellant wants to start a  PhD  in
    Staffordshire which would have entailed moving  out  of  the  brother's
    home; this she found constituted evidence that all parties could manage
    on a day to day basis without the  appellant's  presence.  Accordingly,
    although the appellant's removal would cause upset and inconvenience to
    the parties involved, she was not  satisfied  that  it  would  lead  to
    unjustifiably harsh consequences.

 5. In the circumstances, she was not satisfied that there are any  factors
    which call for ".......what I find would be a repeat assessment." There
    were no arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  the
    rules by reference to Article 8 [20].

 6. On 3 December 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Osborne  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal. He  noted  that  evidence  was  adduced
    before the Judge relating to the appellant's brother's medical problems
    which were not, apparently, before the respondent's representative. The
    undisputed evidence was that the  appellant  had  provided  significant
    care for his brother at times when he required personal  care  at  home
    and also when he was hospitalised, leaving the appellant with even more
    caring responsibilities for his niece, for  whom  he  accepted  a  high
    level of responsibility.

 7. It was also contended in the grounds of application that the Judge made
    an arguable error by failing to assess the  medical  evidence  and  its
    consequences. That would have put the Judge in the position of  primary
    decision maker in that regard as the evidence had not been  before  the
    respondent.

 8. It was also argued  that  the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    interests of  the  child  in  accordance  with  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. That should have been  considered
    as a discrete issue relevant to the issue of proportionality which  the
    Judge did not consider as she decided that  it  was  not  necessary  to
    undertake an assessment outside the rules.

 9. It was not disputed that the child in question  is  cared  for  by  her
    mother who is estranged from the appellant's brother, but lives in  the
    same house - a multi-let property  -  as  her  father  and  uncle,  the
    appellant. The three adults have divided the care of the child  between
    them to enable them to work. Those issues should also have  been  taken
    into account.

10. Mr Franco submitted that the Judge had made positive findings as to the
    credibility of the appellant and his brother. Moreover, she found  that
    the appellant was close to his brother  and  his  niece.  He  had  only
    returned to Nigeria once in nine years for his father's  funeral  which
    was indicative of the level of ties he perceived he had  with  the  UK.
    She did not consider that there was an overwhelming public interest  in
    his removal.

11. He submitted that the 'primary  issue'  in  the  case  related  to  his
    brother's dependency on the appellant. He had helped his brother a lot,
    particularly since his medical crisis began two years ago. He has often
    needed to bathe and have personal care for his brother  -  particularly
    after his surgery. He had also regularly summoned ambulances for him.

12. The level of care amounted to more  than  the  "normal  emotional  ties
    between adults." However, the Judge failed to make a  finding  on  this
    crucial aspect. Moreover, he had acted  as  a  'third  carer'  for  his
    niece. That was accepted by  the  Judge.  The  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer had submitted that the required threshold from Kugathas had not
    been reached.

13. Mr Franco pointed out that the Judge 'garbled' the  submission  by  the
    presenting officer at paragraph 11 in which the following  is  set  out
    ..." although there may be a level of practical dependency between  the
    brothers, their emotional ties of the gnome  emotional  ties  of  adult
    siblings who live together..,"  rendering the sentence unintelligible.

14. The Judge therefore failed to determine the  issue  of  the  dependency
    claimed which amounted to  more  than  normal  emotional  ties  between
    adults.  She had not set out properly what the issue was, having regard
    to the "garbled" sentence in the determination - [11].

15. He also submitted that the Judge had erred in  the  circumstances  when
    considering Article 8. She found  that  there  were  no  factors  which
    called for "a repeat assessment under Article 8." She had however noted
    at paragraph 5 that specific and important medical evidence relating to
    the appellant's brother had only  been  adduced  and  received  at  the
    hearing. Accordingly, this had not been considered  by  the  respondent
    and  accordingly   "......was   not   a   repeat   assessment   (within
    Ganeshabalan)".  This  would  amount  to   primary   decision   making.
    Accordingly, an assessment should have been undertaken once  the  Judge
    consented to admit the evidence adduced.

16. Further, the Judge failed to have regard to the interests of the  child
    within s.55 of the 2009 Act.

17. Mr Duffy during the course of his submissions initially submitted  that
    the Judge properly dismissed the appeal under the rules.   However,  in
    due course it was pointed out to him by Mr Franco, who represented  the
    appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  evidence  adduced
    before the Judge  was  that  the  appellant  had  in  fact  decided  to
    undertake a PhD in close geographical proximity to  where  his  brother
    lived.  From the record of proceedings it is evident that the Judge had
    in fact considered that evidence when the appellant gave evidence.

18. In the circumstances Mr Duffy accepted that this constituted a material
    misdirection which affected the Judge's finding at  paragraph  19  that
    the appellant's presence  in  Staffordshire  would  have  entailed  his
    moving out of his brother's home.  That  provided  the  basis  for  the
    finding that the parties could all manage on a day to day basis without
    the appellant's presence. Although that  had  been  specifically  dealt
    with in his evidence it was not referred to by the Judge as part of her
    ultimate assessment.

19. Both parties accordingly agreed that the determination  should  be  set
    aside and that would have to be re-made. Mr  Franco,  after  conferring
    with the appellant, submitted that in  the  circumstances  this  was  a
    proper  case  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as   the
    appellant's claim, particularly with regard to Article 8, had not  been
    considered.

20. Mr Duffy did not oppose  the  submission  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted.

    Assessment

21. Apart from  the  material  misdirection  relating  to  the  appellant's
    intention to continue living close to his brother -  by  undertaking  a
    PhD at a closer  and  geographically  more  suitable  university  -  it
    appears in any event that the so-called test of emotional dependency is
    not a pre-requisite to the existence of  family  life  between  adults.
    Kugathas has been interpreted too restrictively in the past. There  can
    be a family life that exists without dependence. I have had  regard  to
    AA v UK [2011] ECHR 800/08. Neither voluntary separation of the  family
    nor the attainment of the age of majority are themselves sufficient  to
    displace the presumption that there is family life,  an  approach  that
    has been followed in domestic authorities.  The  important  factors  in
    assessing the existence of family life are the  continued  presence  in
    the family home and whether the appellants have established a family of
    their own.

22. In the circumstances, I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge contained material errors of  law  and  accordingly  set
    aside it aside.

23. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    regarding the issue of remitting the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision. In giving  effect  to  such  an  approach,  I  am
    satisfied that the  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to  deprive  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal of a  proper  opportunity  for
    his  case  to  be  put  and  considered.  Moreover,  there  will  be  a
    substantial amount of fact finding and evidence that will  be  required
    to be led.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed. The case is remitted to Hatton Cross for  a  re-
    hearing. The positive findings  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibbs,
    including those at paragraphs 13, 14 and 17, are preserved. The  agreed
    hearing date is 15 June 2015.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed        Date 27/1/2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
