
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/04809/2015
                                                               IA/07107/2015
                                                               IA/07108/2015
                                                               IA/07109/2015
                                                               IA/07110/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 March 2016                   |On 1 April 2016                    |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                             MUHAMMAD ISHAQ MAST
                                GHULAM KUBRA
                                 ALI HUSSAIN
                                    [A I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr G Brown counsel instructed by Rasools Law
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Caswell promulgated on 1  May  2015  which  dismissed  the
   Appellants appeals against decisions to remove them from the UK following
   refusal of their applications for further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  2
   Migrant and his dependents.
Background
4. The Appellants are a husband and wife and their 3 children.
5. They were born respectively on 5 May 1969,  17  June  1974,  23  November
   1996, 7 November 1998 and [ ] 2000. They are all nationals of Pakistan.
6. Mr Mast ('the Appellant') arrived in the UK on 16 March 2009  as  a  work
   permit holder and his family followed soon after as his dependents.
7. The Appellant was granted further leave from 25 April 2013to 18 May  2014
   as a Tier 2 Migrant. On 23 March 2014 he applied  for  further  leave  to
   remain. His application was refused on 27 January 2015 and those  of  his
   wife and children on 4 February 2015.
8. The refusal letter in respect of the Appellant gave a number of reasons:
   a) The application was considered under paragraph 245HF of the Rules  and
      he could not meet the requirements as he fell for  refusal  under  the
      general grounds for refusal (paragraph  322)  as  he  was  working  in
      breach of the terms of his visa)
   b) He also failed under paragraph 245AAA in that for the purpose of being
      granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  he  was  required  to  show  a
      continuous period of 5 years lawfully in the UK and the Appellant  had
      been absent from the  UK  for  more  than  180  days  in  one  of  the
      consecutive 12 month periods in the 5 years preceding the application.
9. The refusal letter in respect of his wife and children gave a  number  of
   reasons :
   a) The main Appellant had not  been  granted  leave  as  a  points  based
      migrant.
   b) The applications were considered under the  family  and  private  life
      requirements of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1).
   c) The mother could not succeed under the  Rules  as  a  partner  as  her
      husband was not a British citizen
   d) The mother could not succeed under EX.1 because none of  the  children
      had been in the UK for 7 years prior to the date of the application.
   e) The requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) were  considered  and  neither
      the mother nor the children met the  requirements.  All  the  children
      were under 18 at the time of the application but none had lived in the
      UK for 7 years prior to the date  of  application.  Given  they  would
      return as a family  and  the  chronology  there  were  no  significant
      obstacles to  reintegration  into  the  country  of  which  they  were
      nationals and had spent the majority of their lives.


The Judge's Decision
10. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  Caswell  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeals   against   the
   Respondent's decision. The Judge :
   a) Set out the Appellants case at paragraphs 3-8.
   b) Set out the law and the evidence before her at 9-11.
   c) Set out the Respondents case at 12-16 identifying  that  none  of  the
      family could meet Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  given  the  period
      they had lived in the UK prior to the  date  of  the  application  and
      their background. Any interference was proportionate.
   d) In her findings she noted that the Appellants Representative  conceded
      that the Appellant could not meet the Rules as a Tier 2 Migrant.
   e) She accepted that the Appellant had not been dishonest himself in  his
      application although false documents  were  used  in  support  of  the
      application.
   f) At paragraph 22 she noted that the Appellants Representative  did  not
      argue that any of the Appellants met the terms of paragraph 276ADE and
      set out her findings as to why they had ties to Pakistan.
   g) At paragraph 23 she set out the test in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.  She
      found that this was a private life  appeal  as  family  life  was  not
      engaged as the family would return to Pakistan together.
   h) She addressed their private life in paragraph 24.
   i) She addressed the argument that the Appellant had been misled  by  his
      employer and found there were no compelling reasons for them  to  stay
      taking into account the provisions  of  section  117A  and  B  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  setting  out  all  the
      relevant provisions.
11. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :
   a) The Judge placed too much weight on the Appellants illegal employment.
12. Permission was refused on 8 July 2015 and the  application  was  renewed
   with further grounds of appeal which argued:
   a) There was no consideration of the best interests of the children.
   b) The assessment under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) was flawed  arguing  that
      'the trigger for assessment is  not  always  the  7  year  period,  as
      arguably periods of less than 7 years will suffice.'
   c) The assessment of reasonableness under Article 8 outside the Rules did
      not take into account the guidance in  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]  UKUT  197
      (IAC)
   d) The Judge failed to properly direct  herself  as  to  the  meaning  of
      'ties' by reference to Ogundimu (Article 8-new rules)  Nigeria  [2013]
      UKUT60 (IAC) in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).
13.   On  11  September  2015  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  gave
   permission to appeal.

14. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Brown  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellants that :

   a) There was no reference to the duty of care under  section  55  of  the
      Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

   b) Paragraph 22 was wrong in that there were two children under 18 at the
      time of the application.

   c) Given that the father had been misled  about  his  work  circumstances
      there should have been engagement with where the best interests of the
      children law.

15. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Duffy submitted that :

   a) The best interests of the children were addressed within the Rules and
      in paragraph 24 the  Judge  considered  them  within  the  context  of
      Article 8 outside the Rules.

   b) The assessment was a matter of substance not form.

16. In reply Mr Brown on behalf of the Appellants submitted:

   a) The Judge apparently overlooked in her assessment of paragraph  276ADE
      that there were two children under 18 although  he  accepted  that  at
      paragraph 24 it was clear she was aware of the children's ages.

   b) The Judge did not do enough for the Tribunal to  be  comfortable  that
      section55 had been considered.

The Law

17.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.

19. In relation to whether  a  failure  to  specifically  mention  the  best
   interests of the children constitutes an error of  law  I  have  reminded
   myself of SS (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2012] EWCA Civ  945  (11  July  2012)  neither  the  appellant  nor  the
   respondent made any reference to the best interests of the children.  The
   Judge did not expressly consider the best interests of the children which
   did involve a serious error of law. However, the  Court  of  Appeal  held
   that it could not affect the outcome of the appeal. There was no evidence
   before the Tribunal to suggest the children had put  down  roots  of  any
   sort or established any significant private life that would be  disrupted
   by their return to Sri Lanka. In those circumstances their best interests
   would be served by living with their mother. It was difficult to see  how
   the children's best  interests  would  be  adversely  affected  by  their
   removal together with the appellant to Sri Lanka. Even if  the  Tribunal
   had considered the best interests of the children there was no basis upon
   which it could have concluded that  those  interests  would  be  so  much
   better served by allowing the appellant to remain in  the  UK  that  they
   outweighed all other considerations. In AJ (India) v Secretary  of  State
   for the Home Department; SP (India) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
   Department; EJ (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
   [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 the Court of Appeal  held  that  provided  that  the
   substance of the decision makes it clear that the interests of the  child
   has been treated as a primary  consideration  then  absence  of  specific
   reference to section 55 is not fatal.

   Finding on Material Error

20. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

21. I will address the two sets of grounds that were advanced in support  of
   these appeals.

22. In the first set of grounds it was argued that the Judge had placed  too
   much weight in her assessment of the  illegal  employment  of  the  first
   Appellant. Such an argument is both misconceived and unfairly categorises
   what is a balanced and detailed assessment of all of the circumstances in
   this case as they related to both the adult  and  child  Appellants.  The
   weight placed on any individual matter is for the Judge to determine  and
   while accepting that the Appellant had been deceived by his  employer  it
   was nevertheless open to the Judge to find that there was a strong public
   interest, particularly in cases where leave was based on  employment,  in
   applicants having employment which is legal.

23. In the grounds drafted by Mr Brown and argued before me  it  was  argued
   that the

        (a)Judge failed to make specific reference to  section  55  of  the
        Borders Act 2009 (paragraphs 3-8 of the grounds) and

        (b)that her assessment of paragraph 276ADE(1)  was  flawed  because
        she overlooked the fact that there were two children under 18 years
        of age for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) (paragraph 9)

        (c)and that her assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules failed to
        assess the reasonableness of the children's return by reference  to
        relevant caselaw (paragraph 10- 12)

        (d)The assessment under 276ADE (vi) was flawed as the Judge  failed
        to properly assess the concept of  ties  as  required  by  Ogundimu
        (paragraph 13-14)

24. In relation to the argument that the Judge failed to specifically  refer
   to section 55 I am satisfied that the assessment of the  children's  best
   interests is a matter of substance not form as argued  by  Mr  Duffy  and
   provided that it is clear from the decision that  they  have  been  taken
   into account as a primary consideration that is enough.  I  am  satisfied
   that when read as a whole, particularly given the Judge's  focus  on  the
   children in  paragraph  24,  that  the  Judge  has  considered  the  best
   interests of the children. There was certainly  no  evidence  before  the
   Judge to suggest that the welfare of these children would  be  threatened
   by the removal decision given  that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
   children to remain with their parents and  they  would  be  removed  with
   their parents to their country of nationality  where  they  could  resume
   their education and have family support after a period of time in the  UK
   that did not meet the requirements of the Rules.

25. I will deal with both arguments that relate to  paragraph  276ADE(1).  I
   note of course that before the first-tier the Appellants were represented
   by Mr Reyaz a solicitor from Rasools Law who now  instruct  Mr  Brown.  I
   note that the Judge recorded at paragraph 22 that Mr Reyas (sic) did  not
   seek to argue that the Appellants met the requirements of  paragraph  276
   ADE and I have checked the record of proceedings  to  confirm  this.  His
   argument was that the case should succeed under  Article  8  outside  the
   Rules. I am satisfied that this concession was a matter for the solicitor
   but it was open to the Judge to accept it on the evidence before her.  Mr
   Browns argument that the Judge overlooked one of the children in relation
   to Paragraph 276ADE(iv) is entirely misconceived as it is  clear  from  a
   reading of the whole decision and references to both  children  that  the
   Judge was aware of them and their ages. The fundamental  problem  for  Mr
   Brown is that neither child could meet the Rule because at  the  time  of
   the application neither had lived in the UK for more than 7 years:  I  do
   not accept Mr Brown's argument that a period of less than 7  years  meets
   this Rule because that is simply not what is said in the Rule.

26. I am satisfied  that  the  only  conceivable  requirement  of  paragraph
   276ADE(1) that all of the Appellants could have met was  subsection  (vi)
   and the Rule at that time was not as Mr Brown argued as to  them  losing'
   ties 'with Pakistan but there being 'very significant obstacles'  to  the
   applicant's integration into the country to which he would have to go  if
   required to leave the UK.  Having noted Mr Reyas's concession  the  Judge
   nevertheless went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  insurmountable
   obstacles to the family reintegrating into their country  of  nationality
   given the factual and undisputed background that they would return  as  a
   family, all of the family had been born there and the children arrived in
   the UK aged 13.12 and 9 respectively so had been exposed  to  their  home
   country's local norms and begun  their  education  there.  She  noted  at
   paragraph 22 that they had close family members with whom they maintained
   contact, speak the language and none of them had lived in the UK for more
   than 6 years. I am satisfied it was therefore open to the Judge to accept
   that Mr Reyas's concession had been properly made.

27. In relation to the argument  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the
   reasonableness of the children's  return  in  her  Article  8  assessment
   outside the Rules I am satisfied that again, when read as  a  whole,  the
   Judge has properly assessed all of those factors that  were  relevant  to
   the issue of reasonableness and did not have  to  repeat  those  findings
   that she made at paragraph 22 and 24 .I also note that there  appears  to
   have been no argument advanced before the first tier tribunal in relation
   to the reasonableness of return for the children but rather  a  focus  on
   the argument of compelling circumstances  arising  out  of  the  father's
   employment. No additional factor in relation to the children that had not
   already been addressed under the Rules was  advanced  before  either  the
   first-tier or before me that the Judge had failed to  take  into  account
   that could have impacted on the outcome of her  decision.   She  properly
   directed herself as to the relevant guidance  in  Razgar  and  considered
   whether there were any compelling circumstances that warranted a grant of
   leave outside the Rules and found there were none. Given that  there  was
   no challenge in the grounds to the Judge's conclusion  that  this  was  a
   private life appeal and s117B required the Judge to give little weight to
   private life established while leave was precarious I am  satisfied  that
   the decision she made was well reasoned and entirely open to her.



CONCLUSION

28. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

29. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
29.3.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

