
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/04116/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On  30 November 2017                      | On 15 December 2017             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                TA (NIGERIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Vidal, Counsel instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  Ian  Howard  sitting  at  Harmondsworth  on  6  February  2017)
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent to  refuse
    to grant her leave to remain in  the  UK  on  family  or  private  life
    grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in favour
    of the appellant, and as the central issue in the appeal is whether the
    best interests of her dependent children  should  prevail  over  public
    interest considerations, it is appropriate to maintain those  anonymity
    directions for these proceedings in the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
    protect the children from harmful publicity.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, whose date of birth is 11  June
    1975.  She claims to have arrived in the  UK  in  1991,  but  the  Home
    Office has no record of her entry or of her presence in the UK  in  the
    1990s, and so her asserted length of residence has always been a matter
    of dispute.  Her partner and the husband of her children,  "L",  claims
    to have arrived in the UK from Germany in the year 2000.  L is  also  a
    national of Nigeria.  The couple say that they began their relationship
    in 2005, and that they started cohabiting in 2006.  It is not  disputed
    that they have three children, all of whom have been born  in  the  UK.
    "P" was born on 17 May 2008, "M" was born on 14 December 2009  and  "A"
    was born on 23 June 2012.

 3. The appellant and L sought to regularise their  status  in  the  UK  in
    2009, and for this purpose they instructed Chidys Solicitors to act  on
    her behalf.   Their  solicitors  submitted  bank  statements  from  the
    Nationwide Building  Society  and  the  Cooperative  Bank,  purportedly
    relating to accounts held by the appellant and L with  these  banks  as
    far  back  as  2004.   However,  the  documents  were  forgeries.   The
    applications were refused on 21 April 2010  on  this  ground,  and  the
    appellant was given no right of appeal.

 4. In a letter dated 15 August 2010, Moorehouse  Solicitors  claimed  that
    the appellant knew nothing about the bank  statements:  they  had  been
    submitted by Chidys Solicitors without her knowledge. On  23  September
    2010,  Moorehouse   Solicitors   requested   reconsideration   of   the
    appellant's application.

 5. On 12 June 2014, the respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain upon reconsideration.   The
    appellant fell for refusal under R-LTRP as she did  not  meet  all  the
    requirements of  section  S-LTR.   Specifically,  she  fell  within  S-
    LTR.2.2A as she had previously submitted  false  documentation  to  the
    Home Office.  The appellant's bank statements had been confirmed to  be
    false.  It was  noted  that  Moorehouse  Solicitors  claimed  that  the
    appellant knew nothing about these bank statements, but  this  was  not
    accepted because no  information  or  evidence  had  been  provided  to
    support the claim.  She also did not meet the eligibility  requirement.
    Her partner  was  a  Nigerian  national  who  was  present  in  the  UK
    illegally, with no leave to remain.  In addition, the appellant had not
    evidenced her legal entry into the UK.

 6. The appellant's then solicitors made a request for reconsideration, and
    the application was re-refused upon reconsideration on 15 January 2015.
     The respondent continued to assert that the appellant did not meet the
    suitability requirements of section S-LTR of Appendix FM of the Rules.

 7. The appellant's appeal against  this  decision  came  before  Judge  L.
    Gibbs, sitting at the First-tier Tribunal at Hendon Magistrates'  Court
    on 25 July 2015.  The Judge took into account a  document  verification
    report  in  respect  of  a  bank  statement  relating  to  an   account
    purportedly held by L with Nationwide Building Society, and a  separate
    document verification report in respect of bank statements  purportedly
    relating to an account held by the appellant with the Cooperative Bank.
     The Judge noted the explanation of the appellant and her partner  that
    they were unaware of these documents being submitted.  The  Judge  held
    that, notwithstanding any finding of complicity, she was satisfied that
    the suitability requirement was relevant, whether or not the  applicant
    was aware of the submission of false information.  Judge Gibbs went  on
    to dismiss the appeal.

 8. Her decision was set aside  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  in  a
    decision promulgated on 25 February 2016.  He found  that  Judge  Gibbs
    had misunderstood the suitability requirement in play, and so  she  had
    failed to make a crucial finding of fact concerning the  submission  of
    false documents.  As a consequence, it was not known whether the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge accepted the  appellant's  evidence  that  she  was
    wholly unaware that any false documents had been submitted.

 9. Judge Southern set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  aside,  and
    remitted  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   for   a   fresh
    consideration before a different Judge.

The Decision of Judge Howard

10. Both parties were legally represented before Judge  Howard.   Ms  Vidal
    appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Mr Bassi appeared on behalf of
    the respondent.  The appellant and her partner gave oral evidence,  and
    each of them was cross-examined by Mr Bassi.

11. In his subsequent decision, Judge Howard found against the appellant on
    the issue of her length of  residence,  and  on  whether  she  and  her
    partner were complicit in the submission of false  bank  statements  in
    2009.

12. On the topic of the appellant's claim to have arrived in the UK in 1991
    and to have been kept in servitude in the North of England from 1991 to
    2001, the Judge held that the appellant's evidence on this  matter  was
    "the least convincing" of all  the  matters  she  spoke  of.   She  was
    hesitant in her answers.  What answers she did give were devoid of  any
    real content.  She was unable to impart any sense of having been in the
    North of England at all between 1991 and 2001.  Thus, he did not accept
    that she had been in the UK since 1991.

13. In the same paragraph, the Judge gave his reasons for  concluding  that
    it was not the solicitor who had submitted "the false bank  statement".
    His reasoning was that  the  appellant  had  much  more  to  gain  from
    submitting false documents  than  did  the  solicitor.   If  the  false
    document was accepted, the appellant would have had a better chance  of
    getting the leave she sought.  If her  application  was  rejected,  the
    appellant was put  to  the  cost  and  inconvenience  of  making  other
    application.  In contrast, the solicitor exposed himself to the loss of
    his  livelihood.   Additionally,  he  did  not  find   convincing   the
    appellant's  contention  that  they  were  simply  fobbed  off  by  the
    solicitor, and that they did not take the matter further.

14. In the context of a discussion of the best interests of  the  children,
    the Judge rejected the evidence of the appellant and her  partner  that
    they had nothing to  return  to  in  Nigeria,  including  no  surviving
    family, and he also rejected their claim that L would not  be  able  to
    find work in Nigeria as he did not have an education: "These matters  I
    do not accept.  That both  parents  should  be  devoid  of  any  living
    relatives in Nigeria is not credible.  [L]  has  shown  himself  to  be
    resourceful enough while living unrecognised in the UK to find and keep
    work.  Work sufficient for him to provide for his family.  In  Nigeria,
    he would not have the disadvantage of only being able to  work  beneath
    the radar of officialdom."

15. In paragraph 20(5), the Judge found that  the  children  would  not  be
    deprived of an education in Nigeria.  He was satisfied that there  were
    family members in Nigeria who would assist,  and  that  their  father's
    personal resources were such that he would find work in Nigeria.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

16. Ms Vidal settled an application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, advancing four grounds.  Ground 1  was  that  the  Judge  had
    erred at paragraph [13] in stating that it was common ground  that  the
    appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  any  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  This contradicted her skeleton argument, in which she sought to
    argue that the appellant met  Rule  276ADE(1)(iii)  and  that  the  two
    eldest children met Rule 276ADE(1)(iv).

17. Ground 2 was that the Judge had  failed  to  give  strong  reasons  for
    finding that it was reasonable to expect the two eldest  children,  who
    met the seven year residence  rule,  to  leave  the  UK,  following  MA
    (Pakistan).

18. Ground 3 was that, in finding that the appellant's two eldest  children
    would not be deprived of an education if returned to Nigeria, the Judge
    had failed to take  into  account  background  country  material  which
    showed that in Nigeria one-third of school-aged children  were  out  of
    school.

19. Ground 4 was that, in assessing proportionality, the Judge  had  failed
    to take into account that the finding of the competent authority  there
    were reasonable grounds to believe that the appellant had been a victim
    of human trafficking/modern slavery.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

20. In a decision dated 5 September 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley
    granted the appellant permission to appeal on all four grounds, as  all
    of them involved arguable errors of law.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. After hearing submissions from Ms Vidal and Mrs Fijiwala, I found  that
    an error of law was made out in respect of ground 2, but not in respect
    of the remaining grounds.  My reasons for so finding are set out below.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law on Ground 2 Only

Ground 1

22. The Judge was wrong to hold at paragraph [13] that it was common ground
    that the appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  any  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  However, his error was not material, as neither the
    appellant nor her two older children could bring themselves within Rule
    276ADE(1).

23. All the relevant requirements of this  Rule  have  to  be  met  by  the
    applicant at the date of application. The oldest child had not  accrued
    seven years'  residence  at  the  date  of  application,  and  so  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) was not potentially in play.

24. I accept that the  position  is  less  clear-cut  with  regard  to  the
    appellant herself.  This depended on whether the refusal  decision  was
    treated as a refusal upon reconsideration of the  application  made  in
    2009, or whether the appellant was treated as having at some point made
    a fresh application after 2011.  I consider that it  was  open  to  the
    Judge to treat the appellant as having applied  in  2009  -  and  hence
    after 18 years of unlawful residence on her case -  not  least  because
    that was  the  case  she  put  forward  in  her  supplementary  witness
    statement, in which she observed: "already more than seven  years  have
    lapsed since my application was submitted."

25. In addition, the effect of the Judge's findings of fact  was  that  the
    requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(i) and Rule 276ADE(1)(iii) were not met.
     In finding against the appellant on  the  issue  of  suitability,  the
    appellant could  not  satisfy  the  requirement  of  showing  that  her
    application on private life grounds under Rule 276ADE(1) did  not  fall
    for refusal under any of the grounds in section S-LTR.1.2 to  S-LTR.2.3
    and S-LTR.3.1 in Appendix FM.

26. In finding that the appellant had not proved that she entered the UK in
    1991, and had not credibly demonstrated her presence in  the  North  of
    England between 1991 and 2001, the appellant could not  show  that  she
    had resided in the UK for at least 20 years.

Ground 3

27. The Judge was not obliged to refer to every piece  of  evidence  relied
    upon by the appellant.  It was open to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
    children would not be deprived of an  education  in  Nigeria,  for  the
    reasons which he gave.  These were that there were  family  members  in
    Nigeria who would be able to assist the family, and  that  L  would  be
    able to support himself and his family adequately, including paying for
    the costs of his children's education.  On that  basis,  there  was  no
    reason to suppose that the children would be part of  the  minority  of
    children of school age who are not in  school,  according  to  a  Human
    Rights Watch World Report of 2017 on Nigeria; or that the family  would
    be amongst the 54% of Nigerians who live in dismal  poverty,  according
    to the same Report.

Ground 4

28. The appellant's remitted appeal was originally due to be heard  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal in August 2016, but it was  adjourned  because  the
    appellant  had  raised  a  claim  that  she  had  been  a   victim   of
    trafficking/modern slavery in the period 1991 to  2001.  The  appellant
    was asked to complete a Questionnaire. On the basis of her  answers  to
    the Questionnaire, the Competent Authority at the Home Office  informed
    the appellant  by  letter  dated  15  November  2016  that  there  were
    reasonable grounds to believe that she had  been  a  victim  of  modern
    slavery (human trafficking).

29. She was informed that she had a  period  of  45  days  to  recover  and
    consider her options. At the end of the recovery and reflection period,
    she was informed that the Competent Authority would make  a  conclusive
    grounds decision as to whether she was the  victim  of  modern  slavery
    (human trafficking or slavery, servitude, or false/compulsory  labour).
    In order to be able to make a conclusive ground decision in  as  timely
    manner as possible, she was asked to provide all the  documents  listed
    "below" by 29 November 2016.  The list of  documents  included  witness
    statements; third party  reports/supporting  statements;  and  anything
    else deemed relevant to her claim.

30. However, the appellant did not provide the information requested.   She
    also did not make a claim for asylum.  On 16 January 2017, a member  of
    the Metropolitan Police wrote to the appellant to say that she had been
    trying to call her on the contact number provided to  the  Home  Office
    and she had left several messages for her to call back.  She wished  to
    substantiate the allegations that the appellant had made, so  that  the
    police could carry out a full  investigation,  and  the  appellant  was
    asked to contact the writer so  that  they  could  arrange  a  mutually
    convenient time to carry out an official police interview.  If she  did
    not hear from the appellant within the next 7 days, she  would  presume
    that the appellant did not wish to support a police  investigation  and
    she would close down the crime report and she  would  inform  the  Home
    Office of the outcome.   The  appellant  did  not  contact  the  Police
    Officer.

31. In the light of this evidence (all of which was before  Judge  Howard),
    there was no  error  on  his  part  in  not  taking  into  account  the
    provisional conclusion of  the  Competent  Authority  as  part  of  the
    proportionality assessment.  Ms Vidal referred me to the  supplementary
    witness statement of the appellant in which she explained why  she  had
    not pursued the allegation that she  had  been  the  victim  of  modern
    slavery.  Her explanation was that she  did  not  have  the  energy  to
    pursue the matter, when she could not recollect the details. It  was  a
    chapter in her life which she wanted to forget.

32. The appellant claims to have been kept in servitude  in  the  North  of
    England between 1991 and 2001.  She was questioned about her  knowledge
    of the North of England in cross-examination, and  the  Judge  did  not
    find her to be credible in her account of having resided there.   Given
    that she had not pursued the complaint of  being  a  victim  of  modern
    slavery, it was open to the Judge to treat the provisional  finding  of
    the Competent Authority as being completely irrelevant to the  question
    of proportionality, and hence not worthy of mention.

Ground 2

33. However, as I ruled at the  hearing,  the  Judge  materially  erred  as
    pleaded in ground 2.  He failed to  acknowledge  that  the  two  eldest
    children were now qualifying children for the purposes of section  117B
    of the 2002 Act, and failed to acknowledge the significance of  section
    117B(6) which is that, where the seven year rule is satisfied, it is  a
    factor of some weight leaning  in  favour  of  leave  to  remain  being
    granted.

The Remaking of the Decision

34. Having ruled that an error of law was made out  on  ground  2  only,  I
    invited submissions from the representatives as  to  how  the  decision
    should be remade, applying the  relevant  jurisprudence,  including  MA
    (Pakistan and others, R on the application of) -v- Upper Tribunal (IAC)
    and another [2016] EWCA Civ 703.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

Best Interest Guidance

35. A useful summary of the learning on the best interests of  children  in
    the context of immigration is to be  found  in  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC):

         30.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

The Home Office Policy Guidance
36. The IDIs on Family Migration: Appendix FM  state  at  paragraph  11.2.4
    that the longer a non-British citizen child has resided in the UK,  the
    more the balance swings in favour of it being  unreasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the UK,, and strong reasons are required to refuse a
    case where the child has accrued over seven years continuous residence.
The relationship between the Rule and Section 117B(6)

37. In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  the
    duty of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  quite  clear.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  considerations  listed  in
    Section  117B.   It  had  no  discretion  to   leave   any   of   those
    considerations out of account, if  it  was  a  consideration  that  was
    raised on the evidence before it.  The Tribunal continued in  paragraph
    [13]:

         There is also in our judgment no requirement that  the  FtT  should
         pose and answer the same question  more  than  once,  simply  as  a
         matter of form.  Thus since both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and s117B(6), both raise the  same  question  in
         relation to a particular child, of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is  a  question
         that need only be answered once

The question of reasonableness

38. In MA (Pakistan) and Others, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal
    (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph [45] Elias LJ said:

         In my judgment, the court should have regard to the conduct of  the
         applicant and any other matters relevant  to  the  public  interest
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' concept under Section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         Section 117B(6).  ...  The critical point is that  Section  117C(5)
         is in substance a  free-standing  provision  in  the  same  way  as
         Section 117B(6), and even so the court in  MM  (Uganda)  held  that
         wider public interest considerations must  be  taken  into  account
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' criterion.  It seems to me that it
         must be equally so with respect to the reasonableness criterion  in
         Section 117B(6).  It would not be appropriate to  distinguish  that
         decision simply because I have reservations whether it is  correct.
         Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I will analyse
         the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  submission
         on this point is correct and that the only significance of  Section
         117B(6) is that where the seven year Rule is  satisfied,  it  is  a
         factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to  remain  being
         granted.

39. At paragraph [46] Elias LJ said that the published Home  Office  Policy
    guidance merely confirmed what is implicit in adopting  a  policy  [the
    seven year rule] of this nature:

         After such a period of time the child will have put down roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less when the children are very  young
         because the focus of their lives will be on their families, but the
         disruption becomes more serious as they  get  older.  Moreover,  in
         these cases there must  be  a  very  strong  expectation  that  the
         child's best interests will to be remain in the UK with his parents
         as part of  a  family  unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a  primary
         consideration in the proportionality assessment.

40. At paragraph [48] Elias LJ cited with approval the explanation given by
    Clarke LJ in EV (Phillipines) at  [34]-[37]  as  to  how  the  Tribunal
    should apply the  proportionality  test  where  wider  public  interest
    considerations are in play, in circumstances where the  best  interests
    of the child dictate that he should remain with his  parents.  At  [36]
    Clarke LJ said that  if  it  is  overwhelmingly  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain, the need to maintain immigration control may  well
    not tip the balance. By contrast if it is in the child's best interests
    to remain, but only on balance (with some factors  pointing  the  other
    way), the result may be the opposite. Clarke LJ continued in [37]:

         In the balance on the other side  there  falls  to  be  taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully.

Primary Findings of Fact of the First-tier Tribunal preserved

41. As will be apparent from my error of law ruling, the  primary  findings
    of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  do  not  require  to  be
    revisited, and therefore they are  preserved.  The  appellant  has  not
    shown that she entered the UK in the 1990s, and so she  has  not  shown
    that she has accrued twenty years continuous unlawful residence in  the
    UK.

Article 8 Claim outside the Rules

42. I accept that questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test should  be  answered
    in favour of the appellant. Questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar  test  must
    be  answered  in  favour  of  the  respondent.   On  the  question   of
    proportionality, I take  into  account  the  relevant  public  interest
    considerations arising  under  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.   The
    appellant  speaks  English,  but  neither  she  nor  her   partner   is
    financially independent.  As their private and  family  life  has  been
    built up in the UK unlawfully, little weight can be attached  to  these
    matters from the perspective of the appellant and her partner. However,
    the best interests of their children are a primary consideration in the
    proportionality assessment and are capable of dictating the outcome  of
    the proportionality assessment, having regard in particular to  section
    117B(6).

Best Interests Assessment

43. The eldest child has the strongest private life claim, as her length of
    residence is the longest.  The  best  interest  factors  militating  in
    favour of her remaining in the UK are that she has resided  in  the  UK
    since birth, for over nine  years,  and  relocation  to  Nigeria  would
    disrupt the excellent primary school education which she  is  currently
    receiving. However, she is likely to receive an adequate  education  in
    Nigeria.  She has also not yet accrued seven years' residence from  the
    age of four, and she has not  reached  significant  milestones  in  her
    education.  She will have the  support  of  her  parents  and  extended
    family members in Nigeria in adjusting to life  there,  and  in  common
    with her younger siblings, she will be able to enjoy all  the  benefits
    attendant upon her Nigerian citizenship, including  being  immersed  in
    the social and cultural milieu from which both her parents spring.

44. So, overall, I consider that the best interests of the eldest child lie
    in her going with her  parents  and  siblings  to  Nigeria.   The  same
    applies to the middle child.  But even if I am wrong about that, it  is
    not overwhelmingly in either child's  best  interests  to  remain.   At
    best, it is only on balance, with some factors pointing the other way.

45. The youngest child has not accrued seven years' residence from his date
    of birth, and he has always been in good  health  (as  have  his  older
    siblings).  So, the best interest considerations militating  in  favour
    of him remaining here are much weaker than those  which  apply  to  his
    older siblings, whereas the best interest considerations militating  in
    favour of him going to Nigeria with his parents  and  siblings  are  as
    strong as those which apply to his  older  siblings.   So,  I  give  an
    emphatic answer as to where his best interests lie.  They  plainly  lie
    in him going to Nigeria with his parents and siblings.

Whether it is reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK

46. In answer to the question of whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave the UK, it is  necessary  to  have  regard  to  wider
    proportionality considerations.  Both parents have adverse  immigration
    histories.  Not only are they illegal entrants, but they have sought to
    use  deception  in  order  to  obtain  leave  to  remain.   They   have
    established private and family life in the UK  in  the  full  knowledge
    that they were present in the country unlawfully, and neither  of  them
    has had a legitimate expectation of being able to carry on  family  and
    private life here on  a  permanent  basis.  Their  children  are  being
    educated at public expense. Although L worked illegally in the past  to
    support the family, since March 2016 (or earlier) the family  has  been
    supported under section 17 as otherwise they would be destitute without
    local  authority  financial  support.   Thus,  the  parents'  continued
    unlawful presence in the UK imposes a significant financial  burden  on
    the London Borough of Bromley,  where  they  reside.  Hence  there  are
    strong reasons for requiring the children to leave the UK.

47. While the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  her
    three children, it is reasonable to expect all the children  (including
    the two qualifying children) to leave the country  with  the  appellant
    and L.

Conclusion on proportionality

48. The decision appealed against strikes a fair balance  between,  on  the
    one hand, the appellant's  rights  and  interests,  and  those  of  her
    children and partner, and, on the other hand, the  wider  interests  of
    society. It is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to  be
    achieved, namely the protection of the  country's  economic  well-being
    and the maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted:

The  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights  (Article  8  ECHR)  grounds  is
dismissed.


Signed                              Date 4 December 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


