
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04417/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 20th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                          Miss MARVA LINDA CALLISTE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Hussain (counsel) instructed by Addison & Khan,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hillis promulgated  on  2  June  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 10 March 1981 and is a national of Grenada.

4.    On 13 January 2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application to vary leave to remain in the UK  and  decided  to  remove  the
appellant.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Hillis  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 September 2015 Judge  Cox  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

    ".. The judge did not in my view demonstrate at [17] to  [20]  that  he
    had either understood or engaged with A's case,  rather  borne  out  at
    [20] by his reference to family life."

The Hearing

7.    Mr Hussain, for the appellant, adopted the terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal and argued, firstly, that the appellant's  bundle  of  documents  had
not been considered by the judge, and, secondly, that the judge has  carried
out an inadequate balancing exercise when considering  article  8  ECHR.  He
explained that the appellant could not submit an application  for  leave  to
remain as a tier 4 student because she did not have a CAS letter as she  was
awaiting approval for her Ph.D. proposal. He argued that  the  judge  failed
to consider the appellant's full immigration history and failed to  consider
what would happen to the appellant if she had to return  to  Grenada  for  a
few months to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from  there.  He
conceded that at [10] the five stage test set out  in  Razgar  is  narrated,
but argued that the judge did not follow those five steps.

8.    Ms Savage, for the respondent, relied on the rule 24  reply  dated  14
September 2015, and argued that the decision does  not  contain  a  material
error of law, nor do the grounds of appeal  identify  a  material  error  of
law. She told me that the judge considered article 8 ECHR  in  a  structured
way by first of all  assessing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  paragraph
276ADE of the immigration rules, before considering  whether  or  not  there
are reasons to consider the appellant's case out-with  the  immigration.  Ms
Savage relied on paragraph 57 of Patel and others v SSHD [2013] WLR(D)  450,
and urged me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

9.    The appellant drafted the grounds of appeal  without  the  benefit  of
legal representation. Two challenges are raised by the appellant. The  first
is that the appellant does not believe that documents presented by her  were
considered; the second is that inadequate consideration has  been  given  to
the factors pled in her case.

10.   At [5] of the decision the judge states "I have also  read  and  taken
into account all the documents which have been placed  before  the  tribunal
for this appeal." At [6] the judge says that the appellant has not  produced
a bundle of documents but relies on the documents submitted to  support  her
original application. The appellant argues that the  judge  failed  to  take
account of documents submitted with her notice and grounds of appeal.

11.   The problem for the appellant is that the judge  clearly  states  that
he considered every document which was placed before  him.  Neither  in  her
grounds of appeal nor in submissions  made  by  counsel  for  the  appellant
before me is it said that a specific piece of evidence has been ignored.  In
reality counsel for the appellant sought to plead this case of new,  arguing
that inadequate weight had been given to the history behind the  appellant's
application.

12.   Although the decision is  brief,  a  fair  impartial  reading  of  the
decision clearly demonstrates that the judge made findings in fact that  the
appellant is a 33-year-old student who entered the UK in February 2007,  and
that she appealed against the respondent's decision to remove her  from  the
UK arguing that she has established private  life  in  terms  of  article  8
ECHR. At [3] the judge clearly and correctly sets  out  the  decision  which
the appellant appeals against. At [11] the judge  succinctly  sets  out  the
appellant's claim. At [13] the judge summarises the appellant's  grounds  of
appeal.

13.   Between [14] and [15] the judge correctly sets out why  the  appellant
cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules.  It  is  not
suggested that the appellant can fulfil the requirements of the  immigration
rules.

14.   In reality the appellants challenge drives at  [18]  to  [20]  of  the
decision. It is true that at [20] the judge makes reference to  "any  family
life the appellant may be found to have". That is clearly an error,  but  it
is not a material error of law  because  it  is  abundantly  clear  from  an
holistic reading of the decision that  the  appellant's  appealed  concerned
her right to respect for private life, and it was the appellant's article  8
private life that the judge considered. One wrong word has  been  used,  but
the context makes it clear that the focus in this case  never  shifted  from
article 8 private life.

15.   [17] to [18] are brief. The question for me is  whether  or  not  that
brevity amounts to superficiality.

16.   Findings of fact can only be made on the basis of  evidence  produced.
The  documents  placed  before  me,  together  with  the  submissions  made,
indicate that no reliable evidence of the component parts  of  private  life
within the meaning of article 8 ECHR was played before the judge. The  judge
looked for reasons to consider the appellant's article 8  ECHR  rights  out-
with the immigration rules and could not find  them  because  that  evidence
was not placed before him.

17.   In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387  Lord  Justice  Richards
said  (at  paragraph  33)  "In  our  judgment,  even  though   a   test   of
exceptionality does not apply in every case  falling  within  the  scope  of
Appendix FM, it is accurate to say that the  general  position  outside  the
sorts  of  special  contexts  referred   to   above   is   that   compelling
circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of
LTR outside  the  new  Rules  in  Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of  exceptionality  or  a
requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria)  in
the context of the Rules applicable to foreign criminals), but  which  gives
appropriate weight to the focused consideration of public  interest  factors
as finds expression in the Secretary  of  State's  formulation  of  the  new
Rules in Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation  in  Nagre  at  para.
[29], which has been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,
e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ".

18.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

19.   It is not an arguable error of law for a  Judge  to  give  too  little
weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged.  Nor
is it an error of law for a Judge to fail to deal with every  factual  issue
under  argument.  Disagreement  with  a  Judge's  factual  conclusions,  his
appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility,  or  his  evaluation
of risk does not give rise to an error of  law.  I  find  that  the  Judge's
decision, when read as a whole, sets out findings that were sustainable  and
sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

20.   I therefore find that no errors of law have been established and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21.   The appeal is dismissed.




    Signed Date
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
