

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/04575/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2016                           |    On 17 March 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between


                         LUKEMAN OLATUNDE ANIMASHAUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:         Ms K Joshi, Counsel instructed by A Bajwa & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 26 April 1988. He is
   appealing against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge
   Hussain, promulgated on 17 September 2015, to dismiss his appeal against
   the respondent's decision to refuse to grant him leave to remain.

2. The appellant entered the UK in April 2011 as a Tier 4 Student with
   leave to remain until 27 October 2014.

3. On 24 October 2014 he applied for discretionary leave for three months
   outside the Immigration Rules in order to enable him to take an English
   test and thereafter make an application to enable continuation of his
   studies.

4. In October 2014 the appellant met his current partner, who is a British
   national, and in November 2014 they commenced their relationship.

5. On 14 January 2015 the appellant's application was refused and he
   appealed, contending that it was unreasonable for the respondent to
   refuse it.

6. The appellant's partner became pregnant in February 2015.

First tier Tribunal Hearing

7. The FtT dealt briefly with the appellant's original appeal, which
   concerned the Secretary of State refusing to grant him discretionary
   leave in order to facilitate the making of a further application as a
   Tier 4 Student. The FtT stated that it was not open to it to review this
   exercise of discretion outside the Rules.

8. The FtT then turned to consider the appellant's claim to private and
   family life, arising from his relationship with a British woman who was
   pregnant with his child and with whom he did not cohabit (but claimed he
   intended to cohabit once she obtained larger accommodation from the
   Council).

9. The FtT noted that Article 8 grounds were not raised in the appellant's
   grounds of appeal. That appeal was made in January 2015, when the
   relationship had only recently commenced and before the appellant's
   partner became pregnant.

10. The FtT then gave brief consideration to the Article 8 claim and found,
   at paragraph [19], that:

      As things stand at the date of the hearing, I find that the
      appellant's relationship with his claimed partner is no more than one
      of boyfriend/girlfriend. This gives rise to private life but any
      interference with this private life, in my view, is not of sufficient
      seriousness to engage the United Kingdom's obligations under the Human
      Rights Convention.


Grounds of appeal and submissions

11. The grounds of appeal argue that the FtT erred by failing to take into
   account, when determining whether Article 8 was engaged, that the
   appellant's partner was pregnant and that the appellant and his partner
   intended to cohabit.

12. In her submissions, Ms Joshi expanded on the grounds of appeal. She
   argued that the FtT should have assessed the proportionality of removing
   the appellant, given that his partner was pregnant and they intended to
   cohabit. She maintained that too much weight was placed on them not
   living together and she commented that the FtT accepted the relationship
   was genuine.

13. Mr Melvin's response was that the FtT made a clear finding that the
   appellant and his partner were no more than boyfriend and girlfriend. It
   was clear that the Immigration Rules could not be met and there were no
   exceptional circumstances to warrant allowing the appeal outside the
   rules. The FtT was aware the appellant's partner was pregnant and that
   they claimed they intended to cohabit and took this into account in
   reaching its decision. At the time of the FtT hearing the appellant was
   in a short term relationship with a girlfriend and the FtT was entitled
   to find Article 8 was not engaged.

Consideration

14. This is an appeal in which there was no attempt on the part of the
   appellant to show that he was able to satisfy the Immigration Rules and
   the only question before the FtT, in respect of his private and family
   life, was whether leave to remain should be granted outside the Rules.

15. Where Article 8 is considered outside the Rules, it is well established
   that the structured approach as set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 should
   be followed. Razgar poses five questions:

      (1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
      with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his private
      life or (as the case may be) family life?
      (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
      potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
      (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
      (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in
      the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-
      being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
      protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
      and freedoms of others?
      (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
      end sought to be achieved?

16. The FtT concluded that the appellant's claim failed at the second of
   the five questions. It found that there would be an interference with the
   appellant's private life (thereby answering the first Razgar question in
   the affirmative) but that the interference would not be sufficiently
   serious to engage the UK's obligations under the Human Rights Convention
   (thereby answering the second question in the negative).

17. It is apparent from reading paragraph [19] of the FtT's decision, as
   quoted above at paragraph [10], as well as considering the decision in
   the round, that the FtT reached its finding that the second question
   under Razgar was not satisfied because it considered that the
   relationship between the appellant and his partner was "no more than one
   of boyfriend/girlfriend".

18. The evidence before the FtT, however, was that the appellant's partner
   was pregnant with his child. That being the case, the relationship was
   clearly not, as found by the FtT no more than a boyfriend/girlfriend
   relationship. There was something significantly more - the appellant's
   girlfriend was pregnant with his child.

19. Had the appellant's girlfriend not been pregnant the FtT might well
   have found that the appellant failed at the first Razgar question and it
   would have been open to it to find, in answer to the second question,
   that any interference with the appellant's private or family life would
   not have consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the
   operation of Article 8. See, for example, BM (Iran) (2015) EWCA Civ 491.

20. However, in this case the appellant's girlfriend was pregnant. That was
   a factor the FtT should have taken into consideration when determining
   whether Article 8 was engaged and its failure to do so was a material
   error of law the consequence of which was that the FtT did not proceed to
   the latter three questions under Razgar and did not undertake an
   assessment, having regard to the mandatory requirements of Section 117A-D
   of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as to whether
   removal of the appellant would be a proportionate interference with his
   private life.

21. Given the further fact finding necessary to remake this decision, I
   have decided, having regard to section 7.2 of the President's Practice
   Statement, to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

a. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
   such that it should be set aside and the appeal heard afresh.


b. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
   before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.


|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 14 March 2016                 |

