


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/04448/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |       Decision & Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 16 February 2016                      |       On 4 March 2016            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     TWC
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Representative

                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellant.   This  direction
      applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and a  failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.

Introduction

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Knowles) allowing TWC's  appeal  against  a
      decision of the Secretary of State taken on 23 January 2015 to  deport
      TWC to Zimbabwe on the basis that his deportation is conducive to  the
      public good under s.3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971.

   3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who was born on 11 March  1976.
      He arrived in the UK on 5 May 1999 with leave to enter  as  a  visitor
      valid until  3  November  1999.   Thereafter,  the  appellant's  leave
      expired.  On 14 February 2002, the appellant made a claim  for  asylum
      which was refused on 12 November 2003.  On 10 May  2002,  he  made  an
      application for indefinite leave to remain as a spouse  but  that  was
      also refused on 10 June 2002.  Thereafter, the  appellant  voluntarily
      left the UK either in 2005 or in April 2006 - the precise date is  not
      clear from the papers.

   5. On 6 April 2006, the appellant applied for entry clearance as a spouse
      but this was refused on 4 May 2006.  His appeal against that  decision
      was allowed on 23 February 2007 and in July 2007  he  entered  the  UK
      with leave as a spouse valid until 13 July 2009.

   6. On 9 July 2009 the  appellant  submitted  a  further  application  for
      indefinite leave to remain  as  a  spouse  but  that  application  was
      refused on 16 March 2010.   Again  he  appealed  and  his  appeal  was
      allowed on 29  July  2010.   On  15  September  2010  he  was  granted
      indefinite leave to remain.

   7. Whilst the appellant has been in the UK he has  been  convicted  of  a
      number of criminal offences between September 2001 and September 2014.
       These offences include a number of motor vehicle  offences  resulting
      in community punishment orders, obtaining a false passport  for  which
      he was sentenced to  8  months  imprisonment,  obtaining  services  by
      deception for which he  received  a  community  punishment  order  and
      shoplifting for which he received a conditional discharge.

   8. On 6 November 2013, he was convicted at the Cardiff Crown Court of two
      offences of possession with intent to supply Class B  drugs.   He  was
      sentenced to 8 months imprisonment which was suspended for 2 years.

   9. On 13 October 2014, having been committed for sentence, at the Cardiff
      Crown Court the appellant was sentenced for  two  offences  of  common
      assault involving domestic violence against his  partner  and  he  was
      sentenced to 2 months imprisonment.  In addition, as he was in  breach
      of the suspended sentence order, that sentence  was  activated  and  a
      consecutive term of 6 months imprisonment imposed.  The  total  period
      of imprisonment was, therefore, 8 months.

  10. Following these  offences,  on  4  December  2014  the  appellant  was
      notified of his liability  to  be  deported  on  the  basis  that  his
      deportation was conducive to the public  good.   On  5  January  2015,
      submissions were made on behalf of the appellant as to why  he  should
      not be deported.  In a decision dated 23 January 2015,  the  Secretary
      of State rejected the appellant's claim not  to  be  deported  on  the
      basis that it would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.  On that same date,  the
      respondent made the decision to deport  the  appellant  which  is  the
      decision the subject of this appeal.

The Appellant's Claim

  11. The appellant's claim not to be deported relied upon Article 8 of  the
      ECHR.  He relied both upon his family life in  the  UK  and  also  his
      private life.  As regards the former, he relies upon his  relationship
      with his partner whom he met in 1999 and they were married in  October
      2011.  They have two children, a daughter R who was born on 22 January
      2011 and a son, F who was born on 19 July 2007.  The appellant's  wife
      also has a son who is 22 years of age. All the appellant's family  are
      British citizens.  As regards his 'private life', the appellant relied
      upon the time he has spent in the UK and the time he has spent outside
      Zimbabwe.

  12. The Secretary of State  rejected  the  appellant's  claim  not  to  be
      deported under the Rules, namely para 399(a) and (b) (based  upon  his
      relationships with his partner and children) and para 399A  (based  on
      his private life).  Accepting  the  relationships  were  genuine,  the
      Secretary of State concluded that it would not be 'unduly  harsh'  for
      the appellant's family to move with him to Zimbabwe  or,  if  they  so
      chose, to remain in the UK without him.   Further,  the  Secretary  of
      State concluded that there were no 'very significant obstacles' to his
      reintegration into Zimbabwe, despite his period of absence, given  his
      age  and  links  with  Zimbabwe.   Finally,  the  Secretary  of  State
      concluded that  there  were  no  'very  compelling  circumstances'  to
      outweigh the public interest so as to prevent his deportation.

The Judge's Decision

  13. Judge Knowles considered a substantial body of evidence including oral
      evidence from the appellant, his wife and two family friends.

  14. The appellant again relied  upon  his  private  and  family  life  and
      Article 8 of the ECHR.   There was evidence before the Judge that  the
      appellant's daughter R was autistic  and  that  she  had  a  long-term
      history of self-harm and that separation from her father would have  a
      negative effect upon her.

  15. In approaching the appellant's appeal, the Judge stated  at  paragraph
      48:

           "It is an appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8) and not  an
           appeal against a decision to make a deportation order under  the
           Immigration Rules."

  16. Applying that, Judge Knowles made no reference  to  the  relevant  and
      applicable Immigration Rules, namely  paras  398-399A.   Instead,  the
      Judge considered  the  appellant's  claim  directly  under  Article  8
      applying the 5-stage process in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.     The  Judge
      accepted that the appellant had established private life in the UK and
      also family life with his wife and children.  The Judge accepted  that
      the appellant's deportation would interfere with that private life and
      as a consequence Article 8.1 was engaged.

  17. Turning to Article 8.2,  the  Judge  accepted  that  the  respondent's
      decision was for a legitimate aim and in accordance with the law.  The
      Judge then turned to  consider  whether  the  appellant's  deportation
      would be proportionate.  In doing so, the judge considered the factors
      set out in s.117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 2002.

  18. The Judge concluded that the appellant's claim could  not  succeed  on
      the basis of his private life.  However, having regard to  his  family
      life, in  particular  the  impact  upon  his  daughter  R,  the  Judge
      concluded that the appellant's deportation  would  be  "unduly  harsh"
      and, as a consequence, a disproportionate interference with his family
      life.

The Respondent's Appeal

  19. The respondent appealed to the Upper Tribunal on two grounds which  Mr
      Richards adopted in his submissions.

  20. First, it was submitted that the Judge had erred in law by failing  to
      consider the appellant's Article 8 claim under the  Immigration  Rules
      and through the "lens" of those Rules.  Reliance was placed  upon  the
      Court of Appeal's decision in AJ (Angola) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  1636
      in particular at [39]-[40].

  21. Secondly, it was submitted that the Judge had been wrong  to  approach
      the appellant's Article 8 claim  on  the  basis  that  the  Presenting
      Officer had conceded that the appellant's family could not go with him
      to Zimbabwe.  It was submitted that the Presenting Officer had  simply
      stated that there was "no expectation" that they would do  so  in  the
      sense that they would not be required to do so.  As a consequence, the
      Judge had failed to consider whether it would be unduly harsh for  the
      appellant's family to relocate to Zimbabwe.

Discussion

  22. There is no doubt that the appellant's  case  fell  to  be  considered
      under the relevant Immigration Rules, in particular  paragraph  398(c)
      which provides as follows:

           "398. Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and

           ....(c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                 conducive to the public good and  in  the  public  interest
                 because, in view of the Secretary of State their  offending
                 has caused serious harm or they are a  persistent  offender
                 who shows a particular disregard for the law,

           the Secretary of State in assessing  that  claim  will  consider
           whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does  not,  the
           public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by  other
           factors where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and
           above those described in paragraph 399 and 399A."

  23. Paragraph 399 deals with the 'family life' aspects  of  a  claim  that
      deportation would breach Art 8.  So far as relevant, para 399 provides
      as follows:

           "This paragraph applies where paragraph 399(b) or (c) applies if
           -

           a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
              with a child under the age of 18 who is in the UK, and

                    i) the child is a British citizen; ... and ...

                      a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live  in
                         the country to which the person is to be deported;
                         and

                      b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain
                         in the UK without the person to be deported; or

           b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
              partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen or  settled
              in the UK, and

                 (i)   the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                       (deportee)  was  in  the  UK   lawfully   and   their
                       immigration status was not precarious; and

                   ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                       the country to which the person is  to  be  deported,
                       because of compelling circumstances  over  and  above
                       those described in paragraph EX.2.  of  Appendix  FM;
                       and

                  iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  remain
                       in the UK without the person who is to be deported."

  24. Paragraph 399A deals with the private life aspects  of  a  claim  that
      deportation would breach Art 8.  It provides as follows:

           "399A. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
           applies if -

                 (a) the person has been lawfully resident  in  the  UK  for
                 most of his life; and

                 (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and



                 (c) there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                 integration into the country to which it is proposed he  is
                 deported."

  25. In a series of decisions beginning with MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
      EWCA Civ  1192,  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  consistently  held  that
      paragraphs 398-399A of the Rules  provide  a  comprehensive  code  for
      determining whether the deportation of a foreign criminal is  contrary
      to Article 8 of the ECHR.

  26. In AJ (Angola), Sales LJ (with whom Sullivan LJ and  Newey  J  agreed)
      set out the position at [39]-[40] as follows:

           "39.        The fact that the new rules are intended to  operate
                 as a comprehensive code is significant,  because  it  means
                 that an official or a tribunal should seek to take  account
                 of any Convention rights of an appellant through  the  lens
                 of the new rules themselves, rather than looking  to  apply
                 Convention rights for themselves  in  a  free-standing  way
                 outside the new rules.  The feature of the new rules  makes
                 the  decision-making  framework  in  relation  to   foreign
                 criminals different from that in relation to other parts of
                 the Immigration Rules, where the Secretary of State retains
                 a general discretion  outside  the  rules  in  exercise  of
                 which, in some circumstances, decisions may need to be made
                 in order to accommodate certain claims for leave to  remain
                 on the basis of Convention rights, as  explained  in  Huang
                 and R (Nagre) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
                 [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

           40.   The requirement that claims by appellants who are  foreign
                 criminals for leave to  remain,  based  on  the  Convention
                 rights  of  themselves  or  their  partners,  relations  or
                 children, should  be  assessed  under  the  new  rules  and
                 through their lens is important, as the Court of Appeal  in
                 MF (Nigeria) has emphasised.  It seeks to ensure uniformity
                 of approach  between  different  officials,  tribunals  and
                 courts who have to assess such claims, in the interests  of
                 fair and  equal  treatment  of  different  appellants  with
                 similar cases on the facts.  In this regard, the new  rules
                 also  serve  as  a  safeguard  in  relation  to  rights  of
                 appellants under Article 14 to equal treatment  within  the
                 scope of Article 8.  The requirement of assessment  through
                 the lens of  the  new  rules  also  seeks  to  ensure  that
                 decisions are made in a way that is  properly  informed  by
                 the considerable weight to be given to the public  interest
                 in  deportation  of  foreign  criminals,  as  declared   by
                 Parliament in the 2007 Act and reinforced by the  Secretary
                 of State (as the relevant Minister with responsibility  for
                 operation of the immigration  system),  so  as  to  promote
                 public confidence in that system in this sensitive area."

  27. That approach has been approved and applied in a number of  subsequent
      decisions of the Court of Appeal including CG (Jamaica) v SSHD  [2015]
      EWCA Civ 194; SSHD v AQ (Nigeria) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 250; SSHD
      v Boyd [2015] EWCA Civ 1190 and SSHD v  ZP  (India)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
      1197.

  28. It follows from this line of jurisprudence that a judge  will  err  in
      law, in determining whether an individual's deportation  would  breach
      Article 8, if he or she does not follows and remain within the  rubric
      of paras 398-399A (for a very recent example, see SSHD v Suckoo [2016]
      EWCA Civ 39).

  29. There is no doubt that the appellant falls within  para  398(c).   The
      Secretary of State considered that his offending "caused serious harm"
      but, equally, given his offending history there is no  doubt  that  he
      could also be characterised as "a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
      particular disregard for the law".

  30. As a consequence, the Judge was first required to consider whether the
      appellant succeeded under para 399 or 399A.   If  he  did,  then,  his
      appeal fell to be allowed.  If he did not, then the Judge was required
      to consider whether there were "very  compelling  circumstances"  over
      and above those in paras 399  and  399A  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
      public interest in his deportation.  As the  Upper  Tribunal  recently
      noted in Greenwood (No. 2) (para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 629 (IAC)
      as set out in the head note:

           "The exercise of considering whether there are  very  compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
           and 399A of the Immigration Rules must, logically,  be  preceded
           by an assessment that the appellant's case does not fall  within
           paragraph 399 or 399A."

  31. If the appellant could not succeed under either para 399 or 339A  then
      the Judge was required to consider whether there were "very compelling
      circumstances" - and the following words are  important  -  "over  and
      above" those set out in paras 399 and  399A.   In  that  context,  the
      Judge would need to "have regard" to the statutory factors set out  in
      ss.117B  and  117C  of  the  2002   Act   (see   Bossade   (ss.117A-D-
      interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC)).

  32. In this appeal, the Judge failed to consider the application  of  para
      399 or 399A.  That, in itself, amounts to an error of  law.   Instead,
      he engaged in a "free-wheeling" proportionality assessment taking into
      account the factors set out in s.117B and 117C of the  2002  Act.   He
      did not, as para 398 mandates, first consider para 399  and  399A  and
      only then (if the appellant could not succeed under  one  or  both  of
      those  rules)   consider   whether   there   were   "very   compelling
      circumstances" over and above those set out in paras 399 and  399A  so
      as to outweigh  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   The  Judge's
      failure then to apply the rubric of para 398 was also a clear error of
      law.

  33. I do not see any escape  from  the  structural  error  in  approaching
      Article 8 that the Judge fell  into  in  his  determination.   He  has
      clearly engaged in the very process which  the  Court  of  Appeal  has
      repeatedly held to be improper namely a "free-wheeling" assessment  of
      the proportionality of the appellant's deportation  without  reference
      to the relevant rules and, if they are not  met,  a  consideration  of
      whether there are "very compelling circumstances" beyond  matters  set
      out in the Rules  to  outweigh  the  strong  public  interest  in  the
      appellant's deportation as a foreign criminal falling within para  398
      of the Rules.

  34. In my judgment, it cannot  be  said  that  the  Judge  has  in  effect
      considered the application of the Rules (by considering  s.117C(5)  of
      the 2002 Act) such that any error is immaterial.

  35. First, whilst there are  similarities  between  paragraph  399(a)  and
      s.117C(5) where an individual relies upon a "genuine  and  subsisting"
      relationship with either a qualifying partner  or  with  a  qualifying
      child, the wording is not identical.

  36. Under s.117C the issue is whether the effect of deportation:  "on  the
      partner or child would be unduly harsh".  That, at least  in  relation
      to the effect upon the appellant's daughter R, was at the core of  the
      Judge's decision in this appeal.

  37. Paragraph 399(a),  in  respect  of  a  claim  based  upon  a  parental
      relationship with a child who is a British citizen in the UK  requires
      that (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the country
      to which the individual is to be deported and (b) it would  be  unduly
      harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
      be deported.

  38. Likewise, in respect of a claim  based  upon  a  relationship  with  a
      partner who is a  British  citizen  the  requirement  under  paragraph
      399(b) is that (a) the relationship be formed when the individual  was
      in the UK lawfully and their immigration status  was  not  precarious;
      (b) that it would be unduly harsh for  the  partner  to  live  in  the
      country to  which  the  person  is  deported  because  of  "compelling
      circumstances" over and above those set out in EX.2. of  Appendix  FM,
      namely "insurmountable obstacles" as there set out  and  (c)  that  it
      would be unduly harsh for the partner to remain in the UK without  the
      person who is to be deported.

  39. Judge Knowles did not, in fact, base his decision on the  effect  upon
      the appellant's partner of his deportation but rather  on  the  effect
      upon R which he characterised as "unduly harsh".  At paragraph  61  he
      made this clear when he said:

           "The appeal succeeds, therefore, for what I say about [R]."

  40. It is not clear to me precisely what Judge Knowles would have  decided
      had he sought to apply, as he was required, the terms of para 399 and,
      in particular,  para  399(a)  in  relation  to  the  impact  upon  the
      appellant's children especially upon R.

  41. Secondly, the Judge made no effective finding in relation  to  whether
      it would be unduly harsh for  the  appellant's  children  to  live  in
      Zimbabwe as a family. This links into the Secretary of State's  second
      ground of appeal to this Tribunal.  In  my  judgment,  the  Judge  was
      wrong to conclude that the Presenting Officer  had  conceded  that  it
      would be "unduly harsh"  for  them  to  do  so.   The  respondent  had
      expressly taken the opposite position in the refusal letter.  Seen  in
      context, the Presenting Officer was not conceding  that  it  would  be
      "unduly harsh" for the appellant's family  to  live  in  Zimbabwe  but
      rather was acknowledging that it was not "expected"  that  they  would
      leave the UK.  That was, in my judgment, recognition of the  practical
      effect, and reality of, the appellant's deportation  that  his  family
      would remain in the UK: but not that they could  not  go  to  Zimbabwe
      because it would be "unduly harsh".  That might have  been  a  finding
      properly open to the Judge had he made it but it was not a finding  he
      was bound to make and, as I have said, he made no effective finding on
      that basing himself wrongly on a misunderstanding  of  the  Presenting
      Officer's position at the hearing.

  42. There remains, however, the systemic error in failing  to  follow  the
      rubric of para 398(c) in that the Judge  failed  to  consider  whether
      there were "very compelling circumstances" to justify outweighing  the
      public interest in deportation "having regard" to the  s.117C  factors
      (see s.117A(2)).

  43. I should add, although it formed no part of the Secretary  of  State's
      grounds of appeal, that the Judge's approach  to  the  phrase  "unduly
      harsh" in  paragraph  59  is  premised  upon  "a  balancing  exercise"
      weighing the degree of harm against the seriousness  of  the  offence.
      That approach was found to be imthe wrong approach proper by the Upper
      Tribunal in MAB (Para 399; "Unduly Harsh") [2015] UKUT 435  (IAC)  but
      was accepted in a subsequent Upper Tribunal as the correct approach in
      KMO (Section 117- Unduly Harsh) [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC).  It is an issue
      which, I understand, the Court of Appeal is due to resolve in the near
      future.  I do not conclude that the Judge erred in law by adopting the
      approach, in effect, set out in KMO as opposed to that in  MAB.   But,
      it is noteworthy, that the Judge gave no clear indication of the level
      of "harshness" necessary to engage the phrase deployed in para  399(a)
      and s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act which, speaking with one voice the Upper
      Tribunal decisions agree, requires consequences that are  "severe"  or
      "bleak" such that they are "inordinately" or "excessively"  harsh  for
      the individual (see MAB at [56]-[66] and KMO at [26]).  As I  consider
      that the Judge's decision cannot stand for the reasons I have  already
      given, I need say no more about this issue other than to note that  it
      will be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal remaking the decision  in
      due course.

Decision and Disposal

  44. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the
      appellant's appeal under Article 8 involved the making of an error  of
      law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

  45. Mr Richards indicated to me  that,  although  the  appellant  was  not
      represented  at  this  hearing,  he  had  spoken  to  the  appellant's
      solicitors who had indicated that they would represent  the  appellant
      at any rehearing and further Mr  Richards  indicated  that  there  was
      significant new evidence both from the respondent and appellant  which
      the Tribunal would need to consider  in  remaking  the  decision.   He
      indicated,  without  further   elaboration,   that   the   appellant's
      circumstances had  significantly  changed  since  the  initial  appeal
      before the First-tier Tribunal.  He invited me to remit the appeal  to
      the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

  46. In the light of those submissions, and having regard to  para  7.2  of
      the Senior President's Practice Statement, I considered it appropriate
      to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing
      before a Judge other than Judge Knowles. None of the Judge's  findings
      is preserved.



                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:













