

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    APPEAL NO: IA/04515/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Determination promulgated
On 21 January 2015     On 4 February 2015


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     CLEOPETRA NATASHIA FYNN RONDGANGER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms Uko


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. On 28 November 2011  the  respondent,  a  citizen  of  South  Africa,
       applied to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Worker)  Migrant  and  that
       application was refused on 19 December 2013.  An appeal  against  the
       decision was heard on 25 September 2014 and the appeal  was  allowed.
       Permission to appeal was sought.

    2. It was argued that the judge failed to address and make  findings  on
       the Secretary of State's[1]  assertion that the applicant had  failed
       to provide with her application the original of  her  transcripts  of
       performance from the institution at which she had studied and also of
       her Lloyd's TSB bank statement. The trial  judge  accepted  that  the
       appellant had  provided  the  required  original  documentation;  see
       paragraph 18 of the determination.

    3. It was secondly argued that the respondent could not show that at the
       relevant time she was in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  student/Tier  4
       Migrant/ dependant of an appropriate person.[2] The first  matter  to
       point out is that Ms Uko  argued  that  this  was  not  part  of  the
       original grounds for refusal and cannot now be relied on.  It clearly
       is; see pages 2 and 3 of the letter of 19 December  2103.  The  trial
       judge concluded that the respondent did have extant student leave  at
       the time of the application.

    4. With regard to the ground set out in paragraph 2,  above,  the  judge
       granting leave  concluded that the  judge  made  findings  that  were
       properly explained and that were open to  him  on  the  evidence  and
       that the respondent  had  provided  the  originals  of  the  required
       documents and he concluded that there was no merit in that ground. He
       nonetheless granted permission on this point for  reasons  I  do  not
       follow as the two grounds are in no way related.  I  agree  with  him
       that there is no merit in this ground. The trial judge made  findings
       on this point that were open to him on the evidence and the  contrary
       was not argued at the hearing.

    5. With regard to the respondent's status  at  the  relevant  time,  the
       judge granting permission said:

           Given the [applicant's] acceptance  that  [her]  last  leave  to
           remain was outside of the Immigration Rules then  the    judge's
           findings at para 18 of his decision that [she]  had  "an  extant
           student visa" at the time of [her] application is  perverse  and
           constitutes a material error of law.

    6. That analysis appears to be correct.  The  determination  points  out
       that the respondent's earlier application to remain as a student  was
       allowed on article 8 grounds. That would  result  in  the  respondent
       only being granted discretionary  leave.  There  is  nothing  in  the
       determination to suggest that the respondent had status as a student,
       save the respondent's assertion in paragraph 14 of the determination,
       a matter for which there was no evidence.

    7. I asked Ms Uko if there had been evidence  at  the  original  hearing
       that the respondent had the necessary status. She said that she could
       not answer that question; I take that to  mean  that  she  could  not
       point to such evidence.

    8. It is clear that there was no evidence before the  trial  judge  that
       the respondent had the necessary status at the relevant time;  indeed
       the  evidence  points  to  the  contrary.   It   follows   that   the
       determination contains an error of law as the  only  conclusion  that
       could be reached on the evidence was that the respondent did not have
       the relevant  status  and  the  appeal  should  therefore  have  been
       dismissed.

    9. It is not necessary to say more, but Ms Everett has  provided  copies
       of documents that  show  that  that  this  is  in  fact  the  correct
       conclusion, not simply on the  evidence  provided,  but  in  reality.
       There is a determination dated  28  February  2011  that  allows  the
       respondent's appeal on article 8 (Private Life) grounds  only.  There
       is then a grant  of  discretionary  leave  dated  24  May  2011  that
       obviously followed that determination. It follows that at the time of
       the application the respondent did not have leave as  a  student  and
       that her application could not succeed.

   10. Ms Everett points out that there is now, but was not at the  time  of
       the decision, a policy that might have assisted the respondent.  This
       cannot affect the outcome of this appeal but it is a matter that  the
       respondent's representatives may like to consider.

   11. It follows that the original determination did contain  an  error  of
       law and I substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.



The appeal is accordingly allowed

Designated  Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal     23 January 2015

-----------------------
[1] Hereafter I shall call the Secretary of State "the appellant" and the
applicant "the respondent".
[2] It is not in dispute

