
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04360/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 December 2013                        |On 16 December 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                       MISS ADEBUKOLA MISTURA BALOGUN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: the appellant did not
           appear and was not represented
          For the Respondent: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who  was  born  on  18  November
      1987. She has been given permission to  appeal  the  determination  of
      First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Canavan  ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed  her
      appeal against the respondent's decision of 28 January 2013 to  refuse
      to recognise her claimed right of residence as a family member  of  an
      EEA  national  under  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").


   2. The appellant claimed to have entered the UK on 31 December 2010  with
      entry clearance as a visitor. She appears to have overstayed. She said
      that she married her partner, Imants Janupe who is a Latvian  citizen,
      in a proxy marriage ceremony in Nigeria by native law and custom on 12
      March 2012. She said that they had been living  together  since  their
      marriage and her husband was in full-time employment in the UK.


   3. The respondent refused the application because she was  not  satisfied
      that the appellant had produced sufficient evidence to show  that  she
      met the requirements of regulation 7  of  the  2006  Regulations.  The
      respondent did not  believe  that  the  proxy  marriage  was  a  valid
      marriage or that to refuse the application would result in a breach of
      the appellant's Article 8 human rights.  The  appellant  appealed  and
      asked that the appeal be determined on  the  papers  without  an  oral
      hearing. This is what the FTTJ did, in the  determination  promulgated
      on 24 April 2013.


   4. The FTTJ observed that it was difficult to decide  a  technical  legal
      issue such as that arising in this appeal  without  oral  evidence  or
      submissions and  on  very  limited  evidence  relating  to  the  legal
      framework for marriages in Nigeria. She assessed the  evidence  before
      concluding that there was nothing in the Nigerian Marriage Act 1990 to
      support the appellant's contention that a  proxy  marriage  contracted
      under native law and custom would be viewed as a  valid  marriage  for
      the purposes of that Act. There was nothing to show that the  marriage
      had been registered under the Marriage Act 1990. Even  if  there  were
      provisions for proxy marriage within the local customary  law  in  the
      appellant's home area she had failed to produce evidence to show  what
      these were or whether they had been met. Whilst her father's affidavit
      stated that the marriage had been conducted with the consent  of  both
      parents it was not clear what involvement if any the husband's parents
      had in the marriage. It was highly unlikely  that  they  had  been  in
      Nigeria.


   5. The FTTJ concluded that the appellant had failed to produce sufficient
      evidence to show that she had contracted  a  valid  marriage  for  the
      purpose of the 2006 Regulations. She went on to consider  whether  the
      appellant could meet the requirements as  an  extended  family  member
      rather than a spouse. The appellant had  chosen  to  have  the  appeal
      determined without a hearing which meant that she and her husband  had
      not had the opportunity to provide evidence with sufficient detail  to
      establish the history and nature of their relationship. After  setting
      out the evidence which had  been  supplied  the  FTTJ  concluded  that
      whilst there was some evidence that they had been living at  the  same
      address  in  February  2013  they  had  not,   on   the   balance   of
      probabilities, provided enough evidence to show that they  were  in  a
      durable relationship.


   6. Finally, the FTTJ considered the appeal  on  Article  8  human  rights
      grounds concluding that there was insufficient evidence to  show  that
      family life had  been  established  or  as  a  consequence,  that  the
      decision would amount to an interference with that  family  life.  She
      dismissed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations and  on  human  rights
      grounds.


   7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal which was refused by  a
      judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. On renewal to the Upper Tribunal  it
      was granted on the basis  that  it  was  likely  that  the  frequently
      encountered issue of Nigerian proxy marriages would  be  addressed  by
      the  Upper  Tribunal  and  general  guidance  provided.  I  have  made
      enquiries and whilst I am aware that such a case has  been  heard  the
      determination has not yet been promulgated or  reported.  I  have  not
      been asked to and I can see no good reason to delay the  determination
      of this appeal to await this.


   8. The appellant's representatives have sent a  letter  to  the  Tribunal
      indicating that neither they nor the appellant would be attending  the
      hearing  before  me  due  to  availability,  presumably   this   means
      unavailability, of funds.


   9. Mr Saunders submits that the FTTJ did not base her  decision  on  just
      one paragraph in the reports before her but dealt  with  it  far  more
      thoroughly. She looked at all the country information before  her  and
      made a proper assessment. Rather than limiting  her  consideration  to
      regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations  she  went  on  to  consider  the
      alternative possibility of extended family membership under regulation
      8 and Article 8 human rights grounds. The grounds  of  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal do not suggest that these conclusions  were  flawed  in
      any way. There was no  error  of  law.  I  was  asked  to  uphold  the
      decision.


  10. Paragraph 1 of the grounds of appeal is misconceived. In paragraph  10
      the FTTJ accepted that the Nigerian Marriage Act 1990  made  reference
      to customary marriage but  only  in  a  way  which  indicated  that  a
      marriage under the Act could be contracted in addition to a  customary
      marriage so long as it was to the same person. This does  not  support
      the  contention  that  the  Marriage  Act  1990  recognised  customary
      marriages either generally or  in  the  absence  of  another  form  of
      marriage specifically recognised by  the  Act.  The  ground  makes  no
      reference to the  important  point  made  by  the  FTTJ  in  the  same
      paragraph namely that there was nothing in the Marriage Act 1990 which
      supported the appellant's contention that a proxy marriage  contracted
      under native law and custom would be viewed as a  valid  marriage  for
      the purpose of that Act.


  11. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the grounds  of  appeal  submit  that  the  FTTJ
      ignored paragraph 24.19 of the COIR report  dated  6  April  2011  and
      failed to give any or  adequate  reasons  for  not  taking  this  into
      account. It is not correct to state that this was  ignored.  There  is
      clear reference to it in paragraphs 3 and 8. The appellant  relies  on
      extracts  from  paragraph  24.19  quoted  in  paragraph   4   of   her
      representative's skeleton argument at page 16 in the bundle  submitted
      to the FTTJ. Whilst this makes reference to three forms of marriage in
      Nigeria, one of which is customary  marriage,  it  does  not,  as  the
      appellant suggests, indicate that  customary  marriages  conducted  by
      proxy are recognised as valid marriage is under  Nigerian  civil  law.
      This is the point made by the FTTJ in paragraph 10.


  12. The grounds failed to address further points made by  the  FTTJ  which
      provided indications that there was no valid marriage.  There  was  no
      evidence that the marriage had been registered under any provision  of
      the Marriage Act 1990, there was no evidence that at least one of  the
      parties to the marriage was resident in the area  where  the  marriage
      was conducted, there was no evidence of what the local  customary  law
      was  in  this  area  or  that  the  appellant's   marriage   met   its
      requirements. Furthermore,  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
      appellant's father statement that the marriage was conducted with  the
      consent of both parents and no evidence  that  the  husband's  parents
      attended.


  13. I find that there is no error of law and I uphold the decision.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 11 December 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

