
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA042452015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th April 2016                            |On 14th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         mrs Cordelia Adaure Biaduo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    Immigration Officer, heathrow airport

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge P J M Hollingworth, promulgated on 3rd June 2015, after a hearing
    at Nottingham Justice Centre on 8th May 2015.   In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Nigeria, and was born  on  12th
    September 1943.  She appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 24th January 2015, cancelling  her  continuing  leave  and  entry
    clearance to come to the UK  as  a  visitor,  in  order  to  visit  her
    daughter, Patricia Biaduo.

 3. The reasons given by the Respondent are that the stamp in her  passport
    had been fraudulently altered and the Respondent relied upon  paragraph
    320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found that the Respondent had failed to prove  the  existence
    of a fraudulently altered stamp.  The judge then considered the  appeal
    with reference to Article 8, ECHR and dismissed it.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  law  in  that
    his finding in relation to the stamp should  have  led  to  the  appeal
    being allowed on the basis  that  the  decision  to  cancel  the  entry
    clearance certificate was irrational, and that the decision  to  refuse
    leave to enter was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

 6. Article 8 was not in issue.  It ought not to have  been  considered  by
    the judge.

 7. On 7th August 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

 8. On 21st August 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by  the  Respondent
    to the effect that

         "The Respondent does not oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and invites the  Tribunal  to  set  aside  the
         First-tier Tribunal's decision and remake the decision allowing the
         Appellant's appeal against the decision to cancel  the  Appellant's
         leave at port".

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me,  the  Appellant  had  in  attendance  on  her
    behalf, her daughter, Mrs Patricia Biaduo, as her McKenzie friend.  The
    Respondent was represented by Mrs R Pettersen,  a  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.

10. Mrs Pettersen submitted that I should heed the Rule 24  response  which
    is to the effect that the Respondent did  not  oppose  the  Appellant's
    application for permission to appeal.  She invited the Tribunal to  set
    aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  remake  the  decision
    allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  cancellation  of  the
    Appellant's leave at port.

Decision



11. For the reasons set out both in the grant of permission, and  the  Rule
    24 response, I allow the appeal.  I set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  I remake the  decision  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision to cancel the Appellant's leave at port is not  in  accordance
    with the law and this appeal is allowed  against  the  cancellation  of
    that leave.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

13. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
