
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04029/2013
                                                               IA/05279/2013
                                                               IA/05278/2013
                                                               IA/05277/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 22nd October 2013                          |On 5th November 2013         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                         ADERIMI OLUROTIMI OYEKANMI
                          BOLANLE CECELIA OYEKANMI
                         FIJAFOLUWA PEYEMI OYEKANMI
                           TOLUWANI AJOKE OYEKANMI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms S Iqbal instructed by Maliks and Khan Solicitors.

For the Respondent: Mr Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Griffiths promulgated on 15th July 2013 following  a  hearing
        at Taylor House on 28th June 2013, in which the Judge dismissed the
        appeal, under both  the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  ECHR,
        against the  refusal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant  the
        appellants' application for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom.



Background


     2. The appellants' are a family unit. The first appellant was  granted
        entry clearance on 16th November 2007 to enter the  United  Kingdom
        as a highly skilled migrant although his  date  of  entry  was  3rd
        March 2008.  His leave was subsequently renewed with his last grant
        of leave as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant  being  valid  until  16th
        November 2012.  The remaining appellants, his  wife  and  children,
        joined him in the United Kingdom on 31st August 2009.


     3. All appellants' are citizens of Nigeria whose respective  dates  of
        birth are 14th October 1964,  19th  September  1974,  21st  October
        2003,  and  28th  April  2007.  The  second,  third,   and   fourth
        appellant's are dependent upon the first appellant  succeeding  and
        so I shall focus initially on his appeal.


     4. Judge Griffiths found that the application was  premature  as  rule
        245CD requires an applicant to have spent a  continuous  period  of
        five years lawfully in the United Kingdom in order to  qualify  for
        indefinite leave to remain (ILR) as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.  It
        was noted the first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  3rd
        March 2008 and applied for ILR on  18th  October  2012,  which  was
        received on 25th October 2012.   The  Judge  found  that  when  the
        appellant  made  his  application  he  was  unable  to   meet   the
        requirements of the Rules because he had not  been  in  the  United
        Kingdom for five years.


     5. Judge Griffiths found the claim the appellant  had  been  given  an
        assurance by an unnamed person within UKBA not determinative as  no
        such assurance could have been given and there was no  evidence  to
        corroborate the appellant's account [19].


     6. It is said the appellant did not pursue an  Article  8  ECHR  claim
        although Judge Griffiths considered this  in  any  event  [20]  and
        found the decision to be proportionate.


     7. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  but  granted  on  a  renewed  application  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal.



The law


     8. The relevant provisions are  paragraph  245CD  of  the  Immigration
        Rules.  paragraph 245CD is to be found within part 6 of  the  Rules
        which is  that  relating  to  the  Points-Based  System  and  which
        provides:


              245CD. Requirements for indefinite leave to remain


              To qualify for indefinite leave to remain, a Tier 1  (General)
Migrant must  meet                the  requirements  listed  below.  If  the
applicant meets these requirements,                    indefinite  leave  to
remain  will  be  granted.  If   the   applicant   does   not   meet   these
requirements, the application will be refused.

              Requirements:

              (a)      DELETED

              (b)      The applicant must not fall  for  refusal  under  the
general grounds for                     refusal, and must not be an  illegal
entrant.

              (c)      Unless the application is being made under the  terms
set out in Appendix                 S,  the  applicant  must  have  spent  a
continuous period of 5 years lawfully in                  the UK,  of  which
the most recent period must have been spent with leave                 as  a
Tier  1  (General)  Migrant,   in   any   combination   of   the   following
     categories:

                  (i)  as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant,

                  (ii)     as a Highly Skilled Migrant,

                  (iii)    as a Work Permit Holder,

                  (iv)     as an innovator,

                  (v)  as a Self-Employed Lawyer,

                  (vi)     as a Writer, Composer or Artist,

                   (vii)     as  a  Tier  2  (General)  Migrant,  a  Tier  2
(Minister of Religion) Migrant                   or a Tier 2  (Sportsperson)
Migrant, or

                  (viii)   as a Tier  2  (Intra-Company  Transfer)  Migrant,
provided the                         continuous  period  of  5  years  spent
lawfully in the UK includes a                    period of leave as  a  Tier
2 (Intra-Company Transfer)  Migrant  granted                      under  the
Rules  in   place   before   6   April   2010,   or   as   a   Work   Permit
Holder  where  the  work  permit   was   granted   because   the   applicant
         was the subject of an Intra-Company Transfer.



     9. The appellant also relies upon Section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act
        1971 which provides:
              (1)  This section applies if-
                   (a) a person who has limited leave to enter or remain  in
      the United                    Kingdom  applies  to  the  Secretary  of
      State for variation of the leave,
                   (b)     the application for variation is made before  the
      leave expires, and
                   (c)     the leave expires  without  the  application  for
      variation having been                  decided.
              (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during
      any period when-
                   (a)     the application for variation is neither  decided
      nor withdrawn,
                   (b)     an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality,
      Asylum and                    Immigration Act 2002 could  be  brought,
      while  the  appellant  is  in  the                    United  Kingdom,
      against   the   decision   on   the    application    for    variation
      (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of time  with  permission),
      or
                    (c)      an  appeal  under  that  section  against  that
      decision, brought while the                 appellant is in the United
      Kingdom, is pending (within the  meaning                   of  section
      104 of that Act).
              (3)  Leave extended by virtue of this section shall  lapse  if
      the applicant leaves               the United Kingdom.
              (4)  A person may not make an application for variation of his
      leave to enter or             remain in the United Kingdom while  that
      leave is extended by virtue of this             section.
              (5)  But subsection (4) does not prevent the variation of  the
      application               mentioned in subsection (1)(a).



Discussion



    10. The chronology is not disputed but it is alleged the Judge erred in
        law by failing to consider section 3C when  assessing  whether  the
        appellant had spent a continuous period of five years  lawfully  in
        the United Kingdom.


    11. This is an appeal under section  82  Nationality,  Immigration  and
        Asylum Act 2002. The grounds of appeal only seek to rely  upon  two
        grounds, section 84 (1)(f),  that  a  discretion  under  the  Rules
        should have been exercised differently, and 84 (1)(c),  a  decision
        incompatible with his right under ECHR.


    12. It is necessary with regard to s 84 (1)(f) to identify  the  nature
        of the  discretion  in  question.  In  relation  to  non  mandatory
        refusals under paragraph 320 the inclusion of the wording "normally
        be refused' connotes a discretion to be exercised by  the  decision
        maker.  The wording of paragraph 245CD contains  no  such  wording.
        The PBS, of which this rule forms part is based upon  a  philosophy
        that entitlement to enter and remain in the United  Kingdom  should
        be  assessed  by  reference  to  objectively  verifiable  criteria.
        Whether a person is entitled to the grant of  leave  they  seek  is
        dependant upon them proving they are so  entitled.  It  is  a  very
        detailed and highly prescriptive system as recognised by the  Court
        of appeal in Alam [2012] EWCA Civ 960.


    13. Guidance to case workers is to be found in Chapter 6A  of  the  IDI
        (current version dated 28th October 2013) which states:


              General Requirements for indefinite leave to remain as a  Tier
   1 Migrant


              Applicants must meet all of the relevant requirements set  out
   in the                       Immigration Rules to qualify for  indefinite
   leave to remain. In addition to the           individual requirements  of
   each migration category within Tier 1  of  the  Points              Based
   System, applicants are required to meet the general requirements set  out
          in sections 3-5 below.


    14. In the document entitled 'Indefinite Leave to Remain -  Calculating
        Continuous Period in UK, This guidance is based on the  Immigration
        Rules, 28th August 2013' it is stated:


         "Indefinite leave to remain (ILR) must be refused if the  applicant
does not meet the          continuous period  requirement  set  out  in  the
Immigration Rules.


          The Secretary of State considers the granting of ILR in the UK  to
   be a privilege and the       continuous period requirement is the minimum
   amount of time which a migrant must       spend in  employment  or  being
   economically active in the UK before being eligible  to           qualify
   for ILR."


    15. The Secretary of State retains discretion under the Immigration Act
        1971 to  grant  leave  outside  the  Rules  in  exceptional  cases,
        however, the appellant has not proved that the facts of  this  case
        fit within any of the exceptions identified on which  the  exercise
        of a discretion is required.  No error is proved in relation to the
        pleaded ground under the Immigration Rules.


    16. Judge Griffiths, however, considered the appeal on its merits as if
        a section 84 (1) (a) appeal which is not raised as an issue  before
        me.   The  finding  the  appellant  is  unable   to   satisfy   the
        requirements of the Rule  by  reference  to  the  period  that  has
        elapsed since the date of the original grant of  leave  is  legally
        correct as the wording of  the  rule  is  clear  and  requires  the
        requisite period to begin when the  applicant  is  "in  the  United
        Kingdom". Time therefore runs from 3rd March 2008.


    17. In the case of QI v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 614 the  Court  of  Appeal
        were considering whether the wording of paragraph 245ZX (i), as  it
        was then, prevented an  appellant  from  relying  upon  statutorily
        extended leave.  They found that the wording of the  rule  did  not
        although the current version which came into force  on  21st  April
        2001 does prevent reliance upon statutorily  extended  leave  as  a
        result of the inclusion of the words "granted under these rules" to
        the appellants current leave to remain.   The  current  wording  of
        245CD only requires  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  lawful
        residence in the United Kingdom in which  the  most  recent  period
        must have been spent with leave as  a  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant.
        There was discussion during the course of the hearing as to whether
        the requirement for the most recent period to have been spent  with
        leave as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant prevented  the  appellant  from
        relying upon the statutorily extended leave under section  3C.  The
        effect of section 3C is that the leave lawfully  granted  continues
        and is the same leave, not different leave, as  recognised  by  the
        Court of Appeal in QI, paragraphs 13 to 15.


    18. I find there is no restriction preventing reliance  on  statutorily
        extended leave in the current wording of paragraph 245CD and if the
        respondent wishes to exclude such leave an amendment  to  the  rule
        will be required, similar to that in 245ZX (i).


    19. In relation to the relevant  time  at  which  the  question  of  an
        individuals ability to meet the rules has to be considered,  in  AQ
        (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA
        Civ 833 the Court of Appeal held that, unless the rule specifies  a
        fixed historic timeline (i.e. one that clearly  required  something
        to have happened by the  date  of  application)  the  task  of  the
        Tribunal was to consider  the  position  as  at  the  date  of  the
        Secretary of  State's  decision  ,  not  as  at  the  date  of  the
        application as earlier case law had established and as section  85A
        now requires. Section 85 of the 2002 Act  set  out  the  Tribunal's
        duties when considering an appeal under s. 82(1) and  the  Claimant
        had made a statement under s. 120. For the purposes of s. 85(2) the
        word "decision" clearly meant the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
        State.


    20. The appellant made his application on 18th October 2012 when he had
        only been in the United Kingdom for four years  and  seven  months.
        His grant of leave would have expired on  16th  November  2012  but
        such leave has continued as a result of the  operation  of  section
        3C.  At the date of the refusal, 11th January 2013,  the  appellant
        had four years ten months continuous lawful residence  and  by  the
        date  of  the  hearing  he  had  five  years  three  months  lawful
        residence.


    21. The appellant  did  not  seek  to  rely  on  any  further  evidence
        demonstrating that the requirements of the Rules were  met  at  the
        date of the hearing but relies solely  on  the  actual  or  further
        leave since the date of decision, and so is not caught  by  section
        85A which applied to Points Based System cases  and  restricts  the
        admissibility of evidence.


    22. Had it  been  proved  that  the  appellant  was  advised  that  his
        application would be delayed  until  he  had  acquired  five  years
        lawful residence there may be an argument based upon the common law
        duty of fairness/legitimate  expectation  that  the  decision  made
        outside this period is unfair and 'not in accordance with the law',
        although  I  find  no  error  in  the  Judge's  treatment  of  this
        particular allegation and no legal error is proved in this respect.


    23. If the  date  at  which  the  appellant  is  able  to  satisfy  the
        requirements of the Rules is limited to the date of application the
        appellant must fail. If it is limited to the date  of  decision  as
        there is no timeline specified in the rule itself, the appeal  must
        still fail  as  the  appellant  did  not  have  five  years  lawful
        residence even with the effect of paragraph 3C. It is only  if  the
        Tribunal were considering the position at the date of  the  hearing
        that the appellant will have five years continuous lawful residence
        as a result of the operation of  the  statutory  extension  of  his
        leave.  His case is that by showing  he  would  have  been  granted
        leave if he made the same application on the date of  the  hearing,
        he would have succeeded.


    24. Mr Blundell in his grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  to  the
        Upper Tribunal drew an analogy between this case and finding of the
        Tribunal in YZ and LX [2005] UKAIT  00157  in  which  an  appellant
        succeeded under paragraph 317 after turning 65 during the course of
        the appeal. In that case Mr Blundell, in his  previous  life  as  a
        Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, appeared on  behalf  of  the
        Secretary of State.  The  determination  was  reported  to  provide
        further  guidance  as  to  the  effect  on  section  85(4)  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in relation to changes
        of circumstances occurring after  the  date  of  the  Secretary  of
        State's decision, but prior  to  the  date  of  hearing  before  an
        Immigration Judge.


    25. Section 85(4) provides that on an appeal  under  Section  82(1)  or
        83(2) against a decision the Tribunal may consider  evidence  about
        any matter which  it  thinks  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
        decision, including evidence which concerns a matter arising  after
        the date of decision.  In YZ the Tribunal stated:


              13. Mr Blundell argued that Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act  was
   intended to cover                the situation where an appellant,  whose
   application had failed at the date                 of  decision  because,
   for   example,   he   could    not    satisfy    the    maintenance    or
   accommodation requirements for leave to remain at that date, was able  to
              show that the position had changed by the date of hearing, and
   that he was                  then able to satisfy the  same  requirement.
   The distinction which he sought               to draw was between, on the
   one hand, a case in which, at the date of the                    hearing,
   an  appellant  was  able  to  satisfy  the  requirements  for  leave   to
   remain under precisely the same provisions in the  Immigration  Rules  on
          which he had based his application originally (when Section  85(4)
   could               properly be prayed in aid), and, on the other hand, a
   case in which, at the                 date of the hearing,  an  appellant
   was  seeking  to  rely  on  a  different  part  of                    the
   Immigration Rules which he was then  able  to  satisfy,  even  though  he
     had not been able to do so at the date of decision (when Section  85(4)
   was                 not applicable).
              14. We  acknowledge  the  ingenious  nature  of  the  argument
   advanced by                      Mr Blundell on the respondent's behalf.
   However, we are not persuaded by                    it.  Mr  Blundell  is
   seeking   to   introduce   a   distinction   for   which   we   see    no
   justification, either  in  the  wording  of  Section  85(4),  or  in  the
   Immigration                  Rules themselves.
              15. The appellants applied for leave to remain in  the  United
   Kingdom as                       dependent relatives under paragraph  317
   of the Immigration Rules. They                still seek leave to  remain
   as dependent relatives under the same paragraph.                The  fact
   that, as at the date of decision, their applications fell to be  rejected
              under paragraph 317(i)(e), but now fall within  the  ambit  of
   paragraph               317(i)(c) of the same paragraph, does not  change
   the substance of their                    application, which remains  one
   for leave to remain as dependent relatives.
              16. The appellants' reliance on paragraph  317(i)(c),  because
   the  first  appellant                    is  now  over  65,  rather  than
   paragraph 317(i)(e), does not constitute an                 attempt by an
   appellant  who  has  applied,  and  failed,   under   one   category   in
   the Immigration Rules, e.g. as a student, to succeed on appeal  under  an
          entirely different category, e.g. as a spouse, merely  because  by
   the latter                   date he happens to be able  to  satisfy  the
   requirements  for  leave  to  remain                    on  an   entirely
   different basis. That is  not  an  issue  which  is  before  us,  and  is
     therefore not one on which we consider it  appropriate  to  express  an
              opinion in the absence of full argument on both sides.
              17. The central fact in the case of the appeals before  us  is
   that the appellants                   applied  for  leave  to  remain  as
   dependent relatives. They were refused on                    that  basis.
   By the  date  of  the  hearing  by  the  Adjudicator,  the  circumstances
     of the first appellant had changed, albeit only as a consequence of the
                       inevitable effect of the passage  of  time  upon  his
   age, and the appellants                   were then able to  satisfy  the
   requirements for leave to remain on the same                basis as that
   on   which   they   had   applied   originally,   namely   as   dependent
   relatives. Under Section 85(4), they  are  entitled  to  rely  upon  that
   change as               constituting a "matter" which  was  "relevant  to
   the substance of the                      decision" and which had  arisen
   "after the date of the decision".
              18. We are therefore satisfied that  the  Adjudicator  made  a
   material error of law                 in failing to give proper effect to
   the provisions of Section 85(4).  In                     consequence,  it
   now  falls  to  us  to  substitute  our  own  decision   based   on   the
   undisputed facts of the appeals before us.
              19. Mr Blundell did not seek to argue that the appellants were
   not able to                  satisfy all the  requirements  of  paragraph
   317 by reference to paragraph                 317(i)(c) as at the date of
   the hearing before the Adjudicator, or at the  date                    of
   the  hearing  before  us.  He  was  plainly  right  to  do  so.  In   the
          circumstances, both appellants are entitled to succeed.


    26. It was not argued before  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
        limited to considering the situation only appertaining at the  date
        of application or decision as Mr Avery's submissions related to the
        fact the wording of the rule excluded consideration of leave  under
        section 3C.


    27. As the  rule  does  not  exclude  the  application  of  statutorily
        extended leave, and in accordance with the provisions of section 85
        (4) the first appellant must be entitled to rely upon the fact that
        at the date of the hearing he had a continuous period of five years
        lawful leave as constituting a matter which  was  relevant  to  the
        substance of the decision  which  had  arisen  after  the  date  of
        decision. Accordingly I find that Judge  Griffiths  has  materially
        erred in law in dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


    28. The appellant also relied on Article 8 ECHR but the  findings  made
        by the Judge in relation to the private life the appellants have in
        the United Kingdom are within the range  of  those  the  Judge  was
        entitled to make on the evidence in light of  the  fact  the  first
        appellant was unable to satisfy the requirements of the Immigration
        Rules.


    29. I set the determinations aside and remake the decision by  allowing
        the appeal of the first appellant under the Immigration  Rules  and
        that of the remaining appellants as dependents in line.


Decision

    30. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    31. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no  such  order  (pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper        Tribunal)  Rules  2008)  as  no  application  for
   anonymity was made and is not         warranted  on  the  facts  of  this
   appeal.


   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.


    32. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
        by allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award (rule
        23A (costs) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
        Rules 2005 and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
        Enforcement Act 2007).


          I have had regard to the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee
   Awards in           Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


          I make no fee award.


          Reasons: The application was premature and the respondent entitled
   to reject it        on the facts.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 1st November 2013












