
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/04156/2014
     ia/04170/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27 November 2014                             |On 4 December 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                            Sharanjit Kaur Mutti
                            Harjinder Singh Mutti
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr V Makol of Maalik & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are wife and dependent husband born respectively in 1980
    and 1973.  They are both citizens of India.  On 20  February  2011  the
    wife arrived with leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant
    expiring on 14 September 2012.  Her husband  had  leave  in  line  with
    hers.  At the last possible moment, but in time, the Appellants applied
    for further leave.  The wife as a student for post-graduate studies and
    the husband as her dependant.

 2. On 13 December 2013 the Respondent  refused  their  applications.   The
    wife's was refused under paragraph 245ZX(d) with reference to paragraph
    1A(c) of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules (the IRs) because she  had
    not shown she had sufficient funds for the requisite 28 day  period  to
    qualify for further leave.  Her husband was refused in line  with  her.
    The Respondent also made decisions to remove both the Appellants by way
    of  directions  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum   and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 3. On 17 January 2014 each of the Appellants lodged notice of appeal under
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are that the wife  had  sent  with
    the applications of each of herself and her husband bank statements for
    each of them which in aggregate showed that she held  sufficient  funds
    as required by Appendix C.

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 4. By a determination promulgated on 10 September 2014 Judge of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  M  Symes  dismissed  the   appeals.    He   noted   the
    admissibility of evidence in points-based system appeals  was  governed
    by Section 85A of the 2002 Act which limited  the  admissible  evidence
    generally to that which was submitted in support of and at the time  of
    making of the application leading to the decision  under  appeal.   The
    exceptions provided for in Section 85A were not relevant to the appeal.



 5. The appeals were determined on the basis of  submissions  without  oral
    evidence as had been agreed between the parties: see paragraph 8 of the
    determination.

 6. Paragraph 12 noted the wife's bank statement contained a  shortfall  of
    funds but if taken with funds held by the  husband  over  the  relevant
    period she would have had sufficient funds to meet the requirements  of
    Appendix C.  He made a finding that the husband's  bank  statement  had
    not been submitted with  the  application  for  the  reasons  given  at
    paragraphs 13 and 14 of the determination.  Consequently he found  that
    Rule 245AA of the IRs (evidential flexibility) was of no avail  to  the
    Appellants.

 7. He went on to consider any  claim  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention and dismissed the appeals.

 8. On 22 October 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Brunnen  granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that it was an arguable error of  law
    that the Judge had found the wife to be truthful and then, contrary  to
    this finding, concluded she was mistaken in claiming she had  submitted
    her husband's bank statement with her application or that her husband's
    application had included his bank statement.  He  also  considered  the
    conclusion that the Respondent had properly applied paragraph 245AA  of
    the IRs to be an arguable error.  He thought the claim that  the  Judge
    had mis-apprehended the evidence to be the strongest  ground  but  gave
    permission for all grounds to be argued.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. The wife attended the hearing.  I was informed the husband was  in  the
    building and I gave Mr Makol an opportunity to find out if the  husband
    wished to be  present  at  the  hearing.   In  the  event  the  hearing
    proceeded without the husband.

10. Mr Makol took me to the husband's application which had made  reference
    to bank statements in that the relevant box at N23 on page  35  of  his
    application form had been ticked.  Although I noted that List B on page
    40, being a list of  the  items  submitted  with  the  application  not
    comprised in List A on the same page had been left completely blank  in
    contrast to the wife's application which had referred to a single  bank
    statement being submitted.

11. Mr Makol pointed out that sufficient funds had  been  transferred  from
    the husband's account to his wife's account on 20 August to make up the
    deficiency in funds in her account.  The husband and wife  had  between
    them sufficient money to meet the requirements of Appendix  C  for  the
    requisite period of time.  This was the main ground  for  finding  that
    there was an error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.
    He accepted that the ground of appeal based on  evidential  flexibility
    was weak.

12. For the Respondent Mr Kandola pointed out that the  issue  whether  the
    husband's bank statement was before the Respondent at the time  of  the
    applications and so was admissible evidence had addressed at paragraphs
    12 and 13 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.   The  Judge  had
    been right to find that the  husband's  bank  statement  had  not  been
    submitted with the application of either Appellant.

13. Mr Makol in response referred to the husband having ticked the relevant
    box at N23 on page  35  of  the  application  and  submitted  this  was
    sufficient.  In any  event  looking  at  the  two  bank  statements  in
    aggregate the wife had shown she had  held  sufficient  funds  for  the
    duration of the requisite period.  He referred me to Appendix E of  the
    IRs.

14. I considered Appendix E of the IRs.  I drew Mr Makol's attention to the
    fact it specifies requirements to be met by  "the  family  of  Relevant
    Points-Based Systems Migrants."  Paragraph 3(c) of Appendix E  provided
    that:-

         Where the applicant is applying as the Partner of a Relevant Points-
         Based System Migrant the relevant amount of funds must be available
         to  either  the  applicant  or  the  Relevant  Points-Based  System
         Migrant.

    Appendix E related only to the application of the husband as the wife's
    dependant but did not relate to the wife's application  since  in  this
    case she was the Relevant Points-Based System Migrant and had  to  meet
    the requirements of Appendix C.  Paragraph 1A(k) of Appendix C provided
    that:-

         If the applicant wishes to rely on a joint account as  evidence  of
         available funds, the applicant .... must be named on the account as
         one of the account holders.

    The bank accounts on which the Appellants rely are separate accounts in
    each of their individual names.  Since the wife is not named as a joint
    account holder with her husband even if the  husband's  bank  statement
    had  been  submitted  it  would  not  have  enabled  her  to  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix C.

15. Further, paragraph 1(B)(3)(iii)(1) of Appendix  C  sets  out  what  the
    wife's bank statement needed to show.  It had to show either  the  name
    of the Appellant wife or the names of her parents or the  name  of  the
    Relevant Points-Based System Migrant if the applicant is applying as  a
    partner of a Relevant Points-Based System Migrant.  Again separate bank
    accounts in the individual names of each of the  Appellants  would  not
    meet these requirements for the wife's application.

16. I adjourned the hearing into chambers for a general discussion  between
    the parties and myself, given that I  had  indicated  my  view  of  the
    issues raised by the appeal.

17. On resuming the hearing I announced that I was minded to find there was
    no error of law for the reasons which I outlined and which are set  out
    below.

Findings

18. There is an apparent  inconsistency  between  the  Judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 10 of his determination that the Appellant was a  witness  of
    truth and at paragraph 13 that her claim her husband's  bank  statement
    was submitted with the application form was incorrect.  He attempted to
    address this in the last sentence of paragraph 13 of his determination.
    However, it is questionable whether this  was  sufficient,  bearing  in
    mind that the First-tier Tribunal determination  turned  very  much  on
    whether the husband's bank  statement  had  been  submitted  or  should
    properly have been called for by the Respondent pursuant  to  paragraph
    245AA of the IRs.  If this was an error of law, it would be open to the
    Upper Tribunal to consider any other error of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination, even if it had not been specifically referred
    to in the application for permission to appeal which I now  proceed  to
    do.

19. The wife's application was bound to fail because under  the  provisions
    of Appendix C she was not able to claim that the funds available to her
    should be assessed on the aggregation of her and her husband's separate
    bank accounts.  As a dependant, he could rely on her  bank  account  or
    the aggregation of her account and his account but she could  not  rely
    on his funds by reason of the  way  the  IRs  are  drafted.   The  late
    transfer of funds from her husband  to  herself  could  not  avail  her
    because it would not remedy the deficit on her account for  the  period
    before those funds were transferred.  She  needed  to  show  a  minimum
    balance for the 28 day period ending 14 September 2012. The Judge dealt
    fully with this at paragraph 12 of his determination.

20. Had the husband transferred the funds to the wife before the  start  of
    the relevant period covered by the wife's bank statements this  problem
    would not have arisen.  In light of this and the Judge's finding as  to
    the wife's general honesty, the Respondent may wish to  look  again  at
    the Appellants' position.  It should be noted the Judge  did  not  find
    the wife to have deliberately misrepresented the position: see the last
    sentence of paragraph 13  of  his  determination.  The  Judge  did  not
    consider the points in this and the preceding paragraph. They show that
    the appeals under the IRs were doomed to fail.

21. There was no challenge to the Judge's  treatment  of  any  claim  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention.

22. My conclusion is that any error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination is not material such that it should be set aside  because
    for the reasons given the appeal of each Appellant would  be  bound  to
    fail before any differently constituted Tribunal.  It follows that  the
    determination should stand and not be set aside.

Anonymity

23. There was no request for any anonymity order or  direction  and  having
    heard the appeal find that none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law such that it should be  set  aside  in  whole  or  in  part  and
    therefore it shall stand.

     No anonymity order or direction is made.


Signed/Official                                                        Crest
         Date 04. xii. 2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








