
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04994/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th March 2016                             |On 8th April 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                            mr Sandeeprao chimea
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Aihe, instructed by Wisestep Immigration
Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen  of  Mauritius,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  16th
    January 2015 to refuse his application  for  leave  to  remain  as  the
    spouse of someone present and settled in the  United  Kingdom.   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
    and the Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  United
    Kingdom as a student on 5th September 2007 and was  thereafter  granted
    an extension of leave to remain as a Tier  4  Student  until  7th  June
    2014.  His application for leave to remain as a spouse was  refused  on
    22 November 2013 and he made a further application on 6th June 2014  on
    the basis of his marriage to a British citizen.

 3.  In  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  Respondent  refused   the
    application  under  Appendix  FM  S-LTR1.6  which  is  the  suitability
    requirements which states that the presence of  the  applicant  in  the
    United Kingdom is not  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  their
    conduct (including convictions which do not fall within  paragraphs  S-
    LTR1.3-1.5),  character,  associations  or  other   reasons   make   it
    undesirable to allow  them  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Secretary of State stated that the Appellant failed to declare that  he
    had a conviction on 29th May 2014 at  East  London  Magistrates'  Court
    when he was charged on 4th May 2014 with battery contrary to Section 39
    of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 and  that  he  had  a  conviction  for
    battery on 9th May 2014.  The Secretary of  State  concluded  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements of S-LTR1.6.   The  Secretary  of  State
    also went on to consider whether exception EX.1 of Appendix FM  applied
    and concluded that, although relocating together to Mauritius may cause
    a degree of hardship for the Appellant's British partner, the Secretary
    of State was not satisfied that there are insurmountable  obstacles  in
    accordance  with  EX.1.2  preventing   them   from   continuing   their
    relationship in Mauritius and concluded that the  Appellant  failed  to
    fulfil EX.1.1(b) of Appendix FM of the Rules.

 4. In  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  Secretary  of  State  also
    considered  the  Appellant's  private  life  and  concluded  that   the
    Appellant had not shown that there would be very significant  obstacles
    to his integration into Mauritius if he  were  required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom because he spent twenty years in  Mauritius,  spent  all
    his formative years in that country and he provided no evidence to show
    any problems with re-integrating in Mauritius to return to  his  family
    there and therefore concluded that the Appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(i)(vi) of the Rules.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that  the  Appellant  attended  the
    hearing but was not called to  give  evidence  and  he  said  that  his
    partner would not be attending the hearing.  The judge noted  that  the
    Appellant's representative, Mr Aihe,  explained  that  the  Appellant's
    partner did not attend the hearing because in his view the issue before
    the Tribunal was very narrow which  was  in  relation  to  the  alleged
    failure to declare his  conviction  for  assault.   Mr  Aihe  contended
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was wrong because the  Appellant  had  actually  declared  his
    conviction. The judge considered the suitability  of  requirements  and
    concluded that it was clear that the Respondent could find an applicant
    unsuitable if his conduct which includes having any conviction makes it
    undesirable for him to remain in the UK.  The judge noted that  at  the
    date of the decision the Appellant had a  conviction  for  battery  and
    that this  was  used  by  the  Respondent  in  her  decision  that  the
    Appellant's behaviour calls into question his character and/or  conduct
    and the judge concluded that the Respondent's  refusal  on  grounds  of
    suitability is in accordance with the law.

 6. The judge went on to consider paragraph 276ADE and concluded  that  the
    Appellant had provided no additional evidence to show that he will  not
    be able to integrate if he returns to his country.  The judge  went  on
    to consider Article 8 in accordance with the five step approach set out
    in the case of R v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   The  judge
    noted that the Appellant claims to be in a subsisting relationship with
    his partner but she did not attend  the  appeal  hearing  to  show  her
    support for his application nor did she provide a statement.  The judge
    bore in mind that the Appellant was convicted of  battery  against  his
    partner and had been living with his aunt at least up to  the  date  of
    his conviction in June 2014 and concluded that, without the Appellant's
    partner's evidence to confirm that  they  are  still  in  a  subsisting
    relationship or any other evidence to show  that  the  relationship  is
    still subsisting, he was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner are cohabiting with each other or that they are in a subsisting
    relationship. The judge therefore concluded that she was not  satisfied
    that the Appellant has a family life in the  UK.   The  judge  accepted
    that the Appellant  has  a  private  life  but  concluded  that  it  is
    proportionate to return  the  Appellant  to  Mauritius  in  the  public
    interest.

 7. The Appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  contend  that,
    although the Home Office refused the application on the basis that  the
    Appellant did not declare his convictions, he  could  not  declare  the
    convictions at the date of the application because he did not have  the
    relevant information and that that information was  provided  following
    his application.  It is submitted that  the  decision  maker  may  have
    considered whether  or  not  the  gravity  of  the  conviction  of  the
    Appellant or its sentence and duration was serious  enough  to  justify
    refusal  of  leave  in  relation  with  the  Immigration  Directorate's
    instructions.  It is contended  that  no  emphasis  is  placed  on  the
    evidence that the Appellant received a  community  order  and  was  not
    imprisoned.   It  is  contended  that  the   Appellant   informed   the
    Immigration Judge that his wife had formed the view that the  issue  at
    stake was narrow and she could not attend the hearing on  the  day  and
    the Home Office did not challenge the subsistence  of  the  Appellant's
    marriage  and  that  therefore  the  judge  erred  in   reaching   this
    conclusion.

Error of Law

 8. Appearing before me Mr Aihe submitted that there is an error of law  in
    relation to the disclosure of the conviction.  I clarified the timeline
    with the parties and it appears that the  Appellant  was  charged  with
    battery on 4th May 2014, he was convicted  on  9th  May  2014  and  was
    sentenced on 29th May 2014.  I note that  the  Appellant's  application
    form was signed and dated by him on 27th  May  2014.   However  I  also
    further note that the consent by the third party was signed on 3rd June
    2014 (Section 13) and I note that the reasons for refusal letter states
    that the application was submitted on 6th June 2014.

 9. Mr Aihe submitted that the alleged failure to disclose  the  conviction
    goes to the suitability requirements and the  Respondent's  conclusions
    in relation to those requirements in the reasons for refusal letter and
    he submitted that the judge could have applied his discretion in  light
    of the circumstances of the conviction.  He submitted  that  the  judge
    could have sent the decision back to the Secretary of State  to  review
    in light of the facts that the Appellant had in fact disclosed.

10. Mr Nath submitted that the judge adequately dealt with the issue of the
    conviction at paragraphs 15 and 16 of the decision and  did  go  on  to
    consider the issue of the suitability requirements under the  five  and
    ten year route.  He submitted that this was  a  discretion  before  the
    Secretary of State and it is clear that the  discretion  was  exercised
    properly.  He submitted that the reasons for refusal letter dealt  with
    both the  issue  as  to  the  disclosure  of  the  conviction  and  the
    conviction itself in concluding that the Appellant could not  meet  the
    suitability requirements and that the Secretary of State had dealt with
    this matter sufficiently.

11. I am satisfied that the judge made no error in relation to this matter.
     It is clear from the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  it  is  the
    conviction itself that the Secretary of State considered in relation to
    the suitability requirements and this is also clear  from  the  judge's
    decision in relation to this issue.  I find that it  was  open  to  the
    judge to find that the Respondent's refusal on grounds  of  suitability
    is in accordance with the law.  It is not clear why the  judge  phrased
    her consideration of  this  part  of  her  decision  in  terms  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision  being  'in  accordance  with  the  law'.
    However in my view this is a matter of semantics in this  case  because
    the judge clearly found that it was reasonable  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant's  conviction  calls  into  question  his  character.   I  am
    satisfied that it was open to the judge to consider the matter in  this
    way.

12. I have considered whether it was the failure to disclose the conviction
    or sentence or it was the conviction itself that led to the decision on
    suitability.  I am satisfied because of the timeline above that at  the
    time the Appellant signed the application form  he  had  not  yet  been
    sentenced but had been convicted.  It is clear that  the  Secretary  of
    State did understand that this related to one and the  same  conviction
    for battery and that it was open to the Secretary of State to  conclude
    that the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  in
    relation to this matter and that it was open to the judge  to  conclude
    as she did.

13. In relation to the Article 8 issue  Mr  Aihe  has  submitted  that  the
    judge's assessment was not correct because  the  judge  went  into  the
    issue of the relationship which was not raised in the  refusal  letter.
    However,  the  refusal  letter  dealt  with  the  matter   within   the
    Immigration Rules.  It is clear from the consideration of EX.1 that the
    Secretary  of  State  considered  issues  around  whether  there   were
    insurmountable obstacles  preventing  the  Appellant  and  his  partner
    continuing the relationship in Mauritius.   That  issue  was  therefore
    live before the Immigration Judge.  Further, the Secretary of State had
    reached a conclusion in  relation  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  as  to
    whether there  were  'very  significant  obstacles'  to  the  Appellant
    returning to Mauritius.  This also was a live issue before  the  judge.
    Further, the judge went on as he was obliged to  do,  to  consider  the
    appeal in relation to freestanding Article 8 and therefore  all  issues
    were open before the judge.

14. I find that it was open to the judge to  conclude  that  there  was  no
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant and his partner based  on
    the evidence or lack of evidence before the judge at the  date  of  the
    hearing.  The judge was obliged to make findings  in  relation  to  the
    evidence before her and did so.  So in considering Article 8 the  judge
    was entitled and indeed obliged to make a finding as to  whether  there
    was sufficient evidence to establish family life and the judge  did  so
    based on the evidence before her.

15. I conclude that the judge  made  no  material  error  of  law  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge did  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 21 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 21 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
