
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04054/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                               DORCUS MAKWAIRA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Lloyd, Counsel, instructed by A2, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Immigration History

 1. The Appellant in this appeal was in fact the Respondent in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing. However, for ease of reference the Appellant and
    Respondent are hereafter referred to as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  Ms Mukwaira will therefore be referred to as  the  Appellant
    and the Secretary of State will be referred to as the Respondent.


 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Zimbabwe, whose date of  birth  is
    18 November 1967.

 3. As to the background to the case, the Appellant entered the  UK  on  17
    November 1999. Her leave expired on 7 May 2000. She remained in the  UK
    and was granted a residence permit as the  family  member  of  a  Dutch
    national on 21 June 2001. This was revoked on 14 April 2004 because the
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that her  Sponsor  was  exercising
    Treaty rights. She had further leave to remain outside the  Rules  from
    19 November 2010 to because she was  undergoing  treatment  for  breast
    cancer and on 17 December 2011 she made an  application  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on the basis of her private and family life in
    the UK. . This was refused on 23 November 2012. The Appellant  appealed
    against the refusal  to  vary  leave  (the  substantive  decision)  and
    against the decision to remove under s 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006 (2006 Act). Her appeal was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew on 26  February  2013;  the  appeal  against  the
    substantive decision was dismissed.  The  appeal  against  the  removal
    decision was  allowed  to  the  limited  extent  that  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because it was issued at the same time  as  the
    substantive decision when, at that time, the Secretary of State did not
    have authority to issue both  a  substantive  decision  and  a  removal
    decision at the same time.

 4.  In  re-remaking  the  decision  to  remove,  the  Secretary  of  State
    reconsidered the Appellant's  "case"  as  stated  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter dated 24 December 2013 (the RL).  It  appears  from  the
    Notice of Decision, issued on 30 December 2013, (the Notice)  that  two
    decisions were issued; a refusal to vary leave to remain and a decision
    to remove the Appellant under s  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 (2006 Act), the reasons for  which  are  contained
    within the RL. The  Appellant's  appeal  against  those  decisions  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge D Ross, the reasons for which  are
    contained within his  determination  promulgated  on  15  August  2014.
    Unless other wise stated, references to paragraphs  are  references  to
    paragraphs within his determination. All references to  paragraph  276B
    of the Immigration Rules are references to this provision before it was
    removed from the Immigration Rules on 9 July 2012.


 5. Judge Ross stated that it had not been challenged  that  the  Appellant
    had been in the UK since 17 November 1999. She had  therefore  been  in
    the UK for a period of 14 years and 8 months. He therefore allowed  her
    appeal under paragraph 276B, finding that Edgehill & Anor  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 402 applied and therefore the Appellant's claim fell to be assessed
    under the Immigration Rules in force prior to 9  July  2012   (the  Old
    Rules).

 6. In the grounds of application, it is asserted that:

        a. The Judge materially misdirected himself in law  and/allowed  or
           permitted a procedural irregularity to occur which deprived  the
           Respondent of a fair hearing because:

              i. The Appellant did not raise either in the grounds of appeal
                 or in response to a s 120 notice any issue under  paragraph
                 276B of the Immigration Rules and this  issue  was  not  in
                 fact raised until the Appellant's representative  made  her
                 closing submissions;

             ii. The Judge did not give any reasons for allowing the grounds
                 to be amended; the presenting officer in his  hearing  note
                 (which was set out in the grounds) objected  to  the  issue
                 being raised at such a late stage as  this  issue  had  not
                 been raised before, either during  the  appeal  or  in  the
                 appeal before Judge Andrew. The Judge did not mention  this
                 objection nor did he give reasons for allowing the  grounds
                 to be amended.

            iii. The facts  of  Edgehill  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  are
                 different; the facts in Edgehill were focused on a pre-rule
                 change decision. The application of December 2011 had  been
                 refused and dismissed on appeal.  In the current case,  the
                 Respondent  was  considering  the  matter  when  issuing  a
                 removal decision and the relevant rules to be applied  were
                 therefore those in force on 24 December 2013.

             iv. The  Court  of  appeal  in  Edgehill  was  looking  at  the
                 transitional provisions for the changes in the  Immigration
                 Rules.  However,  the  Respondent   was   considering   the
                 application of 2011 and the following refusal letter of  23
                 November 2012. There was  therefore  no  provision  of  the
                 Immigration Rules which was preserved by  the  transitional
                 provisions on which the Appellant could rely.  The  removal
                 decision  and  the  reasons   for   refusal   letter   were
                 maintaining the decision of 23 November  2012  and  at  the
                 appeal before Judge Ross paragraph 276B was  no  longer  in
                 the Immigration Rules  and  the  application  made  by  the
                 Appellant for leave to remain  had  already  been  refused,
                 appealed and the  appeal  dismissed.  The  Judge  therefore
                 materially erred in law in  considering  the  appeal  under
                 paragraph 276B (as was) of the Immigration Rules.

        b. The Judge erred in failing to make findings on material  matters
           because, having found that the Appellant had been in the UK  for
           14 years, he allowed the appeal without any consideration of the
           'public interest' criteria found within paragraph 276B, which he
           was obliged to consider pursuant to MU ('statement of additional
           grounds'; long residence;  discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]  UKUT
           442(IAC).  The  facts  that  would  have  been   relevant   were
           overstaying after expiry of her visit visa, that  her  residence
           card leave was curtailed  in  2004,  that  she  did  not  appeal
           against that decision and that Judge Andrew found that  she  had
           no claim on the basis of Article 8. The failure to consider this
           aspect of the appeal amounts to a material error of law.

 7. Permission was granted on the basis that (i) there  was  a  paucity  of
    reasoning to show how the Judge was satisfied that the Appellant had at
    least fourteen years continuous residence in the UK  and  (ii)  it  was
    arguable that the Judge had 'ignored the history of the case' and  gone
    on to apply the wrong Immigration Rules and the wrong tests in allowing
    the appeal.

 8. In  submissions,  Mr  Tarlow  essentially  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    application.
 9. As to whether or not the Appellant had  raised  reliance  on  paragraph
    276B before the First-tier Tribunal, Ms Lloyd  submitted  that  in  the
    grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, at  paragraph  3,  it
    was stated  that  the  Respondent  did  not  consider  the  Appellant's
    application properly and only considered it retrospectively in light of
    the Article 8 claims made after 9 July 2012. She  submitted  that  this
    was obviously a reference to the Immigration Rules and there can be  no
    doubt that that ground related to the changes to the Immigration Rules,
    that is, that it is clear that the ground related to a consideration of
    the application under the new Rules when the  old  Rules  applied.  The
    grounds pleaded  were  therefore  wide  enough  to  cover  reliance  on
    paragraph 276B. The Respondent was fully aware of the possibility  that
    the old Rules applied due to Edgehill, which had  been  decided  before
    the hearing in July 2014. If it applies to the Appellant's case, it  is
    not open to the First-tier Tribunal to decide the application under the
    new Rules because the old Rules should be applied.

10. She further submitted that  in  any  event:  (i)  she  had  provided  a
    skeleton argument at the hearing and although she  could  not  say  for
    definite  that  she  had  handed  up  her  skeleton  argument  at   the
    commencement of the hearing, it was her practice to do so and paragraph
    276B was referred to within it and therefore the Respondent  was  aware
    of it and the Judge had jurisdiction to deal with it; (ii) even if  the
    issue had only been raised in submissions, the presenting officer could
    have asked to make submissions on any additional points that  had  been
    raised and therefore the submissions raised on behalf of the Respondent
    on this point should be rejected.

11. As to which Immigration Rules (the old or the  new)  should  apply,  Ms
    Lloyd submitted that the reasons for refusal letter of 24 December 2013
    clearly stated that the Appellant's application was made on 17 December
    2011 and that it was that application that was being  reconsidered  and
    therefore the old Rules applied. She submitted that the  Appellant  had
    been granted leave to remain for treatment for breast  cancer  and  the
    substance of the decision of 24 December 2013 was  a  refusal  to  vary
    leave as stated in the Notice which accompanied the reasons for refusal
    letter. This could only happen if she had continuing  leave  since  her
    application of December 2011. When asked if she was suggesting that the
    decision of Judge Andrew, who determined  the  Appellant's  substantive
    application for leave to remain, did not have the effect of ending  any
    continuing leave under s 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 (the  1971  Act)
    she stated that there was no need to  decide  this  point  because  the
    Respondent stated in the RL that the application that was being decided
    was the application of 17 December 2011  and  it  is  that  application
    which has been refused.

12. I raised with Ms Lloyd the effect of paragraph A277C of the Immigration
    Rules, which came into force on 6 September 2012, and to which  changes
    were made subsequently, which gives the Respondent discretion to  apply
    the new Rules even if the old  Rules  apply.  I  gave  her  a  copy  of
    paragraph A277C. She submitted that it did not preclude the  Respondent
    from applying paragraph 276B. Ms Lloyd referred to the changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules from 28 July 2014, which applied regardless  of  when
    the application was made; but stated that  the  decision  had  actually
    been made before these came into effect.

13. As to the need to consider the countervailing factors  under  paragraph
    276B, Ms Lloyd submitted that even if the Appellant had been in the  UK
    unlawfully, the whole purpose of paragraph 276B was that those who  had
    been here unlawfully could succeed if they  could  establish  14  years
    continuous residence. She further  submitted  that  evidence  had  been
    given by witnesses, which was set out at [4 - 7], and there had been no
    cross-examination by the presenting officer. The Judge could  therefore
    accept the evidence of the witnesses and there was nothing  within  the
    evidence that could amount to countervailing factors which needed to be
    taken into account. He had specifically stated that  "...having  regard
    to the public interest there are no grounds why  it  would  undesirable
    for her to be given indefinite leave to remain on the grounds  of  long
    residence taking account of her age, strength of her connections in the
    UK,   her   personal   history,   domestic   circumstances,   and   any
    representations received..."

14. On conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my decision.  Ms  Lloyd  asked
    if she may send in written representations on paragraph  A277C  by  the
    end of the day, with Mr Tarlow to respond within 7 days  thereafter.  I
    agreed to consider any written submissions limited to  the  application
    of paragraph A277C which were sent to me within the agreed time scale.

Analysis and reasons

15. As to which Rules should apply, pre or post 9  July  2012,  Ms  Lloyd's
    submissions focussed on the  wording  of  the  RL  and  the  Notice  of
    Decision for support of her assertion that what was under consideration
    was the application made by the Appellant in  December  2011.  What  is
    stated within the RL at paragraph 1 is:

         "On 17 December 2011 you applied for further leave  to  remain  in
             the United Kingdom. Your application was  refused  on  the  23
             November 2012. Your case has been reconsidered."


16. This lends substance to the submission of the Respondent that what  was
    in fact reconsidered was the decision of 23 November 2012, and not  the
    application. This application was refused and the substantive  decision
    dismissed by Judge Andrew on 23 February  2013.  There  was  no  onward
    appeal against the decision of Judge Andrew. The Appellant's continuing
    leave under s 3 therefore ended when the proceedings were concluded.  I
    disagree with Ms Lloyd's assessment that there was no need to  consider
    the impact of the decision of 23 November  2012  and  the  decision  of
    Judge Andrew in assessing whether the Appellant had  continuing  leave.
    Section 3C (2) specifically provides that :

        "The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any period
        when-

             (a) the application for variation is neither decided nor
           withdrawn,

             (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Asylum
             and Immigration Act 2002 could be brought, while the appellant
             is in the United Kingdom against the decision on the
             application for variation (ignoring any possibility of an
             appeal out of time with permission), or

             (c) an appeal under that section against that decision,
             brought while the appellant is in the United Kingdom, is
             pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act)."

17. Continuing leave ends after dismissal of an appeal and where leave  has
    ended, an Appellant can only have extant leave if a grant of  leave  is
    made. There was no grant of leave between Judge Andrew's decision being
    issued and reconsideration of the Appellant's case on 24 December 2013.
    Where there is no extant leave, a decision cannot  be  described  as  a
    'refusal to vary leave'. The Respondent's erroneous  heading  "Decision
    to refuse to vary leave to enter or remain" within the Notice can  only
    be understood by a consideration of the text beneath it, in which it is
    stated

         "You applied on 17 December 2011 for variation  of  your  leave  to
         enter or remain. That application has been  refused.  Full  details
         for this decision are provided in the attached letter,"

     the latter being a reference to the RL.

18. It is then clearly stated in the RL that  the  Appellant's  application
    was refused on 23 November 2013. Ms Lloyd was mistaken in thinking that
    the Respondent had treated the Appellant's leave as continuing under  s
    3 of the 1971 Act when making the decision of 23 December 2013  because
    the Respondent could not change the provisions of s 3 of the  1971  Act
    which automatically brings to an end any continuing leave. Furthermore,
    the terms of the Notice of Decision, read with the RL, and against  the
    continuing leave provisions of s 3C do not support a finding that  what
    was in consideration when the decision of 24 December 2013  was  issued
    was the Appellant's application of 17 December 2011.

19.  It is clear that what the Respondent has in fact  done  is  deal  with
    that aspect of the appeal before Judge Andrew which was found not to be
    in accordance with the law, that is, the decision to remove. This issue
    was dealt with in the RL pursuant to the  provisions  applying  at  the
    date of decision, that is the Immigration Rules post 9 July 2012.

20. I find that in stating that Edgehill applied, the Judge  did  not  have
    regard to the history of the Appellant's application and relied  on  an
    Immigration Rule, namely paragraph 276B, which  was  removed  from  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to applications made after 9  July  2012.
    This being the case, there is no need  to  consider  whether  paragraph
    A277C of the Immigration Rules had a material bearing on  the  decision
    or to consider the additional submissions made  by  Ms  Lloyd  on  this
    point. There is also no  need  for  me  to  decide  whether  the  Judge
    considered the countervailing factors  set out in paragraph 276B of the
    Immigration Rules, although I would note that at  [11]  the  Judge  was
    simply setting out the provisions which would need to be met before  an
    appeal could be allowed under paragraph 276B and he  did  not  in  fact
    consider any countervailing factors at [12]  and  therefore  inadequate
    reasons were given for allowing the appeal under 276B, even if it  were
    available to the Appellant.

21. There is also no need for me to  consider  whether  or  not  the  Judge
    permitted a procedural irregularity to occur in considering a ground of
    appeal raised in submissions. For completeness, on this point I find as
    follows:

        a. With regard to the submission that the new Rules applied to  the
           facts of the Appellant's case, I find  that  HC  194  made  many
           changes to the Immigration Rules in July 2012 and the grounds of
           appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  sufficiently
           particularise the old Rules on which  the  Appellant  sought  to
           rely in challenging the decision of the Respondent. If Rule 276B
           was to  be  relied  on,  it  should  have  been  particularised.
           Moreover, whilst the skeleton argument provided by Ms  Lloyd  at
           the hearing may well have been provided to  the  Respondent  and
           the Judge  at  the  beginning  of  the  hearing,  there  was  no
           application to amend the grounds of appeal;  no  mention  of  an
           application  to  amend  the  grounds   is   confirmed   in   the
           determination. If an application to amend the grounds of  appeal
           before the Judge had been made at the beginning of the  hearing,
           this would have put all parties on notice of the  issues  to  be
           addressed,  including  the  need  to  consider   the   date   of
           application in the context of the history of the proceedings.

        b. Did this result in a procedural irregularity and  unfairness  to
           the Respondent? Ms Lloyd submitted that the  presenting  officer
           could have asked to make submissions on  the  points  raised  by
           her. However, the presenting officer did object to  the  raising
           of paragraph 276B of the old Rules in submissions. There  is  no
           indication within the determination that the Judge indicated  at
           the hearing that he was minded to consider  the  application  of
           paragraph 276B and whilst the Judge went on to  deal  with  this
           ground  in  his  determination,  there  is  no  record  of   the
           presenting  officer  being  afforded  an  opportunity  to   make
           submissions  on  the  point  and  no  explanation   within   the
           determination of why the Judge decided to consider the appeal on
           the basis of paragraph 276B. I find that the Judge did  allow  a
           procedural irregularity to occur which deprived  the  Respondent
           of a fair hearing.

Decision


22. I find that the decision of Judge Ross is fundamentally flawed for  the
    reasons set out above. I set aside his decision. None of  his  findings
    of fact shall stand. As findings of fact will need to be  made  on  all
    the issues raised in the RL; and because pursuant to paragraph  7(2)(a)
    of the Practice Statements the Respondent  has  been  deprived  of  the
    opportunity of putting her case, this matter is to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (not before Judge Ross) for a full hearing  of  all
    the issues. Any additional evidence to be relied on must  be  submitted
    at least 7 working days before the substantive hearing.

23. It appears that at  no  stage  in  the  proceedings  has  an  anonymity
    direction been made. No request has been made for  an  anonymity  order
    and pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, I find no reason to make a direction as to anonymity.



Signed                                  Date 3 November 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have considered whether to make a fee award. I have had regard to the
Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in Immigration Appeals
(December 2011). As the Respondent's appeal has been allowed, the decision
of Judge Ross as to the fee award shall is also set aside. The award will
be made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge who determines the appeal in the.



Signed                     Dated 3 November 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge






