
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
IA/04042/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 1st  April  2016                                                   On
19th April 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                 MISS XI LI
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr Hart (Solicitor)
For the Secretary of  State:  Ms  Everett  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge N.M.K. Lawrence promulgated on the  1st  September
      2015, in which he allowed the Claimant's appeal under the  Immigration
      Rules against the Secretary of State's original decision to refuse  to
      permit her further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

   2. The Secretary of State has sought to appeal against  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence, and within the Grounds  of  Appeal
      it is argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons for findings on the material matter.   It  is  argued
      that  the  Judge  failed  to  adequately   explain   how   his   final
      determination was arrived at; that it was unclear what a CAS Statement
      is and how that obviated the need for the Claimant to submit  a  valid
      CAS with her application.  It is argued that in  allowing  the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules the Judge erred in law and that that was a
      material error, such that the decision should be set aside.

   3. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Brunnen on the 31st January 2016,  in  which  he  found  that  in  his
      findings First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence had stated  that  the  LSC
      had issued the CAS based upon a language test taken at ETS,  but  that
      the Claimant had produced a CAS Statement  dated  the  12th  September
      2014, in which it was said that she was exempt from the language  test
      requirement.

   4.  Judge Brunnen noted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence had found
      that the Secretary of State's decision concerning the lack  of  a  CAS
      was wrong in law.  However, Judge Brunnen stated that it was  arguable
      that First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence had given  inadequate  reasons
      for this finding and that it was arguable that what  the  Judge  noted
      concerning language testing  had  no  impact  on  the  fact  that  the
      Claimant's CAS had been withdrawn by the  LSC.   Judge  Brunnen  found
      that the fact  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  CAS  was  not  apparently
      challenged by the Claimant and that the Judge made no finding that  it
      had not been withdrawn.  He found that the lack of a current CAS as at
      the date of decision was arguably determinative of the appeal  against
      the Claimant.

   5. For the purposes of the Upper Tribunal appeal  hearing,  Mr  Hart  had
      produced a detailed Rule 24  response,  together  with  extracts  from
      Macdonald's Immigration Law and  Practice,  together  with  a  further
      bundle of documents.

   6. Within the Rule 24 response, there is initially a detailed  historical
      background summary to the case,  which  I  have  considered  in  full,
      before submissions were made in respect of the question as to  whether
      or not there was a material error of law in the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge N.M.K. Lawrence.  It  is  argued  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was aware of the fact that the LSC  had  withdrawn  the
      CAS.  It was also submitted that it was perfectly clear what the First-
      tier Tribunal  Judge  was  referring  to  in  referring  to  the  "CAS
      Statement, which was dated the 12th  September  2014"  and  which  was
      contained within the bundle and  that  this  was  something  that  the
      Secretary of State should have been aware about, notwithstanding their
      non-attendance at the appeal hearing on the 31st  July  2015.   It  is
      argued that the argument as to whether or not the lack of a CAS as  at
      the date of decision was arguably determinative of the appeal was  not
      an argument raised by the Secretary of State in her Grounds of Appeal,
      but it is submitted that in any event this is incorrect in law.  It is
      argued that it is part of the legitimate function of the  Tribunal  to
      correct administrative mistakes on the part of the Secretary of  State
      and sometimes on the part of sponsors.  It was argued that  the  Judge
      had before him material demonstrating that the Claimant at the time of
      the appeal had been reinstated by her  sponsor  who  had  acknowledged
      their mistake in withdrawing the CAS, although it is  recognised  that
      this was not expressly acknowledged within the determination.   It  is
      argued that there was a valid CAS dated the 16th  June  2015.   It  is
      argued that there is not a material error of law.

   7. In his oral submissions to the Upper Tribunal,  Mr  Hart  acknowledged
      that in respect of the documents contained within the new bundle, only
      the documents between pages 31 and 35 were  definitely  before  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence.  He sought to argue that  the  documents
      between pages 3 and  30  inclusive  would  have  been  available  upon
      request by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence at the  hearing  on  the
      31st July, but were not formally served, but Mr Hart was unclear as to
      whether or not any of those documents were actually submitted  by  him
      up to the Tribunal Judge on the date of the hearing.  He was therefore
      not in a position to say that any of those documents had actually been
      referred specifically to the Judge at the appeal hearing.  He conceded
      that if these documents were not submitted up to the  Judge  and  were
      not part of the bundle, then the Judge cannot be criticised for having
      failed to take account of them.

   8.  He further conceded that the documents at pages 1 and 2  of  the  new
      bundle, being a letter from  the  Claimant's  sponsor  dated  the  4th
      November 2015 and the actual CAS Statement dated the  16th  June  2015
      (which he argued was  the  CAS  that  showed  that  the  Claimant  did
      actually have a valid CAS as at the date of the appeal  hearing)  were
      not actually before the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the date  of  the
      hearing on the 31st July 2015, as he had not obtained  the  valid  CAS
      certificate as at that date.

   9. I then sought clarification from Ms Everett as to the position of  the
      Secretary of State, given that it was the Secretary of State's appeal.
       Ms Everett on behalf of the Secretary of State told  me  specifically
      that although the Secretary of State had initially taken the view that
      the Claimant had taken an English Language Test that had been shown to
      be "invalid", as far as she had been able to ascertain, that test  had
      never actually been used by the Claimant to apply  for  any  leave  or
      further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  However,  it  was  the
      Secretary of State's case that as  the  CAS  from  the  LSC  had  been
      withdrawn, that was the basis of the original decision, it  could  not
      properly have been found by First-tier Tribunal Judge N.M.K.  Lawrence
      that the Immigration Rules were complied with, as there was  no  valid
      CAS on the basis of the evidence before him.

  10. Mr Hart on behalf of the Claimant sought to argue that the  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  account  of  the  procedural
      unfairness on the part  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  making  the
      decision in circumstances where the Claimant had never sought to  rely
      upon an English Language Test which was said to have formed the reason
      why for her CAS being withdrawn and that she would have been  entitled
      to allow the appeal on Human Rights grounds.  He argued that the Judge
      was entitled to find that the decision was "not in accordance with the
      law" and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled  to  consider
      any public law arguments in respect of delay,  procedural  unfairness,
      and also to consider Human Rights.

  11. However, he agreed that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  had  not
      stated within his decision that he had reached  his  findings  on  the
      basis of any public law arguments on Human  Rights  grounds,  and  the
      Judge had not specifically mentioned any procedural unfairness in  the
      way that the decision was made.  However,  he  argued  that  the  Home
      Office conduct was highly relevant in this case.




   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  12. In respect of the additional bundle of documents sought to be produced
      on behalf of the Claimant by Mr  Hart,  although  I  accept  that  the
      documents contained between pages 31 and 55 of that bundle  inclusive,
      were before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I  do  not  accept  on  the
      evidence presented that any of the other documents were in fact before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence.  The fact that  it  is  said  that
      documents between pages 3 and 30 inclusive were available upon request
      at the First-tier Tribunal hearing on the 31st July 2015, but  on  the
      basis of what is said within the consolidated index to that bundle had
      not been formally served, does not mean that First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Lawrence had either seen them or should have known about them or their
      contents.  The fact that further documents may be available which were
      not referred to, and Mr Hart was unable to say had actually been shown
      to the Judge, does not mean that these were documents the Judge should
      have taken account of.  Certainly, as  far  as  the  letter  from  the
      Claimant's  sponsor  dated  4th  November  2015  at  page  1  of   the
      supplemental bundle or the CAS Statement dated the 16th June  2015  at
      page 2 of the  bundle,  where  it  is  said  that  her  CAS  had  been
      reinstated, these  documents  certainly  were  not  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence.

  13. It is clear having read the Grounds of Appeal that  the  Secretary  of
      State had raised the need for there to be a valid  CAS  and  that  the
      Judge had not explained why they did not need to be a valid CAS.   The
      question as to whether or not the lack of a  valid  CAS  affected  the
      outcome  of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
      therefore a question which was properly  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.
      The original CAS Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  provided  by
      the LSC that formed the date of  the  Secretary  of  State's  original
      decision on the 15th January 2015, had  been  withdrawn  by  the  LSC.
      This is agreed by all of the parties.  There being no valid CAS before
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence, I  find  that  he  was  not  in  a
      position therefore to find that the Claimant should have been  awarded
      points under the Points Based System under Appendix A (Attributes)  or
      Appendix C (Maintenance (Funds)), without there being a valid  CAS  as
      required  by  the  Immigration  Rules.   Although  the  original   CAS
      Statement dated the  12th  September  2014,  as  found  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence, had stated that the Claimant is "exempt  from
      the English language requirement on the basis of  her  Batchelor  Arts
      Degree in Marketing from  Anglia  Ruskin  University,  UK",  that  CAS
      having been withdrawn, the Judge was not entitled  to  find  that  the
      Secretary of State's decision was wrong in law.  This does amount to a
      material error.

  14. Although the Claimant has sought to  provide  now  the  CAS  Statement
      dated the 16th June 2015, indicating that the sponsor  had  reinstated
      her CAS, that  document  was  not  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Lawrence, nor was the reasoning contained within that  document  there
      to be seen by Judge Lawrence, as although it  was  argued  before  him
      that the CAS had been withdrawn in error, the valid CAS dated the 16th
      June 2015 was not shown to him, and was not available before him.  The
      original CAS having been withdrawn, and the  subsequent  reinstatement
      CAS Statement not being before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence,  he
      was not in a position, on the documentary evidence before him, to find
      that the decision of the Secretary of State not to award points to the
      Claimant under Appendix A and C was wrong in  law.   The  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence does  thereby  contain  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.

  15. The CAS Statement dated the 16th June 2015, as  was  indicated  by  Mr
      Hart on behalf of the Claimant, would  only  have  been  valid  for  a
      period of six months, and therefore I would not be in  a  position  to
      take account of that CAS Statement, if I were to remake the  decision,
      and a further updated CAS Statement would need to be obtained  by  the
      Claimant, if this is to be taken into account.

  16. Given that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  did
      contain a material error of law, his decision  is  set  aside  in  its
      entirety, and the matter is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal
      for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge N.M.K. Lawrence.

  17. In respect of the arguments by Mr Hart that the Judge was entitled  to
      take account of the procedural unfairness aspect of  the  case,  Judge
      Lawrence made no reference to procedural unfairness on the part of the
      Secretary of State in making his decision, nor did he allow the appeal
      or consider the appeal on Human Rights grounds,  despite  this  having
      been raised within the original Grounds of Appeal.  The  Claimant  has
      not sought to cross-appeal the decision on that  basis.   If,  to  the
      extent that Judge Lawrence did have in mind any procedural unfairness,
      it would have to be borne in mind in that regard that it was  not  the
      Secretary of State who had withdrawn the CAS, but the LSC.  Without  a
      valid CAS, the Secretary of State was not in a position originally  to
      have granted the Claimant's application.  Procedural unfairness  would
      therefore not have been a ground for allowing the appeal by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence, but in any event, if he had  sought  to  have
      done so, given that he has not referred to  procedural  unfairness  in
      this regard, his reasoning would have been inadequate and insufficient
      in any event.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N.M.K.  Lawrence  does  contain  a
material error of law and is set aside.

The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  before
any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N.M.K.
Lawrence.

Signed
[pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty                             Dated
3rd April 2016
