




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04314/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th August 2014                             |On 20th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                             MRS COMFORT GYABAAH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ikhlak
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 31st January 1965 is a  citizen  of  Ghana.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Ikhlak.  The Respondent
    was represented by Mr McVeety.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for a residence card as  the  spouse
    of an EEA national under Regulation 7 of  the  2006  Regulations.   The
    Respondent had refused that  application  on  4th  January  2014.   The
    Appellant had appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ransley sitting at Manchester  on  20th  May  2014.
    The judge had dismissed the appeal under both the 2006 Regulations  and
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. Application for permission to appeal had been made and was  granted  on
    17th June 2014.  It was said that there was arguably an error of law in
    the judge failing to recognise signatures  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband on the Ghanaian customary marriage certificate were  not  those
    of the Appellant and her husband but of the mother and  father  of  the
    couple because this was a proxy marriage.  The Respondent  had  opposed
    the application.  Directions  have  been  issued  directing  the  Upper
    Tribunal firstly to consider whether an error of law had been  made  or
    not.  The matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Ikhlak referred to the determination and said that an error had been
    made  by  the  judge  essentially  repeating  the  error  made  by  the
    Respondent and that Kareem was  not  relevant  because  there  were  no
    doubts concerning that certificate.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr McVeety referred me to the marriage certificate contained within the
    bundle of documents together with  the  other  two  relevant  documents
    which were certifying documents contained within pages 3 and 4  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    provide with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. There was in my view no initial error made by the Respondent or  indeed
    by the judge in terms of the relevant signatures.  It  is  agreed  that
    this is a proxy marriage  where  neither  the  Appellant  nor  her  EEA
    Sponsor (an Italian) were present in Ghana for  the  marriage.   It  is
    further the case that the form of register of customary marriages  part
    A and part B requires the name and signature or thumbprint of a witness
    for both the husband and a separate witness for the wife.  Those places
    within part A and part B of the form of register have been  signed  and
    may well represent the signatures of  the  mother  and  father  of  the
    parties.  However it is also clear  that  the  form  of  register  also
    requires the signature or thumbprint of both the  husband  and  of  the
    wife.  There is nothing suggesting  that  such  is  unnecessary  or  is
    something that can be dispensed  with  completely.   Indeed  there  are
    obvious and compelling reasons why the signature of  husband  and  wife
    would be required.  Without their signatures theoretically  parents  or
    others could marry by proxy two individuals without those  individuals'
    consent or knowledge.  There could be any number of  reasons  why  such
    would be done.  The concept of a proxy marriage inherently carries some
    degree of risk but the requirement for husband and wife  both  to  sign
    the form of register is a partial safeguard to demonstrate the  parties
    are both aware of the proxy marriage and consent  to  it  having  taken
    place.  There is a name or signature endorsed in each of the  parts  of
    the form of register ostensibly being the signature  of  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor.  The Respondent noted that those signatures did not  match
    the signatures on their passports and understandably raised  doubts  as
    to the validity of this form  of  register  where  someone  had  signed
    purporting to be someone they were not.  Indeed  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor confirms they  did  not  sign  that  form  of
    register confirming the doubts that were raised by the Respondent.

 8. The documents at pages 3 to 4 of the Appellant's bundle seek to confirm
    as genuine certain signatures.  However it is noteworthy that  they  do
    not seek to confirm as genuine the signatures of the husband  and  wife
    but simply other individuals.

 9. The judge was therefore correct to identify the doubts  raised  by  the
    Respondent in the refusal  letter  and  it  is  quite  clear  that  the
    Respondent had legitimately raised concerns about the form of  register
    in terms of its validity or authenticity.

10. Accordingly contrary to submissions made the case of Kareem  which  has
    recently been restated and affirmed in the case of TA was relevant.  To
    that extent it was necessary for evidence to have been provided to  the
    judge to demonstrate  that  the  alleged  marriage  contracted  was  in
    accordance with the law of the EEA country of  the  qualified  person's
    nationality i.e. Italy.  There was no such evidence provided.

11. The judge was therefore entitled to dismiss this appeal  on  the  basis
    that was done.

Decision

12. There was no material error of law made by the judge in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.






Signed                          Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

