
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04500/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 July 2013                               |On 18 September 2013         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                               Mr Chibuzo Orji

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S P Asamota, Solicitor of Graceland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who was born on 22 August 1989, is a citizen of Nigeria.
     He claims to  have  arrived  in  this  country  on  4  December  2011,
    illegally, and on 12 December 2012, he applied for a Residence Card  as
    a confirmation of a right to reside in the  UK  as  the  spouse  of  Ms
    Gervil Makoua, an EU citizen exercising treaty rights in  this  country
    (she is a French national).  The appellant had married Ms Makoua on  11
    July 2012.

 2. The appellant and Ms Makoua were called in for an  interview  with  the
    respondent  on  24  January  2013,  following  which  the   appellant's
    application was refused on 29 January  2012.   The  refusal  letter  is
    dated the same date.  The respondent also considered whether or not the
    removal of the appellant would be in breach of his rights under Article
    8 of the ECHR, but decided that it would not.

 3.  The  basis  of  the  respondent's  decision  was  that  in  light   of
    inconsistent and conflicting answers given  by  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Makoua,  when  they  were  interviewed   separately,   the   respondent
    considered that the marriage between the appellant and Ms Makoua was  a
    marriage of convenience.

 4. The appellant appealed against this decision, and his appeal was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge K S H Miller, sitting at Taylor  House
    on 17 May 2013.

 5. In a determination promulgated on 5 June 2013, Judge  Miller  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal.  At paragraph 20, he stated  that  because  the
    appellant's Counsel had stated in her skeleton argument "that the  sole
    issue to be determined ... was whether the appellant and his wife  were
    engaged in a marriage of convenience" and "article 8 was  not  referred
    to", he agreed "that no argument under Article 8 lies in this case".

 6. The appellant has appealed against this  decision,  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle on 24 June  2013.



Grounds of Appeal

 7. In the handwritten grounds of appeal, it is submitted that Judge Miller
    made an error of law by not considering the  appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8.  It is said that he had married an EU national and that  his
    removal would be in breach of his rights under Article  8,  because  it
    would destroy his relationship  with  his  stepchildren.   It  is  also
    asserted that Judge Miller had failed to consider his relationship with
    his two brothers in this country who were both British citizens.

 8. In setting out her reasons for granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge
    Astle stated as follows:

         "3.  In the final paragraph of his determination the  judge  states
             that the skeleton argument provided ... that  the  sole  issue
             was whether or not there was a marriage  of  convenience.   In
             fact the skeleton argument expressly  raises  Article  8.   In
             consequence it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in  not
             considering it. ..."

 9. In the Rule 24 response submitted on behalf of the  respondent,  it  is
    submitted that although it might have been  an  error  not  to  mention
    Article 8, in light of the findings made regarding the  genuineness  of
    the marriage, this error was "arguably immaterial".

10. Prior to the hearing before me, a skeleton argument  was  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant which had been prepared by  Ms  Saifolahi,  the
    Counsel who had been instructed before Judge Miller on  behalf  of  the
    appellant.  Although it is asserted at paragraph 3 that  the  appellant
    relied upon Article 8 in the alternative, at paragraph 5.1, it is  said
    that "the sole issue to be determined is whether or not  the  appellant
    and his wife are engaged in a marriage of convenience".

11.  It  is  accepted  that  this  Tribunal  found  in  IS  (marriages   of
    convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031 that the burden of proving  that
    a marriage is not a marriage of convenience rests upon the appellant.

12. Thereafter, essentially it is argued that the judge's finding that  the
    marriage was one of convenience was not open to him  on  the  evidence.
    At 5.6 it is stated in terms "that the allegation  that  the  appellant
    has engaged in a marriage of convenience is not sustainable".

The Hearing

13. I heard submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties,  which  I  recorded
    contemporaneously.  As  these  submissions  are  contained  within  the
    Record of Proceedings, I shall not set them  out  in  full,  but  shall
    refer below only to such part of these submissions as are necessary for
    the purposes of this determination.  However, I have had full regard to
    everything which was said to be during the course of  the  hearing,  as
    well as to all the documents contained within the file, whether or  not
    specific reference is made to these items below.

14. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Asamota did not appear to  rely  on  the
    skeleton argument at all.  He began by apologising for the late service
    of the appellant's bundle, which had been received the day  before  the
    hearing, and then proceeded to call the appellant to give evidence.  He
    had to be reminded by the Tribunal that the issue which first had to be
    determined was whether or not there was  any  error  of  law  in  Judge
    Miller's determination such that it should be set aside.

15. Mr Asamota then submitted that Judge Miller had been wrong  to  mention
    in his determination how the appellant had come into this country.   He
    put the appellant's case on this point in this way:

         "I don't feel that this was an issue of law.  At  the  end  of  the
         day, he [the appellant] tried to make  himself  permanent  in  this
         country by marrying an EEA national."

16. Mr Asamota then referred to the fact that the appellant and his  spouse
    had unfortunately been called for an  interview  and  that  because  of
    answers he and his wife had given, these were not satisfactory  to  the
    respondent, which led to a refusal on the basis that  this  was  not  a
    genuine marriage.  However, he was  saying  that  the  marriage  was  a
    proper marriage, a genuine marriage, and that therefore he ought to  be
    allowed to stay under EU  law.   If  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    marriage was genuine, then he was also entitled to remain under Article
    8.

17. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, Mr Asamota accepted that  if
    the Tribunal did not accept that the marriage was genuine, his  Article
    8 claim would  also  fail.   However,  Mr  Asamota  believed  that  the
    appellant had satisfied the requirements of the Rules  by  "marrying  a
    genuine person".

18. In answer to a question from the Tribunal as to where  it  was  claimed
    Judge Miller had made an error of law, Mr Asamota replied that  he  had
    made the decision on the basis of credibility.  It had been unfair  for
    the appellant and his wife to be called  in  for  interview.   Although
    people were sometimes now called in for interview, obviously there were
    some discrepancies with some of the answers which were made, but it had
    not been fair to call them in for interview.  The evidence  which  they
    had put before the respondent was sufficient.

19. Although Mr Asamota could not say that it was unfair in itself to  call
    the appellant and his wife in for interview, because this was a part of
    procedure, because the interview was  random,  the  appellant  was  not
    mentally ready at the  time.   Although  the  respondent  decided  that
    because some of the answers made were not consistent, this  was  not  a
    genuine marriage, that was not a proper basis on which to say that this
    was not a proper marriage.

20. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker submitted that there was nothing
    in the Article  8  point.   This  must  stand  or  fall  with  the  EEA
    application.  It was clear from the determination that Judge Miller had
    considered the evidence he heard on the day from the appellant  and  Ms
    Makoua, his "wife", when making his findings at paragraph 8.   However,
    following consideration of all  the  evidence,  including  the  answers
    given in the marriage interviews, the judge made clear  conclusions  at
    paragraph 19.  He was not satisfied that this was a  genuine  marriage.
    He was also entitled to consider the previous  immigration  history  of
    this appellant as being relevant to his credibility.

21. In reply, Mr Asamota again said that the issue  here  was  whether  the
    marriage was genuine.  When reminded by the Tribunal that the issue was
    whether or not the judge had been entitled to find that it was not,  Mr
    Asamota said that he felt that how  a  person  came  into  the  country
    should not be a basis for deciding a decision in a court  hearing.   He
    was not saying it was irrelevant, but  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the
    appellant had tried to regularise his stay by  marrying  someone.   The
    focus should be on the fact that he had married an EU national and  not
    on his previous deception.

Discussion

22. I have set out the submissions made on behalf of the appellant in  some
    detail, because in my judgment it is apparent that there  is  no  basis
    whatsoever for asserting that Judge Miller's finding that the  marriage
    of the appellant and Ms Makoua was not genuine was either not  open  to
    him or inadequately reasoned.  He gave appropriate consideration to the
    relevant authorities (in particular the Tribunal decisions  in  IS  and
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2002]  UKUT
    00038) and he considered fully the arguments advanced before  him.   He
    considered the disparities in the accounts given by the  appellant  and
    Ms Makoua in their interviews (which are set out in the refusal letter)
    and at paragraph 18 gives his reasons for the finding he makes that the
    marriage is one of convenience.  The submission, advanced on behalf  of
    the appellant before me, that the manner in  which  the  appellant  had
    entered this country was not relevant because "at the end of the day he
    had tried to make himself permanent in this country by marrying an  EEA
    national" does not, in my judgment, help his case at all.  Neither  the
    arguments advanced within the grounds nor within the skeleton  argument
    nor in oral submissions before me disclose even an arguable  case  that
    Judge Miller's finding was not open to him.

23. So far as Article 8 is concerned, the appeal is also unarguable on this
    basis.   In  light  of  the  finding  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience, the appellant cannot argue that he  has  any  family  life
    here at all.  It was not argued before me  that  the  appellant  should
    have been allowed to stay because of a relationship with his  brothers,
    and nor was it argued that  he  even  had  a  family  life  with  these
    brothers in this country.  Even if he did, in the circumstances of this
    case, his removal would clearly be proportionate.

24. There being absolutely no basis whatsoever  upon  which  this  Tribunal
    could find that Judge Miller's  determination  contained  any  material
    error of law, it follows that this appeal must be dismissed, and  I  so
    find.

Decision

There being no error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Miller, this appeal is dismissed.


Signed:                                 Date:  31 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

