
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04947/2013
     IA/04957/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Sent on                      |
|On 19 February 2014                           |On 3 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                             Mr karamat hussain
                               mrs fareeza bi

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                 NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL OF CASE UNDER RULE 17

1.   On 4 February 2014 the  respondent  wrote  stating  that  she  was  now
    satisfied  the  appellants  met  the  relevant  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules  and wished, in consequence,  to  withdraw  her  case
    under Rule 17(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.
     She added that she believed that the case had become academic.  On  13
    February 2014 the appellants' representatives wrote  to  say  that  the
    respondent had confirmed she would be making a  grant  of  ILR  to  the
    appellants and hence they agreed with the  respondent's   request  that
    the case be withdrawn.

2.   In SM (withdrawal of appealed decision: effect)  Pakistan  [2014]  UKUT
    64 (IAC) the Tribunal reviewed the proper construction  of  Rule  17(2)
    with particular  regard  to  when  it  would  be  appropriate  for  the
    Tribunal  to  proceed  with  a  case  notwithstanding  a  request   for
    withdrawal.  At [59] the Tribunal stated:

         "What, then, should we derive from these  High Court and AAC  cases
         on 'academic' proceedings, bearing in mind the  somewhat  different
         statutory context in which the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  must
         operate?  There are two main points.  The first is the principle of
         restraint, most strongly expressed in the  requirement  that  there
         must be  exceptional  features  before  a  court  will  proceed  to
         adjudicate substantively on an issue that, as between the  parties,
         has become academic.  The second is that,  in  deciding  whether  a
         case is exceptional the court will consider if there is an issue to
         resolve, that will have direct relevance in  other  cases,  thereby
         potentially saving time and expense in litigating future  disputes,
         and which is not fact-sensitive."

3.   The Tribunal concluded at [72] as follows:

         "Section 86 of the 2002 Act does not purport to prescribe  the  way
         in which matters raised as grounds of appeal  must  be  determined.
         In  re-making  a  decision  in  an  appeal,  pursuant  to   section
         12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007 Act, where the respondent's  decision  has
         been withdrawn, the Upper Tribunal may make a  formal  disposal  of
         the appeal if, in all  the  circumstances,  having  regard  to  the
         overriding objective and the matters mentioned below, that  appears
         to be the most the appropriate way of dispose of  the  proceedings.
         In such cases, the Tribunal would decline to hear argument and need
         not  reach  a  substantive,  reasoned  determination.  The   formal
         disposal will normally be to dismiss the appeal, unless  the  issue
         of costs, coupled with  the  reasons  underlying  the  respondent's
         withdrawal of the appealed decision, point  towards   allowing  the
         appeal.  In either case, the formal disposal  of  proceedings  will
         preserve the appellant's position, pending the  fresh  decision  of
         the respondent."

4.   Having considered the matter I am satisfied that I  should  accept  the
    request for withdrawal and that it would be  inappropriate  to  proceed
    further with  the  case.   Whilst  the  grounds  did  raise  issues  of
    interpretation that remain unresolved, the state of the arguments prior
    to the respondent's request to withdraw was somewhat diffuse and in the
    absence of nay further input from either party it is difficult  to  say
    that there would be an important point of principle which would  emerge
    in the course of further deliberations.

5.   I formally dismiss the appeal, noting that the appellants' position  is
    reserved pending the promised fresh decision of the respondent to grant
    them ILR.



                                                                      Signed



                                    Date

                       Judge of the Upper Tribunal
