
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04161/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 June 2017                           |On 11 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Zohaib Ilyas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Barnfield, instructed by Citadel Immigration
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Zohaib Ilyas, was born on 3 August 1986 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  The  appellant  had  applied  in  July  2014  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of his relationship with a  person
    settled in the United Kingdom but his application had been refused by a
    decision on 9 January 2015; the decision of 12 October 2015 referred to
    by the  First-tier  Tribunal  appears  to  have  been  a  supplementary
    decision.  In any event,  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Callender Smith) which, in a decision promulgated on 22
    August 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.  I have reached that decision for the  following  reasons.   The
    analysis of  the  judge  is  seriously  deficient  in  respect  of  its
    discussion of the issues arising in this appeal and the evidence.   The
    judge correctly observed that he needed to consider the question of the
    appellant's alleged involvement in obtaining a false  English  language
    certificate from Educational Testing Services (ETS) and also the status
    and genuineness of his relationship with the  United  Kingdom  sponsor.
    The sponsor, in turn, has a British child  and  issues  concerning  the
    appellant's relationship with that child and whether or not  the  child
    could be expected to leave the United Kingdom  should  also  have  been
    addressed.  Unfortunately, the judge was severely hampered  on  account
    of the fact that the appellant himself was not legally  represented  at
    the hearing nor was there any Presenting Officer  for  the  respondent.
    The judge did have before him a letter from the appellant's  father-in-
    law which had suggested that the appellant's marriage  to  the  sponsor
    was not genuine.  The judge records that the father-in-law attended and
    gave evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and withdrew his  previous
    allegations.  It is clear from any reading of  the  decision  that  the
    father-in-law's written allegations  carried  very  significant  weight
    with the judge (see, in particular, [39]).  The readiness of the  judge
    to latch on to the  father-in-law's  written  (subsequently  withdrawn)
    allegations has led him to ignore the proper procedure for  considering
    whether or not the appellant had obtained a fraudulent language testing
    certificate.  Indeed, the judge does no more at [36]  to  observe  that
    "[the appellant] has not produced any evidence in relation  to  [having
    undertaken the TOIEC test in 2013] and  there  is  no  mention  in  his
    witness statement dated 10 May 2016 of the TOEIC issues which I  regard
    as a significant avoidance or omission".  The  judge  appears  to  have
    been unaware of the possibility of shifting burdens of proof nor has he
    examined in any detail at all the respondent's evidence in  support  of
    the assertion the appellant had obtained the certificate  fraudulently.
    Likewise, the judge appears to have rejected  the  genuineness  of  the
    appellant's relationship with the United Kingdom sponsor in  the  light
    of the father-in-law's withdrawn allegation.   The  matter  is  further
    complicated  (albeit  in  a  way  which  the  judge  could   not   have
    contemplated) by reason of the fact that in May 2017  at  an  interview
    with the appellant, the sponsor  and  the  respondent's  officers,  the
    respondent accepted that the respondent and the United Kingdom  sponsor
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 3. I find that the judge's analysis cannot stand and that the questions of
    the appellant's obtaining of an English language certificate  and  also
    the genuineness of his marriage  (subject  to  what  appears  to  be  a
    concession by the respondent in May 2017) will have  to  be  looked  at
    again.  Having determined the genuineness or otherwise of the marriage,
    the Tribunal will need to examine the appellant's relationship, if any,
    with the sponsor's British child and to consider both  the  application
    of the relevant Immigration Rules and also any relevant case law.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 22  August  2016
    is set aside.  The appeal will be returned to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (not Judge Callender Smith) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 1 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

