
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04938/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On the 2nd November 2016           |On the 7th November 2016           |

                                   Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:
                                   MR J.I.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Haji (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  the  United  States  of  America  and
       Pakistan, who was born on the 5th June 1970.  This is the Appellant's
       appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Jerromes,
       promulgated  on  the  28th  May  2015,  in  which  he  dismissed  the
       Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal  to  grant  him
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his family  and
       private life in the United Kingdom, both under the Immigration  Rules
       and outside of the Immigration Rules under Article 8.

    2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant did  not  meet
       the requirements of paragraph E-LTRPT3.1, in  respect  of  him  being
       granted leave to remain as a parent, on the basis that the  Appellant
       was in the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor.   The  Judge  went  on  to
       consider the best interests of  the  children  for  the  purposes  of
       Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,  and
       at [24], stated "In conclusion, taking into account all of the  above
       factors, I find that it is in the best interests of the children  for
       the Appellant  to  be  with  both  of  their  parents.   It  will  be
       unreasonable to expect the four children and  their  mother  (all  of
       whom are British citizens)  to  uproot  themselves  and  relocate  to
       either the USA or Pakistan and this must lead to the conclusion  that
       it is in the best interests of the  children  for  the  Appellant  to
       remain in the United Kingdom".

    3. However, the Judge went on to consider Article 8 and the  five  stage
       test set down by the House of Lords in the case of Razgar,  but  when
       conducting the proportionality and then  made  reference  to  Section
       117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  and  said
       that he had taken account of the provisions of the same in  terms  of
       the maintenance of effective immigration control,  and  in  terms  of
       whether or not the Appellant was able to speak English and the  Judge
       in that regard found  that  the  Appellant  had  given  his  evidence
       through an interpreter, but said that he could speak English  with  a
       strong accent and could read and write English  and  noted  that  the
       Appellant had said that he would be financially self-sufficient  with
       continuing support from his uncle but there was no evidence  of  this
       therefore the Judge made no findings  in  respect  of  those  issues.
       However, the Judge then went on to find that the  best  interests  of
       the children could be outweighed by the cumulative  effect  of  other
       considerations and that whilst it would not be unreasonable to expect
       the children to leave the UK and that  it  would  be  in  their  best
       interests that the Appellant remain in the UK,  the  Judge  found  at
       paragraph 26.6(ii) that :

           "(ii) This is not a  situation  where  the  Appellant's  removal
                would significantly disrupt their present  circumstances  or
                rupture their relationship with him.  The  relationship  has
                worked on this basis since 2009 and the  family  has  become
                accustomed to living apart; this is not a case where removal
                of the Appellant could result in  the  breaking  up  of  the
                family and rupture the existing ties.  I  am  not  satisfied
                the Appellant's continuous presence in the UK  is  any  more
                essential at this time than it has been in the past 5 years:
                R's autism has been diagnosed from a  very  early  age;  his
                mother has the benefit of  outside  assistance  and  support
                from her own family  and  her  back  condition  has  been  a
                problem for many years.

           (iii)  In accordance with Chikwamba and Chen, I have  considered
                that if the only matter weighing in  the  Respondent's  side
                for the Article 8  proportionality  balance  is  the  public
                policy of requiring an application  to  be  made  under  the
                Immigration Rules from abroad, the  application  should  not
                usually be rejected simply on that ground.  However, in this
                case,  I  am  not  satisfied  there  will   be   significant
                disruption or  effect  on  the  children  if  the  Appellant
                returned to Pakistan and  makes  an  application  for  entry
                clearance bearing in mind that he entered the UK for no more
                than a temporary purpose, as a visitor.  He has  not  placed
                before me sufficient evidence that  a  temporary  separation
                will interfere disproportionately with the protective rights
                of the Appellant, his wife or his children.  Furthermore, on
                the evidence before me, I cannot make any assessment  as  to
                the likely merits of a future entry  clearance  application.
                There is no evidence, for instance, that the  financial  and
                accommodation requirements will be met.  I cannot  therefore
                conclude that he would have a strong case and that  such  an
                application would be a mere technicality.

           (iv)   Based on an overall consideration of the  facts  of  this
                case, the decision is proportionate to the  legitimate  aims
                pursued and interference in the Appellant's family  life  is
                necessary and in the public interest of fair, consistent and
                effective immigration control.   In  these  particular  (and
                unusual) circumstances, the best interests of  the  children
                are  outweighed  by   the   cumulative   effect   of   other
                considerations;  the  decision  is  proportionate   to   the
                legitimate aim  of  maintaining  immigration  control.   The
                Appellant therefore does not succeed under Article 8".

    4. The Appellant has sought to appeal  against  that  decision  for  the
       reasons set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  This is  a  matter  of
       record and is therefore not repeated in its  entirety  here,  but  in
       summary, it is argued that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge in respect of proportionality is flawed and that the Judge  has
       failed to consider Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 when carrying out the  proportionality  exercise.
       It is argued that the Appellant is not liable to deportation and  has
       a genuine and subsisting relationship with 4 qualifying children  and
       that the Judge made findings of fact that all  of  the  children  are
       British citizens and that it is  in  their  best  interests  for  the
       Appellant to remain in  the  UK  and  that  the  Judge's  failure  to
       consider Section 117B(6) amounts to a material error of law.

    5. Permission to appeal had been granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Pedro on the 13th August 2015, in which he stated that:

           "In a well-reasoned decision the Judge  has  properly  conducted
           the proportionality balancing exercise, giving due consideration
           to the best interests of the children  of  the  Appellant  as  a
           primary consideration.  However, the Appellant's  grounds  argue
           that the Judge failed to consider Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
           Act, and it did appear that the  Judge  did  not  consider  this
           provision whilst he did make reference to  other  provisions  of
           Section 117B.  As the Judge concluded that it is in  the  public
           interests for the Appellant to be removed, but  Section  117B(6)
           is a statutory provision indicating  that  the  public  interest
           does not require removal, the grounds raised an  arguable  error
           of law, particularly regarding whether Section 117B(6) does,  or
           is  intended  to,  override  any  other  considerations  in  the
           proportionality balancing exercise in assessing whether  or  not
           removal is proportionate".

    6. In the Respondent's Rule 24 Reply, it is argued, inter alia, that the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge directed  himself  appropriately  and  that
       Section 117B(6) is not determinative of the assessment  exercise  and
       is just one consideration to be factored in.  It is argued the  Judge
       has done their assessment and there is no error of law and  that  the
       Judge has conducted a thorough Article 8 assessment and  the  grounds
       amount to no more than disagreement.

    7. It was on that basis that the appeal came  before  me  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal.

    8. Mr Duffy, on behalf of the Respondent, at the start  of  the  appeal,
       conceded that in light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in  the
       case of R on the Application  of  MA  (Pakistan)  and  Others  v  The
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  that
       the Rule 24 Reply was no longer sustainable.  He  conceded  that  the
       Judge had  not  referred  to  Section  117B(6)  anywhere  within  his
       decision and conceded that this was a  material  error  of  law,  and
       would have been indeed, a material error of law, even pre-dating  the
       Court of Appeal case of MA (Pakistan).  He argued that although there
       was a material error of law  and  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Jerromes should be set aside, that the case should  be
       kept within the Upper Tribunal, and the decision re-made by me on the
       papers.

    9. Miss Haji on behalf of  the  Appellant,  asked  me  to  maintain  the
       Judge's findings, but conceded that the Judge had not  taken  account
       of the public interests requirement at paragraphs [23]  and  [24]  of
       the decision.  She argued that both the 4  children  were  themselves
       British citizens and that the children's mother was  also  a  British
       citizen and that the only question really was whether or not it would
       be reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

   10. Mr Duffy on behalf of the Respondent conceded that any argument  that
       the children should be separated from the Appellant  was  effectively
       unarguable in this case, if the effect would require them as  British
       Citizens to leave the EU.

   11. Both legal representatives were happy for me to re-make the  decision
       on the papers.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   12. Having carefully considered the documents  in  this  appeal  and  the
       submissions  made  on  behalf   of   the   parties   by   the   legal
       representatives,  and  taking  into  account  the  concessions  quite
       properly made by Mr Duffy on behalf of the Respondent, I do find that
       the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Jerromes  does  contain  a
       material error of law,  in  that  when  considering  the  Appellant's
       appeal for the purposes of  Article  8  outside  of  the  Immigration
       Rules, although the Judge has stated that he has taken account of the
       provisions of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act 2002 at paragraph 26.5 of his decision, nowhere does he  in  fact
       refer to Section 117B(6) or the provisions of that  section.   It  is
       quite clear having read the decision, that he has failed to take that
       section into account, when  deciding  whether  or  not  the  decision
       amounted to a breach of the Appellant's Human Rights under Article 8.
        This does amount to a material error of law.

   13. I therefore do set aside the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Jerromes in respect of his analysis of the Appellant's appeal outside
       the Immigration Rules for the purposes of Article 8, and I proceed to
       re-make that decision.

   Re-Making

   14. Although clearly the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Jerromes
       does contain a material error in that  he  failed  to  refer  to  and
       consider the  provisions  of  Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge in respect of the fact that the Appellant did not meet
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules as he was a visitor to  the
       UK  were  unchallenged,  and  further,  the  findings  of  the  Judge
       regarding Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
       2009 at paragraphs [23] and [24] of the decision, were not subject to
       challenge.  Miss Haji sought that I maintain such findings, and  this
       was not contested by Mr Duffy.  I therefore maintain and preserve the
       findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jerromes in respect of the best
       interests of the children at paragraph [23] of his decision, that:

           "23.   In determining the best interests of the children, I have
           considered the following factors:

           (i)    The children have lived in  the  UK  for  the  past  five
                years.  They are therefore familiar with the ethnic identity
                and language of the UK.

           (ii)   Prior to coming  to  the  UK,  they  lived  in  the  USA.
                English is also the primary language in the USA.

           (iii)  They have not lived in  Pakistan  but  I  note  they  are
                bilingual (English and Urdu).

           (iv)   It has not been suggested that religion, faith or  gender
                is relevant in this case.

           (v)    R requires support with  his  condition.   The  Appellant
                says that support cannot be provided  in  Pakistan  although
                Mrs R accepts that such report could be provided in the USA.

           (vi)   The other  three  children  are  fit  and  well  with  no
                particular difficulties being taken into account.

           (vii)  I accept the Appellant's evidence  that  he  has  a  good
                relationship with his children and having read  the  letters
                of M (A1 page 157) and MU (A1 page 158) it is  evident  that
                they wish him to remain in the United Kingdom.

           (viii) I accept the Appellant's evidence that when in the United
                Kingdom he provides his wife with support in terms of caring
                for the children and that R in particular benefits from  his
                presence.

           (ix)   Mrs R refers to access 'conditions' which are unspecified
                but I have found  that  the  Appellant  does  in  fact  have
                frequent access.

           (x)    The children are all settled into school in  the  UK  and
                will inevitably have made friends in school and socially.

           (xi)   As British citizens, the children have rights which  they
                will not be able to exercise if they leave the UK; they will
                lose the advantages of growing  up  and  being  educated  in
                Britain.

           24.    In conclusion, taking  into  account  all  of  the  above
           factors, I find that it is in the best interests of the children
           for the Appellant to  be  with  both  their  parents.   In  this
           regard, I take it that the Judge meant that it was in  the  best
           interests of the children for the children to be with both their
           parents,  including  the  Appellant,  and,  in  light   of   the
           considerations that he has outlined at paragraph 23,  I  make  a
           similar finding that it is in the best interests of the children
           for them to be with both of their parents in the UK".

   15. It is important to bear in mind in  this  case  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge consideration the evidence between paragraphs [11] and
       [20], and I preserve and adopt the analysis  and  findings  in  those
       paragraphs given that those findings  were  not  challenged.   It  is
       relevant that Mrs R is a British citizen and that all 4 children  are
       also British citizens. As at the date of the hearing today, M is  now
       aged 17, MU is now aged 15, R is now aged 14 and W is now aged 8.  It
       is also relevant that  the  Judge  accepted  the  evidence  that  the
       Appellant and his wife had separated in August 2009 as he  wanted  to
       take his wife and children to Pakistan  and  settle  there  with  his
       mother, but that his wife disagreed and that how she described in her
       letter dated the 7th November 2014 of there  being  a  "very  serious
       disagreement" as R, (who had been diagnosed  with  autism)  "required
       special treatment/schooling/care/support which is difficult to obtain
       in Pakistan due to the lack of  facilities  available,  however  such
       facilities are readily available in the UK or in the USA".  The Judge
       at [14] went on to say that Mrs R was left  with  no  option  but  to
       leave the USA in August 2009 and come to the UK with the children  to
       live with her family who supported her and her children through  this
       difficult time and the children lived with  their  mother  in  Luton.
       The Judge also found that on his visits to the UK the  Appellant  had
       last entered on the 11th June 2014 and had stayed since, but that the
       Appellant was living with his uncle, at a different address in  Luton
       which was a short  walk  from  where  the  children  lived.   I  also
       maintain and preserve those findings and the  Judge's  findings  that
       the Appellant does have a good relationship  with  his  children  and
       that he visits his children every day and collects them  from  school
       and spends time with them and that the Appellant also takes M and  MU
       for "booster sessions" of private tuition and that as a  result  they
       have improved significantly and that without the Appellant's  support
       in bringing up the children with the boosters "they would probably be
       struggling at school" as found by the Judge at [16].

   16. I do bear in mind when considering the Appellant's claim  in  respect
       of Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules for the purposes of his
       family life as to whether or not the decision will amount to a breach
       of his right to a family life, and would thereby  be  unlawful  under
       Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, that the  Tribunal  must  (in
       particular) have regard, in all cases, to the stipulations listed  in
       Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and
       I do bear in mind in that regard taking account of Section 117B, that
       the maintenance of an effective immigration control is in the  public
       interests and that it is in the public interests  and  in  particular
       the interests of the economic wellbeing of the  United  Kingdom  that
       persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  better
       able to speak English because persons who can speak English are  less
       of a burden on taxpayers  and  are  better  able  to  integrate  into
       society and that it is also in the public interests in particular the
       interests of economic wellbeing of the United  Kingdom  that  persons
       who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
       independent because such persons are not a burden  on  taxpayers  and
       are better able to integrate into society.

   17. I bear in mind in that regard that  although  it  is  said  that  the
       Appellant could speak English, albeit with a strong accent, there was
       no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in that regard,  nor
       is there any evidence before me in that regard, and  again,  although
       it was said that the Appellant could be maintained  without  recourse
       to public funds, by the continuous support of his uncle, there was no
       evidence of this, and there is still not evidence before  me  to  say
       that the uncle will continue supporting  the  Appellant  indefinitely
       Appellant or the amount of any such support.  I therefore do bear  in
       mind that it has not been established that the Appellant is  able  to
       speak English and that it has not been established that the Appellant
       is financially independent.

   18. When considering the provisions of Section 117B(6), I  bear  in  mind
       that under the provisions of that section "in the case  of  a  person
       who is not liable  to  deportation,  the  public  interest  does  not
       require the person's removal where -

        a) the person has a genuine  or  subsisting  parental  relationship
           with a qualifying child; and

        b) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
           United Kingdom".

   19. I bear in mind that the definition of a qualifying child is found  in
       Section 117D and is said to include a person who is under the age  of
       18 and who is (a) a British citizen or (b) has lived  in  the  United
       Kingdom for a continuous period of 7 years or more.  In this  regard,
       I do find that the Appellant's 4 children are  all  British  citizens
       and are all under the age of 18  and  therefore  are  all  qualifying
       children.  I further bear in mind and find that the Appellant is  not
       liable to deportation and I accept and find as a fact  that  he  does
       have  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationships  with  his  4
       children who are qualifying children, given  the  preserved  findings
       from First-tier Tribunal Judge Jerromes in that regard.

   20. In respect of  the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  it  would  be
       reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom,  I  do
       bear in mind the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of R  on
       the Application of MA (Pakistan) and Others v The Secretary of  State
       for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, that as  was  stated  by
       Lord Justice Elias  at  [17]  that  sub-section  6  does  not  simply
       identify factors which bear upon the public  interest  question,  "it
       resolves that question in the context of Article 8 applications which
       satisfy the conditions in paragraphs (a) and  (b).   It  does  so  by
       stipulating that once those  conditions  are  satisfied,  the  public
       interest  will  not  require  the  applicant's  removal.   Since  the
       interference with the right to private or family life  under  Article
       8(1) can only be justified  where  there  is  a  sufficiently  strong
       countervailing public interest falling within  Article  8(2)  if  the
       public interest does not require removal,  then  there  is  no  other
       basis on which  removal  could  be  justified.   It  follows,  in  my
       judgement, that there can be no doubt that Section  117B(6)  must  be
       read as a self-contained provision in the sense that  parliament  has
       stipulated that where the condition specified under sub-sections  are
       satisfied, the public interest will not justify removal.  It  is  not
       legitimate to have regard to public  interest  considerations  unless
       that is permitted, either  explicitly  or  implicitly,  by  the  sub-
       section itself".

   21. Lord Justice Elias went on at [20] to state that "if  the  answer  to
       the first question is no, and to the other three  questions  is  yes,
       the conclusion must be that  Article  8  is  infringed"  however,  in
       respect of  the  application  of  the  reasonableness  concept,  Lord
       Justice Elias in giving the lead judgement felt constrained  to  find
       that in considering the concept of  reasonableness  in  sub-paragraph
       (b)  one  has  to  include  the  consideration  of  the  conduct  and
       immigration history of the parents as part of the overall analysis of
       the public interest in light of the Court of Appeal decision  in  the
       case of MM (Uganda) went on to find at [45] that in my judgement,  if
       the Court should have regard to the conduct of the applicant and  any
       other matters relevant to the public interests when  considering  the
       "unduly  harsh"  concept  under  Section  117C(5)  it   should   when
       considering the question of reasonableness under Section 117B(6).

   22. It is therefore clear from the Court of  Appeal  decision  that  when
       considering whether or not it is reasonable to expect the children to
       leave, that the wider public interest considerations have to be taken
       into account at this stage.  I therefore do  bear  in  mind  in  this
       context when considering whether or not it is unreasonable to  expect
       the  children  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  the  fact  that  the
       maintenance of an effective immigration  control  is  in  the  public
       interests and that the Appellant had only been in the United  Kingdom
       as a visitor and has never had status in  the  United  Kingdom  other
       than leave as a visitor.  I further bear in mind that it has not been
       established that the Appellant can speak English and that it has  not
       been established that he is financially independent.  I further  bear
       in mind that little weight should be attached to a private life built
       up by him at a time when he has been in the UK either  unlawfully  or
       at a time when his status in the  UK  is  precarious,  and  that  his
       status has been throughout precarious.  I do  bear  in  mind  however
       that the current application was submitted during the currency of his
       6 month visitor visa, and therefore he  would  currently  have  leave
       pursuant to Section 3(c) of the Immigration Act 1971,  and  therefore
       he is not in the UK unlawfully. However, his positon has always  been
       precarious.

   23. However, the Appellant is no longer in a  relationship  with  Mrs  R,
       although she remains legally  his  wife,  and  Mrs  R  is  a  British
       citizen, as are all 4 children, all of whom are settled in school and
       who on the preserved findings of Judge Jerromes have made friends  at
       school and socially, and all of whom have rights of British  citizens
       which they will not be able to exercise if they leave the UK and that
       they would lose the advantage of growing up and being educated in the
       UK. The children would not in fact be returning to either the USA  or
       Pakistan with the Appellant and Mrs R as a family  unit,  given  that
       the Appellant and Mrs R are separated. Further, the children have not
       lived with their father since August 2009, although  he  clearly  has
       visited them regularly since that stage. The Appellant and Mrs R have
       clearly agreed that the children are to live with her in the UK.

   24.   However, when conducting the balancing exercise,  bearing  in  mind
       the fact that all the children are settled  in  the  UK  and  on  the
       findings of Judge Jerromes have made friends at school  and  socially
       and that they are all British citizens, I do consider and  find  that
       it would be unreasonable in the circumstances of this case to  expect
       the children  to  leave  the  UK.   Their  mother  certainly  has  no
       intention of leaving the UK with the Appellant, given that  they  are
       no longer in a relationship, and it would not be reasonable for  them
       to leave without her, in circumstances where they have not lived with
       the Appellant full-time since 2009, given  the  separation  of  their
       parents.  Given that I have maintained the finding of Judge  Jerromes
       that it was in the best interests of the children to remain in the UK
       the reasons given by him at paragraphs [23] and [24], taking  account
       of the public interest criteria and the wider public interest in this
       case, I do consider that it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
       children to leave the United Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of  Section
       117B(6).

   25. The final question asked under Section 117B(6) is "Is it unreasonable
       to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom?".   It  is  not  a
       question as to whether or not "Will the child be expected to or  have
       to leave the United Kingdom, as a result of the decision?".   Section
       117B(6) simply requires the consideration as to the reasonableness or
       otherwise to expect the child under the circumstances of the case  to
       leave the United Kingdom, and in the circumstances of this case, even
       bearing in mind the  public  interest  considerations,  it  would  be
       unreasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

   26. In such circumstances, as stated by Lord Justice Elias in the case of
       MA (Pakistan) at [20] in circumstances where  the  Appellant  is  not
       liable to deportation and the  Appellant  does  have  a  genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and that  it
       is unreasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom,  the
       conclusion must be that in such circumstances Article 8 is infringed.
        I therefore do find that the public interest does  not  require  the
       Appellant's removal, and that in such circumstances, the decision  to
       remove him does amount to a breach of his  right  to  a  family  life
       under Article 8.  The decision reached is therefore in breach of  the
       Appellant's Human Rights under Article 8 in respect of his right to a
       family life.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Jerromes  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside;

I re-make the decision, allowing the Appellant's appeal under Article  8  in
respect of his right to a family life;

An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and  given
that the case involves 4 children, and it is appropriate for that  anonymity
direction to be maintained.  Unless or until a Court or  Tribunal  otherwise
direct, the Appellant, his wife and children are  entitled  to  and  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Appellant, his wife or his children.  Failure  to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty Dated 2nd November 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
Fee Award
The Appellant having succeeded in his appeal, any fees paid by him  both  in
respect of his original application and  also  in  respect  of  his  appeal,
should be refunded to him in full.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty Dated 2nd November 2016
