
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27 August 2013                               |On 27 August 2013          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                          upper tribunal judge pitt

                                   Between

                          EDITHA DELA CRUZ GUMIRAN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wray, Kings Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines and was born on  30  July
    1965.

 2. This is an appeal against the determination dated 2 May 2013 of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Metzer  which  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision of 18 January 2013 which refused the  appellant's
    application as a domestic worker.

 3. It was common ground that the appellant could not succeed under any  of
    the provisions of HC 395 (the Immigration Rules) and  that,  as  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, the only matter in issue was her appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. Mr Walker conceded for the respondent that the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge Metzer disclosed an error on a point of law  such  that
    it should be set aside and re-made. The Judge was in error  in  finding
    that the appellant did not have leave when she formed her  relationship
    with Mr McLean, a British national, in 2011. In fact, the appellant had
    leave until 30 July 2012. This error of fact, submitted Mr Walker,  had
    fatally infected the Article  8  proportionality  assessment.  He  also
    conceded that the use of the  term  "exceptional"  at  [18]  showed  an
    incorrect approach to the proportionality assessment.

 5. Mr Walker also submitted that it was now the respondent's view that  it
    would be disproportionate to expect the  appellant  to  return  to  the
    Philippines and that the appeal should be allowed.  It  was  undisputed
    before the First-tier Tribunal that the relationship  was  genuine  and
    subsisting. If more were needed, it was also accepted that  the  couple
    had married on 5 July 2013. It was accepted that  Mr  Wray  would  have
    difficulty managing without the appellant due to his  health  problems.
    In short, it was Mr Walker's  submission  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed outright under Article 8.

 6. As a result of the Secretary of State's position at the hearing  before
    me, I found that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed
    an error on a point of law such that it should be  set  aside  and  re-
    made.

 7. The Secretary of State has also indicated that the  appellant's  return
    to the Philippines would amount to a disproportionate interference with
    her family and private life. I therefore re-made the appeal as  allowed
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside. I re-make the appeal as allowed under  Article
    8 of the ECHR.


Signed                              Date: 27 August 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
