
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04526/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 June 2015                               |On 7 August 2015              |
|Determination given 23 June 2015              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              Mr Abdoukarim Bah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Queens Park
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Gambia, date of birth  14  November  1986,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 27 December 2013,  to
    refuse a residence permit based upon the Appellant's  claim  to  be  an
    extended family member of an EEA national under  Regulation  8  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The appeal came before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Zahed (the judge), who heard the case  on  30  September
    2014 and sent for e-promulgation his decision on 20 October 2014.   For
    reasons that have not been enquired into the decision  was  promulgated
    by the administration on 15 January 2015.

2.   For the avoidance of doubt there was  no  material  delay  between  the
    hearing and the judge's signing off of his decision.

3.   The hearing was conducted at Hatton Cross hearing centre  when  at  the
    material time the Appellant and Sponsor  were  residing  in  the  Leeds
    area.  The notice of hearing was given to  Queens  Park  Solicitors,  a
    London-based firm.  It does not appear from  the  case  file  that  any
    steps were taken, given the claimed ill health of the Sponsor, to  have
    the hearing conducted at the Leeds/Bradford hearing centre,  which  has
    full access facilities for the disabled, nor was a postponement  sought
    of the hearing in  advance.   Nor  on  the  day  did  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant seek an adjournment on the basis of the Sponsor's ill  health
    rendered her unfit to attend court to give evidence.  Further, even  if
    some application had been made, the case file does not  show  that  any
    steps in advance were taken by the Appellant's representatives to  have
    a video link organised from Leeds, where the Sponsor  resided,  to  the
    hearing centre at Hatton Cross.  In all likelihood such an  application
    would have been met with a transfer of the case to the more  convenient
    hearing centre.

4.   Before the judge there was a letter from a Dr Haroon  Rashid  dated  26
    September 2014.  There was a letter of 15 August 2014 written by a Dr E
    Storr of the Allerton Medical Centre,  the  same  centre  at  which  Dr
    Rashid works.  There may be, but it does not appear  to  be  the  case,
    some correspondence from a consultant orthopaedic surgeon, Mr  Aderinto
    MB, ChB, MSc, MD, FRCS.   This  correspondence  in  totality  does  not
    indicate anything other than the fact that  unfortunately  the  Sponsor
    has a particular problem with lumbar back pain and it seemed from  time
    to time has had some loss of  mobility.   Other  than  that  there  was
    nothing to suggest that she was unfit either to  make  a  statement  or
    unfit to be able to attend a hearing centre to give evidence.

5.   With such limited  evidence  before  him,  the  judge,  was  confronted
    simply by the evidence from the Sponsor in a sponsorship statement  and
    an unsigned statement of which there was nothing  to  indicate  it  was
    ever verified  with  the  Sponsor  as  being  factually  correct.   The
    unsigned statement was undated.  The judge therefore had to do the best
    he could with the material before him.

6.   The principal and first complaint  was  that  there  was  a  procedural
    error of law in the judge proceeding with the hearing when the  Sponsor
    being unable to attend.  I do not accept that the factual position  has
    been established to show that the Sponsor was unfit to attend a hearing
    even one in Leeds.  In those circumstances given the absence  of  steps
    to seek an adjournment nor indeed at the hearing I  see  no  procedural
    unfairness established through the absence of  the  Sponsor  or  proper
    reasons for the same.  The judge made note of the evidence that he  was
    taken to concerning the letter from  Dr  Haroon  (paragraph  6  of  the
    decision) and he was therefore entitled to take  the  point  which  was
    entirely a matter for  him  of  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  that
    information.  Plainly if the Sponsor's statement had  been  signed  and
    its contents confirmed as true and accurate some weight could be  given
    to that statement even if it was untested.  However, the judge was  put
    in the position of doing the best he could on the material as provided,
    in the way it was provided, and I see no sustainable criticism of  him,
    demonstrating any procedural error giving rise to unfairness or a  lack
    of natural justice.  Accordingly the judge's decision  to  proceed  was
    entirely one for him and does not disclose any arguable error of law.

7.   Secondly, it was said that the judge erred in law because  he  gave  no
    weight to the witness statement of the Sponsor.

8.   In this respect I find that as a matter of law it was for the judge  to
    decide what weight to give that matter.  He was entitled  to  read  the
    unsigned and undated statement closely  and  find  such  little  weight
    could be attached to it, given the broad lack of particulars  given  by
    the Sponsor as to the extent of her claimed  sponsorship  and  when  it
    occurred.  In particular it is noteworthy that  in  the  statement  the
    evidence was essentially a bare assertion of money being sent  in  some
    unspecified  amounts  at  some  unspecified  times   to   support   the
    Appellant's upkeep  and  school  fees:  This  at  the  same  time  when
    similarly the Appellant was applying to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom
    reliant upon the financial support of his father in the Gambia.  How it
    should come to pass that the Appellant should be receiving money, as is
    now said, in the way he was were issues, had the judge put his mind  to
    it, which would have raised serious doubts about the reliability of the
    evidence in any event.

9.   I only touch upon this matter because essentially Mr Jafar argued  that
    there was evidence of weight and substance which simply  could  not  be
    dismissed as  lacking  weight,  an  argument  with  which  I  disagree.
    Ultimately it seemed to me that it was entirely a matter for the  judge
    to decide and he made no error of law in reaching the view  he  did  on
    the material.  The practical difficulty for the Appellant was that  the
    judge was not satisfied nor did  the  evidence  go  to  show  that  the
    Appellant and Sponsor were qualifying 'family members': Ultimately that
    matter was essentially the end of the case.  I find the judge  made  no
    error of law in addressing that issue on the evidence before him.

10.  In those  circumstances  the  only  point  that  was  not  particularly
    pursued was the Article 8 issue which  is  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal dated 1  September  2014.   The  near
    entirety of the arguments related to  Regulation  8  of  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.  However, the grounds did state, under heading  Article  8
    ECHR family life proportionately, the Appellant's appeal  ought  to  be
    allowed as it fell within the realms of Article 8 ECHR for private  and
    family life which should not  be  disproportionately  interfered  with.
    The Appellant has established family life and  private  life  with  his
    Sponsor which should be protected and any  decision  to  separate  them
    would amount to a disproportionate interference of the same.

11.  It is clear from the evidence that was advanced that  essentially  what
    was  being  relied  upon,  in  the  main  if  not  entirely,  was   the
    relationship between the Sponsor and the Appellant as evidenced by  the
    statement of the Appellant dated 30 September 2014.

12.  However, it is extremely difficult to see, even if this  was  a  matter
    which the judge should have  considered,  whether  it  could  make  any
    difference to the outcome, not least because the evidence did not  show
    any element of real dependency upon the Sponsor.  Mr Jafar  essentially
    transferred the weight on that issue to the role  the  Appellant  could
    help the Sponsor with her children.  This was barely a  matter  touched
    upon in the statement of the Sponsor and barely touched upon at all  in
    the statement of the Appellant that was before the judge.  Therefore it
    seems to me even if the judge was wrong in failing to consider  Article
    8 no similar Tribunal applying their minds to the  evidence  before  it
    would have reached any different view, namely the claim under Article 8
    ECHR was not made out on the evidence before it.

13.  Accordingly, if there is an error of law by the  judge  in  failing  to
    deal with Article 8 issues it made no difference to  the  outcome.   It
    may be that EEA cases do not attract a consideration of Article 8  even
    though as was pointed out no removal directions are set,  no  intention
    to remove is manifest in any further actions by the Secretary of  State
    and no further steps had been taken to effect removal.  If  there  were
    any merit in the matter, as a fact the Appellant did not establish that
    his Article 8(1) rights were engaged nor that the effect of his removal
    in due course would give rise to a demonstrable breach even to that low
    level of significance identified in AG (Eritrea).  Similarly  Mr  Jafar
    does not point to nor did the  grounds  ever  point  to  the  issue  of
    proportionality in its wider context looking at Article 8 ECHR  outside
    of the Rules.

14.  For those reasons therefore I am satisfied that the  Original  Tribunal
    made no material error of law.  The Original Tribunal decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION
The appeal is dismissed.
No anonymity direction was previously made and none is sought.

Signed                                  Date 2 August 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


