
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/04442/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 8th August 2017                           |On: 9th August 2017          |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Okechukwu Clement Okoli
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adelakun, Arndale Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, Mr Okoli, is a national of Nigeria  born  on  the  10th
    March 1985. On the 20th February 2017 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Chambers)  allowed  his  deportation  appeal  with  reference  to   the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (The  Regs).  The
    Secretary of  State  now  has  permission[1]  to  appeal  against  that
    decision.




    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The reason that a national of Nigeria is able to  place  reliance  upon
    the Regs is that Mr Okoli is a family member of a  Portuguese  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK. Her name is Ms Erica Da  Conceicado
    De Almeida Ramos.  It is accepted  that  Ms  Ramos  and  Mr  Okoli  are
    married, are in a genuine and subsisting relationship and  indeed  that
    they have two children together.  So it was  that  when  Mr  Okoli  was
    convicted, on the 9th February  2012,  of  possession  with  intent  to
    supplying almost half a kilo of Class A  drugs  (heroin  and  cocaine),
    the legal framework to be applied in deporting him was that set out  in
    Regulation 21:

           '21.-(1) In this regulation a "relevant decision" means  an  EEA
         decision taken on the grounds of public policy, public security  or
         public health.

           (2) A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

           (3) A relevant decision may not be taken in respect of a  person
         with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15  except  on
         serious grounds of public policy or public security.

           (4) A relevant decision may not be taken  except  on  imperative
         grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

         (a) has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of at
         least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

         (b) is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision is
         necessary in his best interests, as provided for in the Convention
         on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General Assembly of the
         United Nations on 20th November 1989(1).

           (5) Where a relevant decision is  taken  on  grounds  of  public
         policy or public security it shall, in addition to  complying  with
         the preceding paragraphs of this regulation, be taken in accordance
         with the following principles-

         (a) the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality;

         (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
         of the person concerned;

         (c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of
         the fundamental interests of society;

         (d) matters isolated from the particulars of the case or which
         relate to considerations of general prevention do not justify the
         decision;

         (e) a person's previous criminal convictions do not in themselves
         justify the decision.

           (6) Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds  of  public
         policy or public security in relation to a person who  is  resident
         in the United Kingdom the  decision  maker  must  take  account  of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin.

           ...'


 3. It was uncontentious that Mr Okoli had not accrued a permanent right of
    residence, and so did not benefit from  any  enhanced  protection  from
    removal. The burden lay on the Respondent to show, inter  alia  and  in
    accordance with Reg 21 (5)(c),  that  the  personal  conduct  Mr  Okoli
    represents a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to one of
    the fundamental interests of society.


 4. When the matter came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  evidence
    presented was that  Mr  Okoli  lived  with  Ms  Ramos  and  their  twin
    children. She testified that he was a good father and looks  after  the
    twins when she is working.  The Tribunal  accepted  this  evidence  and
    found there to be a "necessary and valuable  role"  in  his  children's
    lives. The Tribunal was also told that Mr Okoli has another child  from
    a previous relationship, a four year old boy living in Wales  with  his
    mother.   He travels to visit him there once every month.

 5. As to his offending  the  Tribunal  had  regard  to  the  fact  of  the
    conviction  for  what  was  undoubtedly  a  serious  offence,  to   the
    sentencing remarks of the Judge, and to an OASys report prepared by the
    offender  management  service.  This  was  described   as   "positively
    favourable" to Mr Okoli. It did not suggest that there was any risk  of
    reoffending, and set out the steps that he had  taken  to  rehabilitate
    himself, which included taking advantage of  training  and  educational
    opportunities.  On the basis of this material the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was not satisfied that the Respondent had shown there to be a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious risk affecting one of the  fundamental
    interests of society: the appeal was accordingly allowed.



    The Challenge

 6. The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  submits  that  the
    approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal reveals the following  errors
    of law:


              i) Undue weight placed on the  OASys  report.  Whilst  it  was
                 accepted that the report did indicate that there was a  low
                 risk of reoffending, it could not be determinative of  that
                 matter. In the Secretary of State for the Home Department's
                 submission Mr Okoli "clearly had a propensity to  reoffend"
                 such that  the  burden  in  respect  of  Reg  21(5)(c)  was
                 discharged;


             ii)  In  its  assessment  of  proportionality  the   First-tier
                 Tribunal had failed to give reasons as to why it  would  be
                 unduly harsh for his family if he were to be  removed  from
                 the UK


      Discussion and Findings

 7. The focus of the grounds is the OASys report. Mr Harrison  pointed  out
    that such reports can rarely if ever be considered determinative of the
    propensity  of  an  individual  to  reoffend.  He  submitted  that  the
    reasoning in the determination was brief and that the Tribunal appeared
    to have uncritically accepted the conclusions in the report.  I  accept
    that this is a fair assessment. The reasoning appears to be confined to
    paragraph 26 of the determination, and  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    Tribunal subjected the OASys assessment to detailed scrutiny.


 8. I cannot see however, that there is any material error in that.  Unlike
    the report in Vasconcelos (risk-rehabilitation) [2013] UKUT 00378,  the
    global conclusion that there was a "low risk" of reoffending did appear
    to be justified on the basis of any sort of analysis  of  this  report.
    The NOMS assessment was that Mr Okoli had an 8% chance  of  reoffending
    within a year, and a 15% chance of reoffending within two.  Of  course,
    at the date of  the  appeal  before  Judge  Chambers,  this  optimistic
    assessment had proved justified, since there had  been  no  reoffending
    since Mr Okoli was released in late 2012.   Judge  Chambers  also  took
    into account the sentencing remarks, and the oral evidence  of  Mr  and
    Mrs Okoli, in making the clear finding that Mr Okoli  had  taken  clear
    steps to rehabilitate himself,  and  there  was  not  a  propensity  to
    reoffend. Crucially, as the determination notes at paragraph  26:  "the
    contention of the Respondent to the contrary is not  made  out".   This
    was the real difficulty for Mr Harrison in pursuing  the  Secretary  of
    State's case. All of the evidence pointed towards rehabilitation having
    been effected, and there was no evidence at all -  bar  the  conviction
    itself - that Mr Okoli presented any sort of  threat  at  all.  On  the
    basis of Reg 21(5)(e) the Tribunal was entitled to conclude  that  this
    in  itself  was  not  enough  to  establish  a   "genuine  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat".

 9. As Mr Harrison acknowledged, the finding of the Tribunal on risk was at
    the heart of the appeal. If the alleged risk could not be made out,  Mr
    Okoli succeeded in his appeal. It follows that I need not  address  the
    second ground raised.




    Decisions


10. For the reasons set out above I am not satisfied that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law. The  decision
    is upheld.

11. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on that facts of the
    case I see no reason to do so.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             8th August 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin) on
the 11th January 2017


