

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/04261/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7th March, 2016                        |On 2nd June, 2016                 |
|Given extempore                           |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MS A KYRYCHENKO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Chirico, Counsel instructed by Global
Immigration Solutions


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the Secretary of State is the  appellant  and  to  avoid
    confusion I shall refer to her as being, "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Ukraine,  who  was  born  on  17th  May,
    1991.  The respondent entered the United Kingdom on 6th February,  2011
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student and extended her leave to remain in  this
    capacity until 11th February, 2014.

3.   On 23rd January, 2014, the respondent made a  further  application  for
    leave to remain in the same capacity and whilst awaiting a decision she
    married a gentleman with settled status in the United  Kingdom  on  3rd
    September, 2014.  On 8th September, 2014 she  made  an  application  to
    vary her previous, and as yet undetermined, application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her marriage.  That application was  refused  on
    14th January, 2014.

4.   The  respondent  appealed  and  her  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gibbs, sitting at Hendon  Magistrates'  Court,  on  28th
    July, 2015.  Unfortunately,  the  Immigration  Judge  and  the  parties
    appeared to have overlooked the fact that on  19th  January,  2015  the
    Secretary of State, the claimant in this appeal, made a decision  under
    Section 10(8) of the 2002 Act to cancel the  respondent's  leave.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to allow the respondent's  appeal  on
    the basis that she was entitled to a grant of settlement as the  spouse
    of someone settled in the United Kingdom.

5.   The claimant was dissatisfied with this decision, because  she  alleged
    the respondent had used deception in an earlier application.  The judge
    recorded at paragraph 3 of her  determination  that  the  claimant  had
    discovered that the respondent's English test  results  taken  on  19th
    October,  2011  were  cancelled,  because  the  results  indicated  the
    presence of a proxy taker.  The respondent accepted that  she  had  not
    taken the test.  The claimant suggested  that  the  judge  should  have
    refused the respondent's appeal,  because  of  the  use  of  this  test
    certificate and claimed that the same ETS TOEC  certificate  which  had
    been  relied  upon  in  the  2012  Tier  4  application  was  the  same
    certificate relied upon by the respondent in her marriage  application.
    I would note in passing that it  has  been  pointed  out  to  me  quite
    properly by Mr Wilding, that in fact the same test certificate was  not
    used, the respondent having subsequently sat and been awarded  a  valid
    English test certificate and it was the second  certificate  which  the
    respondent submitted..

6.   This morning I was given a copy of an email sent by Mr Wilding  to  the
    correspondence section at the Upper Tribunal at 15:03pm on Friday last.
     In it, or attached to it, is an application by the claimant  to  amend
    her grounds of appeal.

7.   I want to make it abundantly clear that in what I am  about  to  say  I
    make no criticism at all of Mr  Wilding.   He  has  been  exceptionally
    helpful to me today and I am grateful to him and to Counsel  for  their
    submissions.

8.   It is appropriate  that  I  set  out  the  application.   It  reads  as
    follows:

         "An application to amend her grounds of appeal


         1.   This is an application by the Secretary of State to amend  her
             grounds of appeal in this appeal, which is listed to be  heard
             on Monday, 7th March at Field House.


         2.   Despite this application being made out of time, permission is
             requested for time to be extended and permission to be granted
             on this point given:


             a.    It  appears  to  have  been  missed  by  the  Claimant's
                  representatives, the Secretary of State's  representatives
                  at the First-tier Tribunal, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
                  who heard the appeal, the Senior  Presenting  Officer  who
                  drafted the original grounds of appeal and the  First-tier
                  Tribunal Judge who granted permission; and


             b.   Of crucial importance to  the  lawful  disposal  of  this
                  appeal given  the  immigration  decision  which  is  under
                  appeal.


         Ground of Appeal - material misdirection in law


         3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge who allowed this  appeal  solely
             focused  on  whether  the  false  ETS  certificate  had   been
             submitted with the application or not.  She did  not  consider
             the fact that the immigration decision itself was  a  decision
             to administratively remove the claimant  under  s.10(1)(b)  of
             the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, namely that:


                  '10(1)   A person who is not  a  British  citizen  may  be
                      removed from the UK  in  accordance  with  directions
                      given by an immigration officer, if -
                  ...


                  (b)  he uses deception in seeking (whether successfully or
                  not) leave to remain.'


         4.   It is clear in this decision that the grounds for taking  this
             decision were 'there is substantial evidence to conclude  that
             your certificate was fraudulently obtained',  thereby  clearly
             notifying the claimant that the SSHD considered that  she  had
             used deception.


         5.   The effect of this decision is that it invalidates  any  leave
             to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  which  she  had
             previously been given (as per s.10(8) of the 1999 Act).   This
             means that the claimant  could  not  satisfy  the  eligibility
             requirement of Appendix FM:


                  'E-ELTRP.2.2. - the applicant must not be in the UK -


                  1.(a)    on  temporary  admission  or  temporary  release,
                      unless -


                  1.(i)    the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
                      applicant arrived in the UK more than 6 months  prior
                      to the date of application; and


                  2.(ii)   paragraph EX.1.1. applies; or


                  2.(b)    in breach of immigration laws  (disregarding  any
                      period of overstaying for a  period  of  28  days  or
                      less), unless paragraph EX.1.1. applies.'


         6.   Therefore  the  claimant  could  only  succeed  if  she  could
             demonstrate that she met the provisions of EX.1.1, because her
             leave has been cancelled and as a result she is in the  UK  in
             breach of  Immigration Rules, and has been  since  2012.   The
             authority from the Court  of  Appeal  on  this  is  clear,  in
             Mehmood & Anor v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
             [2015] EWCA Civ 744.


                  '35. The provision in section 10(8) of the 1999  Act  that
                      the notification 'invalidates any leave... previously
                      given to him' is to make it clear that its effect  is
                      that, from the date of the notification,  that  which
                      had previously  been  done  is  undone.   It  is  not
                      implicitly  drawing  a  distinction   between   leave
                      pursuant to Section 3 and leave pursuant  to  Section
                      3C.  Such a distinction would, as  the  Secretary  of
                      State  submitted  below  and  as  the  Deputy   Judge
                      accepted (see [33]) produce  arbitrary  results.   On
                      the interpretation for which Mr Malik contended,  the
                      Secretary of State's  power  to  remove  pursuant  to
                      Section 10(1) on the basis  of  deceit  would  depend
                      upon whether the alleged deceit was uncovered  during
                      the primary period of leave or after  a  decision  to
                      extend a person's  leave,  or  during  the  statutory
                      extension of the primary period of leave pending  any
                      decision on the  person's  application  to  vary  the
                      leave.


                  36.  I do not consider Mr Malik gets any  assistance  from
                      Section 47 of the 2006 Act.  It is  dealing  with  an
                      entirely different situation.  That is the removal of
                      people who have complied  with  the  terms  of  their
                      leave but whose application for a variation of  their
                      existing leave has been or will be refused before the
                      expiry of that leave, for example,  because  they  no
                      longer fit the criteria for leave.  It is not dealing
                      with people who have broken the conditions  of  their
                      existing leave  or  used  deception,  whose  existing
                      leave Lord Hughes in R (George) v Secretary of  State
                      for the Home Department [2014] UKSC  28  reported  at
                      [2014] 1 WLR 1831 described  as  'seriously  flawed'.
                      Their position is very different.  It does not follow
                      from a failure to  make  provision  invalidating  the
                      existing leave of a person who has complied with  all
                      requirements that Parliament would  not  empower  the
                      Secretary of State to  made  a  Section  10  decision
                      invalidating the remainder of the existing  leave  of
                      those who are in breach and giving them only an  out-
                      of-country appeal: see my reference at [47] below  to
                      the statement of Stanley Burnton LJ in the  Court  of
                      Appeal in George's case  that  Parliament  would  not
                      have provided for retrospective effect 'at least in a
                      case  where leave was not obtained fraudulently or by
                      misrepresentation.' [Emphasis added].


                  37.  I also consider that  Mr  Malik's  criticism  of  the
                      Deputy Judge's reliance (at [32] of her judgment)  on
                      the statement of Pill LJ in QI (Pakistan) v Secretary
                      of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ  614
                      at [14] that leave varied  under  Section  3C  is  'a
                      statutory extension of the original  leave',  not  'a
                      new or different species of leave' is misplaced.   He
                      submitted that what he described as her 'analogy' was
                      'implausible' because (a) QI  (Pakistan)'s  case  was
                      primarily  concerned   with   the   construction   of
                      paragraph 245ZX(l) of the Immigration Rules  and  not
                      Section 10(8) of the 1999 Act; (b) there  was  common
                      ground  and  therefore  no   argument   as   to   the
                      construction of paragraph 245ZX(l), and (c) there was
                      no  analysis  of   what   are   described   as   'the
                      contrasting' words used in Section 3 and  3C  of  the
                      1971 Act and Section  10(8)  of  the  1999  Act.   He
                      argued  that  Pill  LJ's  statement  that  the  leave
                      extended is not 'a new or different species of leave'
                      is not inconsistent with the construction  for  which
                      he contended.  I consider that,  notwithstanding  the
                      different context, his statement  is  not  consistent
                      with Mr Malik's submissions in these  appeals.   Pill
                      LJ's statement  simply  reflects  what  is,  for  the
                      reasons I have given, the clear  meaning  of  Section
                      3C.'


             Therefore  Section  10(8)  invalidates  the  leave  previously
             given, certainly any leave which resulted from the  deception,
             in this case that is from February 2012.


         7.   This means that the claimant was not lawfully in the UK at the
             time of her application, and means that in  order  to  qualify
             under Appendix FM she had to demonstrate that EX.1.1 was  met.
             The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider this  and  this
             failure is a material error of  law.   For  the  avoidance  of
             doubt this ground does not say that the appeal is  an  out  of
             country one, the appeal is in country due to the human  rights
             claim which was made prior to the decision being made.


         8.   The Tribunal is invited to extend time and to grant permission
             to appeal."


9.   I have  heard  lengthy  submissions  from  both  Mr  Wilding  and  from
    Counsel.  Mr Wilding suggests that the error on the part of, not simply
    the judge, but everybody who has played a part in  the  proceedings  to
    date, was Robinson obvious (R (on the application of)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department & Anor [1997] EWCA Civ 3090).

10.  He suggests that EX.1.1. needs to be considered and  the  appeal  needs
    to be re-heard so that proper findings can be made.

11.  I believe that the time limits for seeking permission  to  appeal  were
    reduced in 2005.  I may be wrong in the year, but I do recall that they
    were reduced to their current level of fourteen  working  days  at  the
    insistence of the Home Office.  This, of course,  does  quite  properly
    focus the parties' minds and the reason for having strict  time  limits
    is that there must be a time when litigation ends.

12.  It seems to me that if the current time  limits  are  adequate  for  an
    appellant to make application  for  permission  to  appeal,  then  they
    certainly should be more than adequate for the claimant, with  all  the
    resources available to her.  The Tribunal  have  always  been  slow  to
    extend the time limits and good reasons for doing so are required to be
    demonstrated.

13.  The claimant's original application for permission to  appeal  met  the
    time limits and it was submitted on 15th September last by a Specialist
    Appeals Team.  It was considered by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on 27th
    January, 2016.  In has to be born in mind that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge will have been considering a number of other applications on  the
    same day.  Although those drafting applications do not seem to be aware
    of it, before a judge can decide whether or not to grant permission  it
    is necessary for the judge to read  the  determination,  so   that  the
    grounds of application only need be very brief.  All they  need  do  is
    simply identify the alleged error of  law.  The  grounds  submitted  on
    behalf of the claimant were refreshingly brief.  Unfortunately,  as  we
    have now discovered they were wrong.

14.  I make no criticism of Mr Wilding for having submitted the  application
    on Friday.  I do not know, but I suspect that he started preparing  the
    case sometime late last week, realised that errors had  been  made  and
    set about trying to correct the situation.

15.  Before I can grant permission,  I  have  to  be  satisfied  as  to  the
    reasons for the delay.

16.  I have not actually been given any explanation and I suspect  that  the
    matter was simply missed by the Specialist Appeals Team and not  picked
    up until more recently by Mr Wilding.  However, the  claimant  has  had
    ample opportunity to take this application since September  2015.   The
    respondent in this appeal would not have known until late on Friday  or
    possibly until this morning that the application was going to  be  made
    by Mr Wilding.

17.  Earlier I invited both representatives to apply for an  adjournment  if
    they felt they needed more time to consider their positions and neither
    did.  I have concluded that it would be entirely wrong of me  to  grant
    leave to the claimant to amend the grounds of appeal at this very  late
    stage.

18.  The claimant could and should  have  reviewed  this  decision  earlier.
    The application to amend is effectively more than five  months  out  of
    time.  In my view that is far too long for me to grant an extension  of
    time; I am afraid I refuse to grant extra time in which to  submit  the
    application.

19.  Having refused to extend the time limits I refuse to  grant  permission
    to appeal.

20.  It follows that since Mr Wilding is no longer relying  on  the  grounds
    on which permission was granted, the appeal is dismissed.






Notice of Decision

The making of the decision by the First Tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of no error on a point of law.


Signed                 Date 2nd June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

