
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04647/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Birmingham           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th July 2016                          |On 19th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                             motty thato rampana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Searle of Counsel instructed by MB Law Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appealed against a decision of Judge Stott of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 30th September 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Botswana born 2nd October 1997 who
    entered the United Kingdom on 7th February 2011 as a visitor.  She  was
    granted leave to enter for six months.

 3. Prior to expiry of that leave, on 4th July 2011 the  Appellant  applied
    for settlement in the United  Kingdom,  claiming  that  she  wished  to
    remain in this country with her mother Edith Rampana to  whom  I  shall
    refer as the Sponsor.

 4. The Respondent refused that application on the basis that DNA  evidence
    proved that the Sponsor is not the Appellant's mother but is her  aunt.
    The Respondent's mother Lady Judith Rampana was living in Botswana.

 5. However the Appellant was granted further discretionary leave to remain
    outside the Immigration Rules, on 11th October 2012, valid  until  11th
    April 2013.  The purpose of this  leave  was  to  enable  her  to  make
    arrangements to return to Botswana.

 6. Rather than making arrangements to return to Botswana, the Appellant on
    8th April 2013 applied for  further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom based upon her family and private life.  That  application  was
    refused on 6th January 2014, and in addition to refusing to vary  leave
    to remain, the Respondent made a decision to remove the Appellant  from
    the United Kingdom.

 7. The Appellant appealed to  the  FtT  pursuant  to  section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the  2002  Act).   The
    appeal was heard on 23rd September 2014.  After hearing  evidence  from
    the Appellant and the Sponsor, the FtT dismissed the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, and on human rights grounds.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
    the basis that the best interests of a child, the Appellant,  were  not
    identified and given primary consideration by the FtT.

 9. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rimington in the following terms;

         "There is an arguable error of law that the judge  failed  to  make
         any reference to the best interests of the  child.   Permission  to
         appeal is granted."

Error of Law

10. At a hearing before me on 7th March 2016 I heard submissions from  both
    parties regarding error of law.  Full details of  the  application  for
    permission, the grant of permission, and the submissions made  by  both
    parties are contained in my decision dated 9th March  2016,  which  was
    promulgated on 18th March 2016.  I set out below paragraphs 14-21 of my
    decision which contain my conclusions and reasons for finding an  error
    of law and setting aside the decision of the FtT;

         "14. The Appellant applied for discretionary leave to  remain,  and
             her representatives made it clear in the  letter  accompanying
             her application, that they  were  requesting  an  exercise  of
             discretion, and not relying upon the Immigration Rules.

         15.  The FtT found that the appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the
             Immigration Rules, and this  finding  is  not  challenged  and
             therefore stands.

         16.  It is clear from paragraph 1 of the decision that the FtT  was
             aware of the Appellant's age, and paragraph 4 makes  it  clear
             that the FtT was aware that it was claimed that it would be in
             the Appellant's best interest to remain in the United Kingdom.

         17.  The Respondent had considered section 55 of the 2009  Act  and
             best interests of the Appellant  at  pages  5  and  6  of  the
             reasons for refusal letter dated 6th January 2014.

         18.  I agree with the submissions made on behalf of the Respondent,
             that it is not an error of law, without more,  simply  not  to
             refer to section 55 of the 2009 Act.   What  however  must  be
             made clear is that in a  case  involving  a  child,  and  when
             proportionality is considered  under  Article  8  outside  the
             Immigration Rules as in this case, the best interests  of  the
             child must be a primary consideration.  It is clear  that  the
             best interests of a child are not a  paramount  consideration,
             or the only primary consideration.  The best  interests  of  a
             child can be outweighed by other considerations.

         19.  However in this case, the findings made by the FtT  which  are
             contained at paragraphs 14-23 do not disclose  that  the  best
             interests of the Appellant as a  child  were  identified,  and
             thereafter considered together with any other  considerations.
             I set out below the conclusions of the Upper Tribunal in Abdul
             at paragraph (ii) of the head note;

             (ii) Where it is contended that the decision maker and/or  the
                  First-tier Tribunal (FtT) has acted  in  contravention  of
                  section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
                  2009, the Upper Tribunal will  scrutinise  the  degree  of
                  engagement with all material evidence and, in  particular,
                  will search for clear findings in a decision of the FtT of
                  what the best interests of any effective child are.

         20.  The conclusion of the FtT is clear, in  that  it  was  decided
             that the Appellant was not entitled to remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom.  What is not clear, is the identification of the best
             interests of  the  child,  and  then  consideration  of  other
             factors which may outweigh the best interests.

         21.  I am therefore persuaded that  the  decision  of  the  FtT  is
             flawed by a material error of law, and cannot stand."

11. It was suggested on behalf of the Appellant that the appeal  should  be
    re-made by remittal to  the  FtT,  but  having  considered  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statements and in particular paragraph 7.3,  which
    indicates that re-making in the Upper Tribunal  rather  than  remitting
    will constitute the normal approach to  determining  appeals  where  an
    error of law is found, even if some further fact-finding is  necessary,
    I decided that the appeal should be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  The
    hearing was adjourned so that further evidence could be given.  It  was
    made clear the findings of the FtT in relation to the Immigration Rules
    were maintained, and therefore the issue to be decided related only  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

Re-Making the Decision - Upper Tribunal Hearing 5th July 2016

Preliminary Issues

12. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.  I had received
    the Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-E, the Notice of Appeal, and the
    Appellant's bundle indexed 1-14.   All  of  these  documents  had  been
    before the FtT.  In addition I  received  from  Mr  Searle  a  skeleton
    argument dated 4th July 2016.

13. Both representatives indicated that it was understood that the  hearing
    related only to consideration of  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

14. Mr Searle advised that the Appellant and Sponsor would be  giving  oral
    evidence, and confirmed that neither required an interpreter.

15. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

Oral Evidence

16. The Appellant and Sponsor gave evidence  independently,  both  adopting
    the contents of their undated witness statements contained at  pages  1
    and 2 of the Appellant's bundle.

17. Both were questioned by the representatives and  I  have  recorded  all
    questions and answers in my  Record  of  Proceedings,  and  it  is  not
    necessary to reiterate the evidence in this decision.   If  relevant  I
    will refer to the oral evidence when  I  set  out  my  conclusions  and
    findings.

18. I will summarise below the witness statements.   The  Appellant  stated
    that she had suffered  from  tuberculosis  in  Botswana  and  described
    living with an uncle who  has  "a  mental  problem  and  is  constantly
    smoking"  and she blamed this for contracting TB.   She  described  the
    environment in which she was living as uncomfortable,  which  adversely
    affected her performance at school.

19. The Sponsor brought her to the United Kingdom to see if  the  Appellant
    liked living in this country, and the initial intention  was  that  she
    would then return to Botswana, and decide whether she wished to make  a
    settlement application.  However, the Appellant explained  that  things
    did not work according to plan, and she ended up having to stay  longer
    than expected.

20. She then enrolled at school and found  that  she  was  performing  much
    better at school in this country than she had in Botswana.

21. The Appellant confirmed that she comes from a Christian background, and
    that she would not cause any problems if allowed to stay in the  United
    Kingdom.  She was studying business and  hoped  to  have  a  career  in
    business.  She stated that if she had to leave this  country  it  would
    destroy her emotionally, because she has made so many close friends.

22. The Sponsor's statement was brief, referring to the  Appellant  as  her
    daughter.  The Sponsor confirmed that she is the  only  person  who  is
    able to look after the Appellant and she brought the Appellant to  this
    country to ensure that she is well looked after.

23. Without reiterating the oral evidence, it is fair to say that both  the
    Appellant and Sponsor expressed a very strong wish that  the  Appellant
    be allowed to  stay  in  this  country.   It  was  contended  that  the
    Appellant regards the Sponsor as her mother, and  the  Sponsor  adopted
    her at birth because the  Sponsor's  sister,  who  is  the  Appellant's
    biological mother, gave birth when she was a  teenager  and  could  not
    look after the Appellant.

24. The Sponsor came to the United Kingdom in 2003 with a work permit,  and
    was granted indefinite leave to remain  in  2008.   She  owns  her  own
    property upon which there is a mortgage,  and  she  is  employed  as  a
    nurse.

25. The Appellant stated in  oral  evidence  that  she  has  just  finished
    college, and that she studied performing arts, and she wishes to set up
    her own theatre company performing for children.

The Respondent's Submissions

26. Mr Mills submitted that it is no longer necessary to consider the  best
    interests of a child, because the Appellant is not a child.  She is now
    18 years of age.  Mr Mills submitted that the  Tribunal  must  consider
    circumstances at the date of hearing, and must therefore  consider  the
    Appellant's appeal on the basis that she is an adult.   With  reference
    to paragraph 10 of Mr Searle's skeleton argument,  Mr  Mills  commented
    that it was  incumbent  upon  the  Secretary  of  State  to  decide  an
    application on the basis  that  an  individual  is  a  child,  if  that
    individual was a child when the application was made, even  if  by  the
    time the decision was made, the individual had reached the age  of  18.
    I was asked to find that this did not apply to the Tribunal.

27. Mr Mills accepted that Article 8 was engaged and he accepted  that  the
    Sponsor had acted in the capacity of a mother to  the  Appellant  since
    2011 when the Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom,  and  therefore
    the Appellant had established a family and private life.

28. I was asked to find that the Respondent's decision is proportionate and
    does not breach Article 8.

29. It was not accepted that the  Sponsor  had  acted  as  the  Appellant's
    mother since birth.  There was no evidence of adoption until  documents
    which were dated in 2012 had been submitted and it was clear,  and  now
    accepted, that the purported adoption would not be  recognised  in  the
    United Kingdom.  I was asked to note that  the  Appellant's  biological
    mother was not a teenager when she gave birth, as had been  claimed  by
    the Sponsor, but as she was born 1st April 1977, she  was  in  fact  20
    years 6 months of age when she gave birth.

30. I was asked to find that evidence given before the FtT, indicated  that
    the Appellant and her biological mother were living together  with  the
    Appellant's grandmother until 2008.  The Appellant and Sponsor had been
    vague as to what happened to the biological mother  thereafter,  though
    the Sponsor had said that she was still living in Botswana.

31. Mr Mills pointed out that the Sponsor had left Botswana in  2003.   She
    delayed making an application for the Appellant to come to  the  United
    Kingdom until 2011, and at that time had used deception  by  describing
    herself as the Appellant's mother in the visit visa application.

32. I was asked to note that the Sponsor had made no effort to undertake  a
    legally recognised adoption.  Both the  Sponsor  and  Appellant  stated
    that the grandmother with whom the Appellant had lived is now frail and
    suffering ill-health but there is no medical evidence to confirm  this.
    The Sponsor had confirmed that one of her sisters had returned from the
    United Kingdom to Botswana  in  2012  to  look  after  the  Appellant's
    grandmother and the Appellant knew this.  Mr Mills submitted  that  the
    Appellant had lied to the Tribunal when  she  was  questioned  on  this
    issue, as she asserted that she was in touch with her grandmother,  who
    lived alone.

33. I was asked to find that there are no  compelling  circumstances  which
    would  justify  allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8  outside   the
    Immigration  Rules.   Mr  Mills  suggested  that  if  the  Sponsor  and
    Appellant wished to live together then it would be reasonable  for  the
    Sponsor to return to Botswana together with the Appellant, as they  are
    both citizens of that country.  I was reminded  of  the  considerations
    contained in section 117B of the  2002  Act,  and  in  particular  that
    little weight should be attached to a private  life  established  by  a
    person when that person has been in  this  country  with  a  precarious
    immigration status.

The Appellant's Submissions

34. Mr Searle relied upon his skeleton  argument  which  runs  to  thirteen
    pages and therefore will not be set out in this decision.  I was  asked
    to consider the Appellant's case on the basis that she was a child when
    her application for leave to remain was made, and therefore she  should
    be treated as a child by the Tribunal.

35. If that was not accepted, Mr Searle submitted that  the  appeal  should
    still be allowed pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

36. I was asked to accept that the Sponsor had  acted  as  the  Appellant's
    mother since her birth, and although documentation had only been issued
    in 2012, the adoption would be recognised in Botswana.

37. I was asked to find that the Sponsor and Appellant had not attempted to
    deceive the immigration authorities in this country, and the  Appellant
    entered  as  a  visitor,  and  subsequently  made  an  application  for
    settlement, on the basis that the Sponsor is her mother.

38. I was asked to accept that the Appellant's grandmother, with  whom  she
    lived until she left Botswana in 2011, is now  elderly  and  frail  and
    could no longer look after her.

39. Mr Searle submitted that the  Appellant  had  integrated  into  British
    society, and I was asked to note the references  contained  within  the
    Appellant's  bundle,  which  came  from  the  Appellant's  friends  and
    teachers, and I was  asked  to  find  that  it  would  not  be  in  the
    Appellant's best interest to return to Botswana.

40. Mr Searle submitted that the length of time that the Appellant had been
    in the United Kingdom should be taken into account, together  with  her
    relationship with the Sponsor, and I  should  therefore  conclude  that
    refusing to grant her leave to remain would be disproportionate  and  a
    breach of Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

41. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

42. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral  and  documentary
    that has been placed  before  me,  and  also  taken  into  account  the
    submissions made by both representatives.

43. In considering Article 8, the burden of proof is on  the  Appellant  to
    establish that she has  a  family  and/or  private  life  that  engages
    Article 8.  If that is established, the Respondent must show  that  the
    decision is lawful, necessary for one of the reasons set out in Article
    8(2), and proportionate.  For ease of reference I set out below Article
    8;

         1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his private  and  family
             life, his home and his correspondence.
         2.   There should be no interference by a public authority with the
             exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance  with
             the law and is  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

44. I find as a fact that the Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor on 7th February 2011 and has resided  here  continuously  since
    arrival.  I find that the Sponsor travelled to the  United  Kingdom  in
    2003 with a work  permit.   She  is  a  qualified  nurse  and  has  had
    employment in that capacity since arriving in this  country.   She  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in 2008.

45. I accept that the Appellant and Sponsor live  together  and  have  done
    since the Appellant's arrival in the United Kingdom.

46. I find that there has been no valid adoption.  I do not accept that the
    Sponsor adopted the Appellant at birth.   I  do  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's biological mother was a teenager when she gave birth, and I
    find she was in fact aged 20 years and 6 months.

47. The evidence given before the FtT confirmed that  the  Appellant  lived
    with her grandmother and  biological  mother  until  2008.   The  money
    transfer receipts within the  Appellant's  bundle  indicates  that  the
    Sponsor was sending money back to the Appellant's biological mother  in
    Botswana in 2010 and 2011.

48. I do not find any satisfactory evidence that the Appellant and  Sponsor
    maintained contact with each other on a regular basis between 2003 when
    the Sponsor left Botswana and 2011  when  the  Appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The evidence in relation  to  contact  conflicted,  in
    that the Appellant in oral evidence claimed that the  Sponsor  returned
    to Botswana "every other month".  The Sponsor stated that she  returned
    once a year, and on balance I accept the Sponsor's evidence.   This  is
    because if the Sponsor had returned  to  Botswana  every  other  month,
    there is no reason why she would not have said so in her evidence.

49. I do not accept the Appellant as a credible witness.  She was asked  by
    Mr Mills whether she was in touch with her grandmother in Botswana  and
    she confirmed that she was.  She was asked who  her  grandmother  lived
    with, and she confirmed that she lived alone.  She said her grandmother
    was ill and could not go out and socialise.  The  Appellant  said  that
    she did not want to return and live with her grandmother, and I  accept
    her evidence on that point, and I accept her evidence that she wants to
    remain with the Sponsor.  However I do not accept that she was truthful
    when describing her grandmother's circumstances, as the Sponsor  stated
    in her oral evidence, that one of her sisters left the  United  Kingdom
    in 2012 specifically to look after the  Appellant's  grandmother.   She
    also explained that one of her brothers, who would be  the  Appellant's
    uncle, also  lived  with  the  Appellant's  grandmother.   The  Sponsor
    confirmed that she also has other siblings living in Botswana.  I  find
    that the Appellant was attempting to provide a  false  picture  of  the
    circumstances in Botswana, and trying to  portray  her  grandmother  as
    being elderly and unwell, and living alone, and unable  to  look  after
    the Appellant.  I accept that the Appellant's grandmother  is  elderly,
    but there is no medical evidence to prove her illnesses, and  different
    answers were given by the Appellant and Sponsor as  to  what  illnesses
    she had, and she does not live alone.

50. In considering Article 8, based upon the facts that  I  have  found,  I
    remind myself of the principles in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    (paragraph 33) in which it was confirmed that compelling  circumstances
    would need to be identified to support a claim for a grant of leave  to
    remain outside the new Immigration Rules in Appendix FM.

51. In considering Article  8  I  have  adopted  the  five  stage  approach
    advocated by the House of Lords in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 which involves
    answering the following questions;

          1) Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

          2) If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

          3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

          4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

          5) If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved.

52. The decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 means that I  must  consider
    the family and private life of the Sponsor as well as the Appellant.

53. In my view I must consider the  circumstances  as  they  exist  at  the
    hearing date, and  therefore  the  Appellant  is  no  longer  a  child.
    Therefore I do not consider the best interests of a child.  I find that
    the Appellant has established a private life since her arrival in  this
    country, and it was  conceded  by  Mr  Mills  that  the  Appellant  had
    established a family life  with  the  Sponsor.   I  therefore  consider
    Article 8 on the basis both of family and private life.

54. As Article 8 is engaged,  I  must  consider  whether  the  Respondent's
    decision would interfere with the Appellant's private and family  life,
    and I find that it would if she was removed from this country.

55. I then must consider whether the interference is in accordance with the
    law and I find that it is  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  cannot
    satisfy the Immigration Rules in order to be granted leave to remain.

56. I find that the proposed interference is necessary in the interests  of
    maintaining effective immigration control, which in turn  is  necessary
    to protect the economic well-being of the country.

57. The issue that must be decided is whether the Respondent's decision  is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

58. When considering family life, I bear in mind that this family life  has
    existed since February 2011 and the Appellant is now an adult.  I place
    significant weight upon the fact that the Appellant cannot satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to family life.

59. I find that when the Appellant arrived in this country as a visitor, it
    was the intention both of the Appellant and the Sponsor that she should
    remain here.  The family life established, has  been  established  when
    the Appellant has had a precarious immigration status.  The issue of  a
    precarious immigration  status  is  not  specifically  referred  to  in
    section 117B in relation to family life,  but  I  find  that  it  is  a
    relevant consideration.  The only leave that  the  Appellant  has  ever
    had, was six months  leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor,  and  thereafter
    discretionary leave to enable her to return to  Botswana.   That  leave
    was subsequently extended by reason of the fact that she  submitted  an
    application for leave to remain  before  it  expired  and  subsequently
    entered an appeal.

60. Having carefully considered the evidence, I find that if the  Appellant
    and Sponsor wish to carry on their family life and cohabit, it would be
    reasonable for the Sponsor to leave the United Kingdom  and  return  to
    Botswana.  Although the Sponsor has indefinite leave to remain, she  is
    not a British citizen.  She is a citizen of Botswana.   She  has  lived
    the greater part of her life in Botswana.  She would have accommodation
    in the family home in Botswana, and her mother and siblings live there.
     There are no relevant medical issues, and the Sponsor as  a  qualified
    nurse would be able to find employment.

61. Alternatively, I find that it would be reasonable for the Appellant  to
    return to Botswana even if the Sponsor wished to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The  Sponsor  could  visit  the  Appellant,  and  they  could
    maintain contact by modern means of communication.  I  appreciate  that
    they stated that they wish to remain living together in  this  country,
    but I have to balance against that, the public interest in  maintaining
    effective immigration control, and the fact that the  Appellant  cannot
    satisfy the Immigration Rules.

62. In relation to the Appellant's private life I have taken  into  account
    all the letters written by her teachers  and  her  friends,  which  are
    contained within the Appellant's bundle.   It  is  to  the  Appellant's
    credit that her teachers regard her so highly.

63. There is no up-to-date evidence from the Appellant's school or college,
    and in her oral evidence she stated that she had just finished a course
    at a performing arts college.

64. In considering the Appellant's  private  life,  I  have  to  take  into
    account that she cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to
    private life, as contained in paragraph  276ADE(1).   No  evidence  has
    been presented by the Appellant to show that she could not continue her
    education in Botswana, or find employment in Botswana.  She has had the
    advantage of being educated in the United Kingdom which may assist  her
    in finding employment.  It is common ground that she was  not  entitled
    to receive an education in the United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant  would
    have no language difficulties if she returned to Botswana, and I do not
    accept she would encounter medical difficulties.  I do  not  find  that
    any  satisfactory  evidence  has  been  submitted  to  prove  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk of tuberculosis if returned to Botswana.

65. Again, I must consider section 117B of the 2002 Act.  I accept that the
    Appellant can speak  English,  and  although  she  is  not  financially
    independent, the Sponsor is financially independent.  However the Upper
    Tribunal confirmed in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 that  an  individual
    can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to remain from  either
    section 117B(2) or (3), whatever the degree of fluency  in  English  or
    strength of financial resources.

66. I must take into account  section  117B(5)  which  states  that  little
    weight should be given to a private life established by a person  at  a
    time when their immigration status is precarious.   The  Appellant  has
    always had a precarious immigration status since  her  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor.

67. Therefore although I  accept  that  the  Appellant  has  established  a
    private life in this country, I must attach little weight to it.

68. In conclusion, I do not find that it has been  established  that  there
    are any compelling circumstances which would justify granting leave  to
    remain to the Appellant based upon Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant has close family members in Botswana,  and  would
    have accommodation.  She is a citizen of Botswana  and  has  spent  the
    greater part of her life in that country.  I find that the weight  that
    must be attached to maintaining effective immigration control outweighs
    the weight to be attached to the wishes of the Appellant  and  Sponsor,
    that the Appellant be allowed to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  even
    though she cannot meet the Immigration Rules necessary  to  be  granted
    such leave.  I find that the Respondent's decision is proportionate and
    does not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.  The appeal  is  dismissed  under
the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

There has been no request for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.






Signed                              Date: 8th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 8th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
