
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04696/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th December 2014                            |On 17th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SYED FAKHAR JAVED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Rashid &
                    Rashid, Tooting, London


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Javed is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth  is  recorded  as
    29th August 1980.  He made application for a Certificate of Entitlement
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.   On
    3rd January  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  refuse  that
    application and Mr Javed appealed.  His appeal was heard on 14th August
    2014 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Majid sitting at Taylor House.
     There were a number of issues in the case  but  it  suffices  for  the
    purposes of the appeal before me to observe that  there  was  an  issue
    concerning paternity of a child of the relationship and also whether or
    not the Sponsor, a national of Slovakia, was exercising  treaty  rights
    as required, given the nature of the application being made.

 2. Judge Majid allowed the appeal.  It is a determination of  some  length
    with reference  to  considerable  learning.  It  is  not  always  easy,
    however, when reading the determination, to relate that learning to the
    issues that fell to be considered.

 3. By notice dated  8th  September  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  made
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and  on  6th
    November 2014 Judge Hollingworth granted permission.  Thus  the  matter
    comes before me.

Was there an error of law?

 4. Mr Sellwood, quite properly in my  view,  did  not  really  resist  the
    appeal.   It  was  the  Secretary  of  State's  contention   that   the
    determination of Judge Majid was inadequately reasoned both in  respect
    to paternity and with respect to the issue whether or not  the  Sponsor
    was exercising treaty rights.  I entirely agree with the submissions of
    the Secretary of State that the reasoning is inadequate.  The error  of
    law in this determination is clearly material.

 5.  The  question  then  arises  as  to  whether  I  should   remake   the
    determination or remit it  for  rehearing.   This  is  a  determination
    beyond repair.  Mr Sellwood invited me to  have  regard  to  additional
    evidence (DNA evidence) relating to the child.  I would  have  admitted
    that evidence because Mr Avery did not object to it  were  it  possible
    for me to remake the decision.  However the determination is,  I  find,
    such that the only course that reasonably can be taken,  having  regard
    to the Senior President's Guidelines, is to remit  this  appeal  for  a
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Majid.

The Decision

 6. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.  The determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be reheard before a judge other
    than Jude Majid in the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date 17th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

