

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/04312/2014

                                                     IA/04330/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at Field House
      Determination promulgated
on 21 January 2015
          on 30 January 2015





                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                       VISHNUBHAT PUNJABHAI PATEL (Mr)
                      MALTIBAHEN VISHNUBHA PATEL (MRS)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the respondent: Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellants: Mr Hussein


                               DECISION AND REASONS

   1. On 31 July 2012, the first appellant, a citizen of India,  applied  to
      remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant, and that application was
      refused on 26 November 2013. His wife made a parallel  application  as
      his dependent wife which was also refused.    An  appeal  against  the
      decisions was    heard  on  23  September  2014  and  the  appeal  was
      dismissed.

   2. Permission to appeal was sought. The case turned on whether the  first
      applicant has actually received a number of letters, which, if he had,
      would have alerted him to the fact that that he had sixty days to find
      a new sponsor. The judge concluded that  he  had  received  them.  The
      grounds of appeal argue  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  reach  this
      conclusion. The grant of permission contains the following:


             2. The grounds are long, poorly  drafted,  repetitive  and  in
             parts unintelligible but they include a claim that  the  judge
             erred in law by failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
             findings that the first appellant had  received  letters  from
             the respondent  giving  him  60  days  in  which  to  find  an
             alternative sponsor.


             3. Given that the judge in the section  of  his  determination
             headed "My findings of Fact" made no findings  with  reference
             to the first appellant's assertion identified by him  at  para
             20 of his determination  that  the  first  appellant  had  not
             received the "60 day letters", it is arguable that the judge's
             failure to make findings upon this key  issue  amounts  to  an
             error of law. It is also arguable that the judge's failure  to
             give  any  reasons   for  his  finding  in  para  24  of   the
             determination that he did not find not credible that the first
             appellant had not received the "60 day letters" constituted  a
             further error of law.


   3. The first thing to say is that it is wrong to state   that  the  judge
      made no finding as to  whether  the  letters  had  been  received;  in
      paragraph  24 he  clearly  does.  He  explains  why  he  reaches  that
      conclusion and it is not  difficult  to  follow  why  he  reached  the
      conclusion that he did. There is one point that must be dealt with. Mr
      Hussein argues that only two letters were sent. The position is  that,
      although there were three letters, two of the letters  from the   Home
      Office bore the same date. It follows that it may  be  that  only  two
      letters were sent, in the sense that two envelopes were used  and  two
      letters were sent in the same envelope.   The  judge  was  nonetheless
      entitled to conclude that it was not credible that  two  letters  from
      the same sender  went astray when there  was  no  evidence  of  postal
      problems. We all have experience of letters going astray and the judge
      was entitled to conclude that it was not more  likely  than  not  that
      they had gone astray here when it is said that at  least  two  letters
      had not been received. Mr Hussein  produced  evidence  that  suggested
      that about 0.7% of letters go astray. He was not entitled  to  produce
      such evidence but it supports  the  proposition  that  the  judge  was
      entitled to reach the conclusion he did. The judge also gives  reasons
      to explain why the appellant may have taken no steps when he  received
      the letter.


   4. I agree with the judge who granted permission that  the  remainder  of
      the grounds identify nothing that could be considered an error of law,
      arguable or otherwise.


   5. The judge reached conclusions that were open to him  on  the  evidence
      and his reasoning contained no error  of  law.  It  follows  that  the
      original decision shall stand.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                 23 January 2015



