
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04442/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 March 2016                           |On 25 April 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between


                                    O C O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adelakun, Solicitor at Arndale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  dated  28  July
    2015. The appeal relates to a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Heynes promulgated on  13  May  2015.   The  Judge  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision to deport the Appellant  pursuant  to  Regulation  19  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and to refuse  to
    issue a residence  card  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights. The protection claim was also dismissed.

2.    The Judge  had  considered  the  written  and  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his wife, an EEA national. At paragraph 20 of the Judge's
    decision the Home Office Presenting Officer is noted to  have  accepted
    that the relationship was genuine and that  the  Appellant's  wife  was
    exercising treaty rights. The Appellant had three children, one from  a
    previous relationship and thereafter twins born in March 2015 with  his
    wife.


3.    The Appellant had  been  convicted  of  a  serious  offence  involving
    Possession of Class A drugs with intent  to  supply.  He  was  given  a
    sentence  of  36  months  imprisonment  (32  months  in  some  of   the
    documents).

4.    The Judge considered the Appellant's claim for  asylum  and  concluded
    that it was a complete fabrication and dismissed  it.  The  Appellant's
    representative had  not  made  submissions  in  respect  of  asylum  or
    Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

5.    The Judge concluded that there were  clear  grounds  based  on  public
    policy and security grounds in respect of the Regulations as to why the
    Appellant had to be deported and why  the  decision  to  refuse  him  a
    residence card were the correct and proportionate decisions.

6.    The Appellant's grounds  of  appeal  raised  several  matters  and  in
    clearly set  out  reasons  Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  said  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge misdirected himself:


     1) In not properly assessing the Offender Manger's letter dated 8  May
        2015  which  shows  that  the  Appellant  was  at  a  low  risk  of
        reoffending and low risk of harm;

     2) By going behind the sentencing remarks of the sentencing the  Judge
        who found the Appellant to have been good character when he did not
        find this to be so;

     3) By failing to assess the Appellant's ties to Nigeria;

     4) By failing to take into account his wife and  children's  interests
        in coming to his decision.

7.     At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Adelakun  relied  on  his   written
    submissions (undated but received by the Tribunal on 4 March 2016).  He
    said that in so far as the  Rule  24  Reply  from  the  Respondent  was
    concerned (which raised issues as to why there was no OASYS report) the
    report had been sought but there had been a delay. That is why  instead
    there was the letter from  the  Manager.  An  e-mail  was  produced  to
    confirm this, but I noted this e-mail was not before the Judge.  In  so
    far as the best interests of the children was concerned, the  complaint
    was that the Judge had only set out their best interests in one  and  a
    half lines. The error was that the Judge had not  considered  the  best
    interests of the children. There were other parts  of  the  Regulations
    such as Regulation 21(5)(a) taking about proportionality.

8.    Ms Johnstone in her brief focused submissions said that she relied  on
    the Rule 24 Response. It was up to the Appellant to produce  the  OASYS
    report. It is not an error of law not to consider evidence that was not
    produced. In relation to the children, there was consideration of them.
    There was no independent report such as a social workers report.  There
    was no evidence that he was the dominant or primary carer of the  twins
    who were recently born. The findings were open to the Judge.

9.    After hearing Mr Adelakun in reply I had reserved my decision.

10.   Despite the attractively  put  submissions  by  Ms  Johnstone,  in  my
    judgement there is a material error of law in the Judge's decision.

11.   The Offender Manager's Report had said that  since  his  release  from
    prison (which was over 2 years prior to the hearing before  the  Judge)
    the Appellant was motivated to find employment,  he  had  attended  all
    appointments on time and had engaged well with supervisions visits. The
    Manager concluded that there was a low risk of reoffending and that the
    Appellant posed a low risk of harm. This was significant  evidence.  It
    also showed the Appellant's behaviour and positive  attitude  for  some
    three years since he was released from prison. There had  been  no  re-
    offending.

12.   In addition there was evidence in the form of the  sentencing  remarks
    of Her Honour Judge Kushner QC which noted that the  Appellant  was  of
    previous good character and that he had behaved well whilst in  custody
    including engaging with training and educational courses. He and his co-
    accused had apparently been nothing other than model prisoners.

13.   There was in addition the evidence in respect of the family life  that
    this Appellant had,  albeit  the  twins  were  born  recently  and  the
    Appellant  only  had  contact  with  his  child   from   his   previous
    relationship.

14    The Judge's decision is to be commended for  attempting  to  focus  on
    the real issues, but in my judgment the errors of law identified in the
    grant of permission and then highlighted further during the Appellant's
    oral and written submissions before me have been made out.

15.   Whilst the fact that the  Appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a  very
    serious offence was the pertinent issue and was made  more  serious  by
    the Appellant being an over  stayer,  there  still  had  to  be  proper
    consideration of the various positive aspects of the evidence which the
    Appellant had put forward. All of this was in the  scales  against  the
    weighty public interest issues, public policy and security issues.

16.   I conclude that although the Judge was entitled to take  into  account
    that he had decided that the  Appellant's  protection  claim  had  been
    fabricated, he was not entitled to go  behind  the  important  evidence
    from the Offender  Manager  or  indeed  the  sentencing  remarks  which
    appeared rather unusually to speak of  the  Appellant  in  good  terms,
    despite the serious sentence which  was  imposed.  Additionally  in  my
    judgment the  best  interests  of  the  children  were  not  given  the
    prominence that Statute in the form of section 55 Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, that the EEA Regulations refer  to  and  that
    the case law refers to,  despite  the  great  weight  that  the  public
    interest merits in respect of deportation appeals.

17    In the circumstances, albeit with  some  hesitation  but  particularly
    because of the children connected to this case, I conclude  that  there
    is a material error of law. I therefore allow the  Appellant's  appeal.
    There will be a  rehearing  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  relating  to
    deportation, the EEA Regulations and Article 8 ECHR. For the  avoidance
    of doubt, the protection claim remains  dismissed  which  was  not  the
    subject of an appeal in any event.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law. The decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

An anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 21 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
