

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04219/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision and Reasons         |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on 5 November 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           EYASU AESKELE MULUGETA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dennis, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal on
    23 February 2012 to revoke a deportation order made on 16  April  2007.
    This arose from the appellant's conviction on  9  January  2006  of  an
    offence of seeking  refugee  leave  by  deception,  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to 12 months  imprisonment.   His  refugee  claim,  based  on
    alleged events in Ethiopia  around  2004  -  2005,  was  subject  to  a
    negative determination on 27 September 2006.

 2. On 10 May 2013 the Criminal Cases Review Commission for England,  Wales
    and Northern Ireland decided to refer the appellant's conviction to the
    Court of Appeal, on the view that the appellant had  been  deprived  of
    legal advice which might quite probably have succeeded, giving rise  to
    a real possibility of the conviction being found unsafe.  There  was  a
    long series of adjournments in the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  records
    are not entirely clear, but the underlying reason seems  to  have  been
    uncertainty over the conviction.

 3. In his determination the judge said at paragraph 19 that it was not for
    him to supplant the role of the Court.  However, it would be  difficult
    to construe the rest of that paragraph as anything  but  a  finding  on
    whether the conviction was likely to stand.

 4. The appellant failed again on his claim relating  to  risk  on  return.
    His proposed grounds  attacking  those  findings  were  thought  to  be
    totally without merit and did not attract a grant  of  permission  from
    either the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.   Permission  was
    granted on the one issue dealt with herein.

 5. Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal have also been delayed, due  to  lack
    of information from either party about when the  Court  was  likely  to
    hear the case.  The  outcome  might  determine  whether  any  error  is
    material.   Mr  McGlashan  has  heard  recently  from   the   barrister
    instructed in the case that it had been thought it might be  listed  in
    June, but no date was now likely to be fixed until  at  least  December
    (presumably of 2014).

 6. The time has come in the Upper Tribunal as it  did  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to make a decision as matters stand.

 7. The respondent's decision of the respondent of 23 February 2012 has not
    been faulted, as at that date.   The First-tier Tribunal correctly took
    account of matters arising thereafter - 2002 Act, s. 85(5).  It was  an
    error of law  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  contrary  to  its  self-
    direction, to pre-empt the outcome in the Court.  As  that  outcome  is
    still awaited, the error is material.

 8. It would be wrong to uphold a refusal to  revoke  a  deportation  order
    when it cannot safely be said that the conviction on which it was based
    is to stand.  If a party had only asked the Commission  for  a  review,
    that would be of little significance.  The position is quite  different
    where the Commission has made a reasoned reference to the Court.

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside,  not  in  so
    far as the asylum or human rights grounds were dismissed,  but  because
    the decision under appeal was (retrospectively, and  as  matters  stand
    today) not in accordance with the law. On that  basis  the  appeal,  as
    originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            5 November 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




