
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04607/2015
                                                IA/04608/2015, IA/04609/2015
                                                IA/04610/2015, IA/04611/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th January 2016                 |On 9th February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                           E G U (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           H U (SECOND APPELLANT)
                          R B D U (THIRD APPELLANT)
                         O O E U (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                         O D O O U (FIFTH APPELLANT)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants     Mr Turner of Counsel instructed on Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Miss Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Nigeria.  This involves the  parents
    and 3 children of a single family unit. As  these  proceedings  concern
    the status and  interests  of  children,  in  order  to  protect  those
    children I make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated on 16th June 2015.  By that decision the
    judge dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals  against  decisions  of  the
    Respondent to remove each of them from the United Kingdom to Nigeria.

 3. The decision are dated on or about 12th  January  2015.  The  decisions
    were to refuse each of the Appellants further leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom under Article 8 of the ECHR, the  Immigration  Rules  or
    otherwise and thereupon to remove them from the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge  dismissed  the  appeals  of  all  the  Appellants  against   the
    decisions.

 4. By a decision made on 8th October 2015 leave to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted.  Thus the matter appears before me  to  determine
    in the first instance whether or not there is an error of  law  in  the
    original decision.

 5. The parents, the two first Appellants, had entered the UK illegally  in
    2004 and had remained in the UK since that date. All the three children
    were born in the UK, July 2006, February 2007 and October 2010. Thus of
    the three children only one at the time of the hearing had been in  the
    UK in excess 7 years.

 6. On the 7th October 2008  an  application  had  been  made  for  an  EEA
    residence card. That application was refused on the 4th January 2010. A
    further application for an EEA residence card was made on the 12th July
    2011 and that was refused 15th December 2011.   On the 15th August 2013
    the Appellants had applied for leave to remain on the 15th August  2013
    on the basis of family and private life. That application  was  refused
    as of 24th August 2013. The Appellants further  applied  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family and private life on  the  13th  September
    2013. that was  refused as of the 1st October 2013.

 7. The Appellants made the present application on the 25th  October  2013.
    The decisions as stated were made on the 12th January 2015.

 8. The Grounds of Appeal raise a number of matters.   First  and  foremost
    within the Grounds of Appeal it  is  alleged  that  the  judge  at  the
    commencement of the hearing indicated that as there was  no  attendance
    by  a  representative  for  the  Respondent  this  meant  that  in   an
    adversarial system there was no-one  to  cast  doubt  the  evidence  or
    challenge the credibility of the Appellants' evidence.

 9. As is pointed out in the Grounds of Leave  such  an  assertion  that  a
    judge has made a  declaration  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    credibility of the Appellants was not sustainable in the absence  of  a
    contemporaneous note of the proceedings from  the  representative,  who
    appeared on behalf of the Appellants.  Before me Counsel on  behalf  of
    the Appellants, Mr Turner, offered himself as a witness.

10. My attention has been drawn to the case of BW  (witness  statements  by
    advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568.  Consistent  with  the  leave
    granted that case suggests that the person representing the  Appellants
    at first instance should make a witness statement.  Guidance  is  given
    in paragraph 5 of the case to indicate the steps that should  be  taken
    including sub-paragraph 4 that the representative  should  not  present
    the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

11. Whatever can be said there was no contemporaneous note provided.  There
    was no witness statement provided.  In the  circumstances  one  has  to
    look at all of the factors in assessing  the  issues.   The  two  adult
    Appellants had come to the United Kingdom and entered unlawfully.  They
    had deliberately entered in breach of the law.  They had remained  here
    and had worked here unlawfully.  They have never had any  legal  status
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  They did apply in  2008  to  seek  to
    regularise their status claiming to be extended or family members of  a
    European  national  but   that   application   was   refused.   Further
    applications had been refused.  The  Appellants  however  continued  to
    remain in the  United  Kingdom.   Taking  all  the  circumstances  into
    account I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to look at the issue
    of credibility and reliability in the way that he did.  The  judge  had
    approached that issue on a legally correct basis.

12. The Grounds of Appeal  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  thereafter  are
    lengthy and set out in detail parts of the evidence.  In substance  the
    challenges amount to the following:-

      a) That the judge has failed to approach the evidence  of  the  expert
         correctly and has failed to refer to specific pieces of evidence.

      b) The  judge  has  failed  to  assess  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the best interests of  the
         children correctly.

      c) The judge has failed to assess the reasonableness of the return  of
         the Appellants to Nigeria in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
         Section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended and in accordance with  the
         requirements of 276ADE(vi).

13. With regard to the expert evidence it is to  be  noted  that  criticism
    appeared to be made that the judge had approached the  expert  evidence
    on the basis that the expert had been reliant upon  the  evidence  from
    the two adult Appellants as to what circumstances would  face  them  in
    Nigeria.  It is suggested that the judge had approached the matter in a
    legally  incorrect  way.   When  challenged  about   the   matter   the
    Appellant's  representative  rather   than   pointing   to   background
    information or other evidence from the appellants,  as  to  what  their
    family circumstances would be, sought to rely on the  fact  that  there
    was  evidence  from  teachers  in  the  United  Kingdom   as   to   the
    circumstances in the United  Kingdom  and  other  evidence  as  to  the
    circumstances in the United Kingdom. Once that was that other  evidence
    that says nothing about what would face the  Appellants  on  return  to
    Nigeria

14. It is accepted at paragraph 19 of the submissions made that the  expert
    was not commenting on  the  socioeconomic  background  in  Nigeria  but
    rather upon the circumstances that the two adult  Appellants  had  told
    her  about  and  what  they  considered  they  faced  on  return.   The
    suggestion then that the judge in referring to the expert says that for
    the circumstances that the parties would face  on  return  was  reliant
    wholly upon what the two adult Appellant  says  appears  to  have  been
    accepted.  Mr Turner on behalf of the Appellant sought  to  argue  that
    that failed to take account of the school  reports  and  other  reports
    relating to the circumstances of the children in  the  United  Kingdom.
    With respect that is not the  issue  under  consideration.   The  issue
    under consideration was what were the circumstances going to face  this
    family if  they  were  returned  to  Nigeria.   The  judge  was  merely
    commenting that the expert  rather  than  having  either  a  background
    knowledge as to the circumstances that would be  faced  or  seeking  to
    obtain information about such had relied wholly upon  the  evidence  of
    the Appellants.  With respect that  appears  to  be  exactly  what  the
    expert did and the judge was entitled in assessing what would face  the
    Appellants  on  return  to  Nigeria  to  take  into  account  that  the
    circumstances were wholly reliant upon the evidence of  the  two  adult
    Appellants, two individuals who had been willing to come to the  United
    Kingdom in breach of the law and remain in the United Kingdom in breach
    of the law for a substantial period of time.

15. It has also to be noted that whilst there was some intimation that  the
    Appellants would have no family members to rely  upon  in  Nigeria  the
    evidence to the expert was otherwise to the  effect  that  they  had  a
    number family members there.  The judge was  entitled  to  conclude  in
    that light that there would be family members who could provide support
    and assistance to the two Appellants.

16. I note that it has been accepted that both the  adult  Appellants  were
    well-educated.  It cannot be said that what  they  were  doing  was  in
    ignorance.  It is clear that they had entered into a deliberate  course
    of conduct to enter the United Kingdom and remain in the United Kingdom
    despite the law.

17. Further issues in the case relate to the  reasonableness  of  returning
    the Appellant and the family to Nigeria and the  children  specifically
    and the best interests of the children.

18. It is suggested that the  judge  has  started  by  stating  conclusions
    before assessing the circumstances.  With  respect  the  judge  had  to
    start somewhere.  The approach of the  judge  is  consistent  with  the
    approach advocated in EV (Philippines) and Others v  The  Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874.    I   refer
    specifically to the judgment of Lord Justice Lewison at  paragraph  58.
    The judge sets out the following:-

         "58. In my judgment therefore the assessment of the best  interests
             of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts  are
             as they are in the real world.  If one parent has no right  to
             remain, but the other  parent  does  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be: is it reasonable to expect the children to follow the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

19. The judge has carefully set out the appropriate legal cases.  There are
    a large number of cases of relevance.  The judge  has  then  noted  the
    submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.   The   judge   has
    specifically noted that he should not punish  the  children  for  their
    parents' conduct.  The judge noted that  submissions  were  being  made
    that there was no support network in Nigeria and that the parents could
    not be expected to take the children to a third  world  country.    The
    judge also considers that submissions that the effect of removal of the
    children will have according to the expert.

20. However having considered that the judge was right to  start  from  the
    point of view that in the normal course of events the parents having no
    right to be in the United  Kingdom  would  be  expected  to  return  to
    Nigeria.  The best interests of the  children  thereafter  given  their
    ages was to remain with the parents.

21. The Appellant's representative sought to  argue  that  as  one  of  the
    children had spent over seven years in the United Kingdom in accordance
    with the provisions or the Immigration Rules and Section 117  it  would
    not be reasonable to remove that child.  There  are  a  total  of  five
    individuals to be considered only one of whom has spent more than seven
    years in the United Kingdom.

22. In the circumstances the judge was entitled to look at the family as  a
    family unit in assessing the best interests of the children.  The  best
    interests of the children were to remain with their parents.  That  was
    a conclusion that the judge was entitled to make.  The judge's approach
    thereafter is consistent with the paragraph set out from  Lord  Justice
    Lewison.

23. The judge has given valid reasons for concluding not only that  it  was
    reasonable to expect the parents to return to Nigeria but that  he  was
    satisfied it was also reasonable for the children to return to Nigeria.
     The judge was entitled to come to that conclusion on the basis of  the
    careful analysis of the facts.  In the circumstances there is no  error
    either in the assessment by the judge of the circumstances relating  to
    the best interests of the children or whether or not it was  reasonable
    for the children to return to Nigeria with their parents.

24. In the circumstances there is no material error of law and I uphold the
    decision to dismiss these appeals on all grounds.



Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

