
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)       Appeal Numbers: IA/04180/2014




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3 July 2014                         |On 22 July 2014           |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE dawson
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                           MR KWABENA ASARE MINTHA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For  the  appellant:      Mr  J  Plowright,  instructed  by   Adam   Barnard
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                 DECISION AND NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL OF APPEAL

1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the determination  of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton dated 23  April  2014,  dismissing  his
   appeal against the decision of the  respondent  dated  21  February  2014
   refusing his application for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  his
   right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse of  an  EEA  national
   under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the
   2006 Regulations").

2. The appellant is a national of Ghana born on 19 June 1984.  His  case  is
   that he is the spouse of his sponsor,  a  national  of  Belgium,  who  is
   exercising her Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The appellant's case
   is that his sponsor and he entered into a proxy marriage  under  Ghanaian
   law.  The appeal was determined by Judge Kempton on  the  papers  at  the
   request of the appellant.


3. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ievins,
   who stated that it was arguable that Judge  Kempton  fell  into  material
   error of law because she did not make a clear finding on the  appellant's
   case as put by the appellant, in  that  Judge  Kempton  made  no  finding
   whether or not the Ghanaian customary marriage met  the  requirements  of
   Ghanaian law, or whether or not it would  be  recognised  in  the  United
   Kingdom.


4. Judge Kempton, in dismissing the appellant's appeal, made  the  following
   findings.


   i. Judge Kempton was not satisfied  that  a  genuine  marriage  has  been
      contracted between the appellant and his sponsor.  The  appellant  had
      been put on notice  that  the  documents  produced  by  him  were  not
      accepted as genuine by the respondent. The appellant had been  advised
      that  in  the  circumstances  the  respondent   had   considered   the
      application on the alternative basis of whether the appellant was in a
      durable relationship with his sponsor. The appellant had not taken the
      opportunity to address that second part of the refusal letter and  had
      provided no evidence whatsoever of any relationship  between  him  and
      his sponsor.  It was incumbent on the appellant to prove that there is
      a genuine relationship or a genuine marriage. He had clearly not  done
      so. It was disingenuous for the appellant to  hide  behind  the  stock
      rhetoric frequently employed in cases such as  this  where  there  has
      been a proxy marriage.  If the appellant and his  sponsor  were  in  a
      genuine relationship, they would not have needed to enter into a proxy
      marriage.  They could  simply  have  married  in  the  UK.  The  proxy
      marriage was clearly nothing more than a means to an  end,  namely  to
      facilitate the issue fraudulently of a residence  card  by  using  the
      particulars of an EEA national, who may or  may  not  know  about  the
      whole sham.  Judge  Kempton  was  not  prepared  to  accept  that  the
      documents produced were genuine given her view of the circumstances in
      which this marriage had arisen.


  ii. As regards the expense  in  having  an  oral  hearing,  Judge  Kempton
      considered that there was no need to instruct counsel in a case before
      the First-tier Tribunal, that the  appellant  could  have  represented
      himself, and that the appellant and the sponsor  could  have  attended
      the hearing and given oral evidence as to "why they married in such  a
      bizarre manner if they are indeed a couple".  Judge Kempton considered
      that the fact that they were not prepared  to  subject  themselves  to
      having their evidence tested in court and had provided no evidence  of
      their relationship  confirmed  that  the  claimed  proxy  marriage  is
      "nothing other than a device to obtain a residence permit".


 iii. Judge Kempton did not consider Article 8 of the ECHR having found that
      found that there was no information to demonstrate that there  is  any
      family or private life in the United Kingdom.

5. In the  present  appeal  against  the  decision  of  Judge  Kempton,  the
   appellant contends as follows.


   i. In finding that  both  parties  to  the  proxy  marriage  need  to  be
      Ghanaians in order to  enter  into  such  a  marriage,  Judge  Kempton
      overlooked the respondent's concession that a proxy marriage  will  be
      valid if it satisfies the  Ghanaian  Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce
      (Registration)  Act  1985  as   amended   in   1981   (the   "Ghanaian
      legislation"), and the  expert  evidence  of  Ms  Mercy  Akman  in  NA
      (customary marriage and  divorce-evidence)  Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT  0009
      ("NA"), who stated that the  only  requirement  is  that  one  of  the
      parties should be a Ghanaian by origin or descent.


  ii. Judge Kempton disregarded the letter from the Registrar of Accra  High
      Court confirming the authenticity of the statutory  declaration  which
      the respondent claimed was invalid, and a letter from the Registrar of
      the Accra  Metropolitan  Assembly  to  confirm  the  validity  of  the
      marriage certificate issued to  the  appellant  which  the  respondent
      further alleged was fictitious.


 iii. The appellant was entitled to elect to have  his  appeal  heard  under
      rule 15 of the Immigration and Asylum Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005,
      and Judge Kempton had "absolute disrespect" for  this  choice.   Judge
      Kempton should have requested an oral hearing to ask the appellant and
      his spouse questions and had no right to make the criticisms that  she
      did about the failure of the appellant had his sponsor  to  give  oral
      evidence.


  iv. The Ghanaian Marriage  Act  1991  states  that  the  marriage  can  be
      registered any time after the marriage.  Therefore,  as  long  as  the
      marriage is correctly registered in Ghana it does not matter  that  it
      was not registered within three months of marriage as  was  previously
      required by the law.  Judge Kempton  should  have  accepted  that  the
      appellant and his sponsor have conducted a valid marriage according to
      the Ghanaian legislation.


   v. The appellant applied under regulation 7(a) of the 2006 Regulations as
      the spouse of an EEA national, and not as a  "relevant  EEA  national"
      under regulation 8 of the 2006 regulations as the respondent asserted.




  vi. Following the ruling in CB  (Validity  of  marriage:  proxy  marriage)
      Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080 ("CB") it is widely accepted that the United
      Kingdom will recognise the validity of proxy  marriage  provided  that
      the marriage is legal in that country as long as the requirements  for
      a proxy marriage are met.


 vii. The onus of proving that a customary marriage took  place  is  on  the
      party making the assertion.  The appellant provided letters  from  the
      Accra High Court  and  Accra  Metropolitan  Assembly  to  confirm  the
      validity of the statutory declaration  and  the  authenticity  of  the
      marriage certificate. Judge Kempton failed to give herself  reasonable
      time to study the official documents placed before  her  and  "ignored
      the case law cited in support of the appeal and the principles of  the
      burden of proof and standard of proof is civil evidence rule et cetera
      and was motivated to dismiss the Appellant's appeal".


viii. The immigration judge failed to familiarise herself  with  regulations
      7 and 8 of the 2006 regulations.





   The hearing



6. At the hearing,  on  behalf  the  appellant,  Mr  Plowright  adopted  the
   grounds of appeal and made the following submissions which  I  summarise.
   The Judge attacked the genuineness of the marriage  and  stated  that  it
   amounts  to  fraud,  but  the  respondent  has  not  asserted  that   the
   appellant's marriage is fraudulent.  Judge Kempton  thereby  went  beyond
   the ambit of the appeal which was to determine  whether  the  appellant's
   marriage was valid.  Judge Kempton made no finding as to the validity  of
   the marriage or in respect of the appellant's reliance on NA.


7.  Mr Plowright did not seek to rely on  paragraph  5  of  the  appellant's
   grounds of appeal which argued that the reasons for  refusal  letter  was
   defective because the pages were odd-numbered whilst  the  even  numbered
   pages were omitted. It stated that the respondent had to be  reminded  on
   several occasions of this anomaly before a  well  paginated  Reasons  for
   Refusal Letter was issued again on 21 February 2014.

8. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Duffy adopted the  Secretary  of  State's
   rule 24 response.  He further argued as follows.  There was no  error  of
   law in the determination.  Judge Kempton had not made a finding that  the
   documents were not genuine. There  was  no  evidence  provided  that  the
   appellant's spouse is a Ghanaian national because she needed  a  visa  to
   enter Ghana.  NA states that both parties to a proxy marriage have to  be
   Ghanaian nationals.  Therefore, there was not a valid proxy  marriage  in
   Ghana because the appellant's spouse is no  longer  a  Ghanaian  citizen.
   The law on proxy marriages was made clear in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU
   law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) ("Kareem"), and although that case  was
   not referred to by either party, Judge Kempton should have been aware  of
   it.

9. In reply it was argued on behalf  of  the  appellant  that  it  does  not
   matter whether Judge Kempton was aware of Kareem as it  follows  from  CB
   that both parties do not need to be Ghanaian citizens.

   Error of law in the determination

10. One of the appellant's first main  contentions  is  that  Judge  Kempton
   found that the proxy marriage was a sham and a means  to  facilitate  the
   issue fraudulently of a residence card, even though  the  respondent  had
   not suggested that it was not genuine.  Mr Duffy accepted at the  hearing
   that the respondent  has  not  made  an  allegation  that  the  documents
   provided by the appellant were not  genuine  or  that  the  marriage  was
   fraudulent as found by Judge Kempton.

11. We therefore find that Judge Kempton erred  in  law  by  making  such  a
   finding.

12. The Judge in her determination made no finding as to whether  the  proxy
   marriage was valid under the law of Ghana.  Judge Kempton appeared to say
   that the claimed marriage was one of convenience, as the only finding she
   made was that the appellant is not in a subsisting relationship with  his
   sponsor as an unmarried partner.

13. This is a problematic as the Judge seems to have  lost  her  way  as  to
   what the appeal was about and the law applicable  to  the  appeal.  Judge
   Kempton did not take into account the recent case of Kareem  even  though
   it had been promulgated a month earlier.

14. In line with Kareem, the issue to be determined  by  Judge  Kempton  was
   whether the appellant has entered into a valid proxy marriage  under  the
   law of Ghana which would be recognised as valid  in  Belgium.  The  Judge
   fell into error as he failed to make a finding on this.

15. A second main contention of the appellant  is  that  the  appellant  was
   entitled to elect to have a hearing on the papers, and that Judge Kempton
   was not entitled to draw adverse inferences from this decision.

16. As to this  contention,  we  find  that  the  onus  of  proving  that  a
   customary marriage took place is on the party making the assertion, which
   in this case is the appellant.  If the appellant did not  submit  any  or
   sufficient evidence of that contention, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was
   clearly entitled to so find.  If there is  evidence  of  that  contention
   that the appellant could have presented, but did not present, that  is  a
   matter that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
   account. We accept that it is open to a party to have the appeal  decided
   without a hearing but such a party must take the consequences if there is
   likely to be an issue which requires oral testimony. In any event  as  we
   have found that the Judge had erred on the primary ground this aspect  is
   less meritorious.

17. However, for the reasons above we find that there is an error of law  in
   the determination of Judge Kempton and we set the determination aside.


   Withdrawal of the appeal

18. At the hearing, we decided it  was  appropriate  in  the  light  of  the
   directions which stated were we to find  an  error  of  law,  the  appeal
   should be determined at  the  hearing.  We  decided  to  proceed  without
   adjourning the hearing to remake the decision under appeal.


19. However, Mr Plowright made an application on  behalf  of  the  appellant
   pursuant to rule 17(1)(b) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
   Rules 2008 to withdraw the appeal.  Mr Duffy on behalf of  the  Secretary
   of State did not object to the application.


20. Permission of the Upper Tribunal is required for  a  party  to  withdraw
   its case. Having carefully considered the facts of this case as a  whole,
   and having noted that the appellant seeks to withdraw his appeal and that
   the Secretary of State does not object to such a course, we give  consent
   for such withdrawal.

21. Accordingly with our consent and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
   Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  the  appeal  is  recorded   as
   "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal", and notice is  hereby
   given to the parties that the withdrawal has  taken  effect  pursuant  to
   rule 17.

22. The effect of the appeal being withdrawn is that the proceedings  before
   the Upper Tribunal are at an end. There is no  appeal  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal.






Decision

The appeal was withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal.

Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge

Mrs S Chana






   Dated 6th day of July 2014
