
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/04985/2015

                                              IA/04987/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 July 2016                           |  On 27 July 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                           SAMJHANA ACHARYA KHATRI
                              RAMESHORA KHATRI
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellants:    Mr S Kumar, instructed by Capital Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are nationals of Nepal born on 5 December 1987 and 28
   December 1976, who entered the UK on 13 November 2009. The first
   appellant had a Tier 4 student visa. The second appellant is her husband.

2. On 14 October 2014 the first appellant applied for further leave to
   remain as a Tier 4 (General) student. On 20 January 2015 the application
   was refused by the respondent on the basis that the appellant did not
   have a valid Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS"). The Reasons
   for Refusal letter included a paragraph headed "One Stop Warning",
   requiring the appellants to inform the respondent of any reasons they
   believe they should be allowed to remain in the UK pursuant to Section
   120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the Section 120
   Notice").

3. Following the Section 120 Notice, the first appellant made submissions
   and adduced evidence to support a claim to be granted leave to remain as
   a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") where their
   appeal was heard by FtT Judge White. In a decision promulgated on 7
   January 2016, Judge White dismissed the appeal. With respect to the first
   appellant's Tier 4 Application, the judge found that she did not have a
   CAS at the time she made her application (or at any stage prior to the
   respondent's decision) as she was waiting to obtain her degree results.
   The judge noted that Counsel for the first appellant did not dispute that
   because of this she could not succeed under Tier 4.

5. The judge then considered the first appellant's claim to satisfy the
   requirements of Tier 2. He found that because this was an application
   under the Points Based System, pursuant to Section 85A of the 2002 Act,
   the Tribunal could only consider evidence adduced by the appellant at the
   time of the application. The evidence submitted by the appellant to
   support her claim to meet the requirements of Tier 2, however, was
   submitted only after the respondent's decision in respect of her
   application under Tier 4 had been made. The judge concluded that he was
   therefore unable to consider the evidence.

6. The appellants' case, as set out in the grounds of appeal, is that the
   judge misconstrued section 120 of the 2002 Act. Mr Kumar, elaborating on
   the grounds, argued that section 120 allows for new evidence to be
   submitted in respect of a new category of claim even if the new claim is
   under the Points Based System and Section 85A applies.

7. Mr Tuffan argued that it is established by Court of Appeal case law that
   an applicant in the first appellant's circumstances is unable to rely on
   evidence that was not submitted at the time of making the application.

Consideration

8. The effect of a Section 120 Notice is that an appeal covers not only any
   grounds before the Secretary of State when the decision was made but also
   any grounds raised in response to the Section 120 Notice even if those
   grounds do not relate to the decision under appeal.

9. However, this is subject to the effect of section 85A of the 2002 Act,
   which applies in Points Based System appeals. Under Section 85A, in a
   Points Based System appeal evidence can only be considered by the
   Secretary of State if it was submitted at the time of making the
   application to which the immigration decision relates.  The effect of
   this is that Section 85A precludes a section 120 Notice from being used
   to adduce evidence of compliance with a different requirement of the
   Points Based System. See Ali [2013] EWCA Civ 1198 at [11]: "The points
   based system is strict and requires the necessary qualification to be
   obtained before the application for leave to remain is made and not
   after, through the mechanism of appeal."

10. In this case, the first appellant applied for leave to remain under
   Tier 4 of the Points Based System but was unable to satisfy the
   requirements. In response to a Section 120 Notice she submitted evidence
   to show she could succeed under Tier 2. This evidence was submitted after
   the respondent had made her decision in respect of the Tier 4
   application. For the reasons set out above, and in accordance with Ali,
   Section 85A of the 2002 Act precluded the judge from considering the new
   evidence. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge did not make an
   error of law by refusing to consider the new evidence put forward by the
   appellant in response to the Section 120 Notice.


Decision

 A. The appeal is dismissed.

 B. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

 C. No anonymity direction is made.


|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 25 July 2016                  |









