


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number IA/04064/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon
                          Determination Promulgated
On 14th August 2014                                            On 18th
August 2014
Prepared 15th August 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                ANTHONY ASARE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: No appearance
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant, a citizen of Ghana, applied for a residence card on the
   basis of his marriage to his wife, a French national, under the EEA
   Regulations. The application was refused in the Refusal Letter of the
   27th of December 2013, it was not accepted that they were genuinely
   married or in a durable relationship. The Refusal Letter notified the
   Appellant that an application under article 8 of the Immigration Rules
   should be made separately.

2. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal by Notice and Grounds
   of Appeal of the13th of January 2014. The grounds assert that the
   marriage documents had been duly issued and if information was missing it
   was not the fault of the Appellants. It was also stated that the decision
   was ultra vires and that the wrong standard of proof had been applied.

3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer on
   the 27th of March 2014 and allowed in a determination of the 31st of
   March 2014. In the determination the Judge found that there was an error
   of law and the appeal was allowed under the EEA Regulations.

4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the basis that the
   Judge had erred in not having regard to the case of Kareem (Proxy
   marriages - EU Law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) where paragraph 14
   indicated that the law of the EU nationals home state applied. Permission
   was granted by Judge Grant on the 7th of May 2014.

5. Directions for the hearing were sent out to the Appellant, Edward
   Marshall Solicitors and the Secretary of State on the 26th of June 2014.
   These indicated that the hearing before the Upper Tribunal was on the
   13th of August 2014 at Sheldon and that the parties were to be prepared
   in the event that the decision was set aside and remade by the Upper
   Tribunal.

6. Neither the Appellant nor the representatives attended the hearing. On
   the 1st of April 2014 the Appellant's representatives had written to the
   First-tier Tribunal indicating that the original address for
   correspondence, in Stratford, was closing and to use the head office
   address which is that given on the Upper Tribunal notice of the 26th of
   June.

7. The court clerk contacted the representatives who stated that they had
   no knowledge of the case and that the lawyer named was on holiday. There
   was no application made by them. The Appellant had been served at the
   address given, which is in central Birmingham and easily accessible from
   the hearing centre. There was no contact from the Appellant explaining
   his absence or seeking an adjournment.

8. In the absence of any contact from the Appellant and bearing in mind
   that the appeal had been a paper appeal, the Appellant having elected not
   to have an oral hearing, it was decided to continue with the appeal in
   the absence of the Appellant.

9. The complaint of the Secretary of State can be dealt with briefly. The
   determination contains no consideration of the issues to be considered
   following the case of Kareem and with there being nothing that addressed
   the position of the Appellant under French law there is a clear error in
   the determination. In the circumstances the determination is set aside
   with no findings being preserved.

10. Given that the Appellant had elected to have his appeal considered on
   the papers and the function of the Upper Tribunal is to correct an error
   of law I decided to remake the decision on the basis of the evidence that
   was contained within the Upper Tribunal file. The Home Office were not
   called on to make submissions.

11. The Appellant's application was made on the 28th of June 2014. It is
   based on his proxy marriage to the Sponsor. There is no evidence from the
   Appellant to show that this marriage is recognised in France as a legal
   marriage and accordingly on that basis the Appellant cannot show that he
   is entitled to a residence card on this basis.

12. So far as the position of the marriage in Ghana is concerned the
   Appellant submitted a number of documents. The first 3 documents from the
   Republic of Ghana appear to confirm the signatures and stamps on other
   documents. The statutory declaration of the 14th of February 2013 baldly
   states "That all the requisite customary rites in respect of the marriage
   aforesaid were duly performed for the purpose of our son and daughter to
   be related as husband and wife." It does not state what those customary
   requirements were or how they were met. This is as helpful as stating
   that the a person will be maintained and accommodated adequately without
   stating what funds or accommodation is actually available. The evidence
   does not satisfy me that the Appellant and Sponsor are married according
   to Ghanian law.

13. Other documents have been submitted including a P60 for Magalie Doyon
   whose relation to the case is not apparent. There is a letter from
   Victoryline UK Ltd of the 25th of June 2013 stating that the Sponsor
   started work on the 11th of February 2013, it does not state her role,
   hours or wages. At the base of the letter the word email is presented as
   "EMAIL" and then "Email". Wage slips for April, May and June 2013 have
   been provided but these do not cover the full period of the Sponsor's
   employment and bank statements showing her pay entering her account have
   not been provided. I am not satisfied, applying Tanveer Ahmed, that the
   documentation is reliable and cannot find that the Sponsor is exercising
   treaty rights.

14. There is no evidence relating to the relationship of the Sponsor and
   the Appellant and no basis for finding that they are in relationship let
   alone that it could be regarded as being durable. The Secretary of State
   has served a notice on the Appellant to the effect that if he wishes
   article 8 or the Immigration Rules to be considered a separate
   application is required and accordingly I have not considered those
   issues.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision and I re-make the decision in the appeal
dismissing the appeal of Anthony Asare.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make a no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 15th August 2014


