
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04708/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 2 February 2016                  |On: 26 February 2016                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between
                        Mr Pankajkumar Ambalal Patel
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with leave from the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, promulgated on 17 June 2015, dismissing  his  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent made on 17 February  2014  refusing  his
    application to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 2. The appellant's application was made in February 2014 but  was  refused
    almost a year later on 23 January 2015. The basis of  the  refusal  was
    that the CAS that had been awarded to the  appellant  had  subsequently
    been withdrawn.

 3. There was in fact evidence from Zaskin College which was referred to by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge at [15], as  to  why  the  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn: it had been withdrawn because the respondent had not made  a
    decision before the start date of the course dated 9 July 2014.

 4. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  found
    that the Judge  had  arguably  failed  to  address  that  evidence.  In
    particular she stated that having  quoted  from  the  letter  from  the
    college which provided the reason for the withdrawal of the CAS, "it is
    difficult to understand why the Judge indicated that  the  letter  from
    the college did not state why the CAS was withdrawn [16]".

 5. At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Walker  referred  to  the
    respondent's Rule 24 response. There it is stated that  the  respondent
    had not seen the letter dated 26 February 2015 from Zaskin College. The
    response also stated that if the withdrawal of the CAS was due to delay
    on the part of the respondent, this could  "possibly  raise  issues  of
    unfairness".

 6. The original of the letter from Zaskin College was made available to Mr
    Walker. The letter was in the bundle and the letter was produced to the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge who referred to it at [15].

 7. Having read the letter, Mr Walker  stated  that  in  the  circumstances
    there had  been  unfairness  arising  from  the  delay  in  making  the
    decision. He accepted that the  appellant  should  have  been  given  a
    period of time in which to apply for "a new sponsor".  He  stated  that
    the appellant should be granted 28 days to apply "with a new sponsor".

 8. Mr Patel accepted the outcome as proposed by Mr Walker.

 9. I am satisfied that the concession made by Mr  Walker  was  correct.  I
    have had regard to the decision of the Tribunal in Thakur (PBS decision
    - common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 where the  Tribunal
    held that a decision by the secretary of state to refuse further  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 student  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
    because of a failure to comply with a common law duty to act fairly  in
    the decision making process where an applicant had not had an  adequate
    opportunity of enrolling at another college following the withdrawal of
    his sponsor's licence or of making further representations  before  the
    decision is made.

10. In this case the respondent took an inordinately long time to  consider
    the application which had been  submitted  on  17  February  2014.  The
    decision had not been made by 9 July 2014, which was the start date  of
    the course. That was the reason given by the college as to why his  CAS
    had been withdrawn.

11. It is moreover clear  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  party  to  the
    withdrawal of  his  CAS.  It  was  accordingly  unfair  to  refuse  his
    application  without  affording  him  an  opportunity   to   vary   his
    application by identifying a new  sponsor  before  the  application  is
    determined.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is set aside.

    It is directed that the respondent make a fresh decision, which is  not
    to be made for a period of 28 days from  the  date  of  the  Tribunal's
    decision being transmitted  to  the  parties,  in  order  to  give  the
    appellant a reasonable opportunity to vary his application.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 23 February 2016
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
