
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04426/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2nd September 2016                      |On 28th November 2016          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                 THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME OFFICE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  MR RAJITHA MADUSHAN MADAPPULI ARACHCHIGE
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P Duffy; Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. R Spurling, Instructed by Nag Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Keane promulgated on 9th February  2016  in  which  he
       allowed an appeal against a decision made by the Secretary  of  State
       on 27th August 2015 refusing the appellant's application for leave to
       remain in the UK.


    2. The appellant before me is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department and the respondent  to  this  appeal,  is  Mr  Arachchige.
       However, for ease of reference, in the  course  of  this  decision  I
       shall adopt the parties' status  as  it  was  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  I shall in this decision, refer to Mr  Arachchige  as  the
       appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


    3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  He arrived in  the  UK  on
       11th October 2009 having been granted entry clearance  as  a  Tier  4
       student valid until 30th July 2010.  The appellant was  then  granted
       further leave to remain in the UK as a  Tier  4  student  until  29th
       October 2012.  On  29th  October  2012,  the  appellant  submitted  a
       further application for  leave  to  remain  outside  the  immigration
       rules.  That application was refused with no right of  appeal  as  it
       was considered by the respondent to  have  been  made  out  of  time,
       having been received on 30th  October  2012.   However,  following  a
       hearing, in a decision promulgated on 12th December 2014,  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Black found that the application had been made on 29th
       October 2012, before the expiry of the appellant's leave  to  remain.
       The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that  the  respondent's  decision
       was not in accordance with the law and that the application  remained
       outstanding.  It was the respondent's  subsequent  decision  of  13th
       January 2015 to refuse the appellant leave to remain in the  UK  that
       was the subject of the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane.


    4. The background to the appellant's application of  29th  October  2012
       and the evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane is set out at
       paragraphs [2] to [9] of his decision.  In broad terms, the appellant
       had enrolled at the Anglia  Ruskin  University  to  attend  a  course
       envisaged to lead to the award of an Honours Degree  in  Electronics.
       The appellant successfully completed the first and  second  years  of
       his degree course, as well as four out of eight modules, in the final
       year.     His  degree  course  was  due  to  conclude  in  May  2013.
       However, on 4th May 2012, the appellant had returned to Sri Lanka  to
       visit his mother who had become unwell.  The  appellant  became  very
       concerned about her, and found it difficult  to  concentrate  on  his
       studies.  He decided that he should visit her and  provide  her  with
       solace.   The appellant returned to the UK on 27th June 2012, but  on
       account it of his inability to pay the full year's fees  he  was  not
       able to complete the third year of  his  degree  course.   The  Judge
       records in his decision:


         "3.  ... The appellant requested a Confirmation of Acceptance  for
             Studies from the university so as to enable him  to  apply  to
             the respondent to extend his leave to  remain  and  so  as  to
             complete  the  final  components  of  his  degree  course.  He
             explained to the university that Mrs Arachchige had  been  ill
             and the reasons why he had been unable to pay the  full  third
             year's fees.   The university refused to issue him with a  CAS
             stating that �1,000 was outstanding in respect  of  the  third
             year's fees. They also stated that the course had expired  and
             they were not prepared to issue him with a  further  CAS.  The
             appellant was in a situation that he had completed almost  all
             of his exams and research programmes but for four  outstanding
             modules.  He was faced with the prospect - as  the  university
             advised him - of returning to Sri Lanka and applying for entry
             clearance to the United Kingdom if he wished to  complete  the
             degree course. The appellant was reluctant to  return  to  Sri
             Lanka in order to apply for entry clearance. He was unsure how
             long it would take the respondent to determine the application
             and he was conscious of the drain on  his  family's  financial
             resources, who would have to pay for his journey to Sri Lanka,
             the making of the application for  entry  clearance,  and  the
             cost of his return journey to the United Kingdom.


    5. At paragraph [6] of his decision, the Judge records that the  parties
       were  in  agreement  that  the  appellant  does   not   satisfy   any
       requirements of the applicable Immigration Rules, and that  the  sole
       issue for him to resolve concerned the  appellant's  contention  that
       Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention was engaged,  and  that  his
       right  to  respect  for  private  life  (essentially  comprising  his
       education and a deep seated desire to complete his degree  course  in
       the  United  Kingdom)  would  be  subject   to   a   disproportionate
       interference if he is removed from the United Kingdom.


    6. The Judge found at paragraph [13] of  his  decision  that  there  are
       exceptional circumstances which warrant the grant  of  leave  outside
       the application of the applicable Immigration Rules.  He  found  that
       the respondent's refusal of the application for leave  brought  about
       unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant  and  his  family.
       His reasons for so finding are set out at paragraphs [14] to [18]  of
       the decision.  At paragraph [19] of the decision the Judge considered
       the application of  s117B  of  the  2002  Act  before  concluding  at
       paragraph [20] that if it is necessary to embark on  a  Razgar  style
       assessment:


         "20. ... The respondent wishes to achieve the  legitimate  aim  of
             the maintenance of an effective immigration control  by  means
             of her immigration policy, her determination to do so lies  in
             the interests of the wider United Kingdom community and is not
             easily overridden.   I am  satisfied  that  her  concerns  are
             overridden in the instant appeal for those very  same  reasons
             which have led me to find that the  instant  appeal  disclosed
             exceptional circumstances which warranted consideration of the
             grant of leave  outside  the  application  of  the  applicable
             Immigration Rules.  I strike the balance, the  essence  of  an
             assessment of the proportionality of a decision  such  as  the
             decision under appeal, in favour of appellant. The  appeal  on
             human rights (Article 8) grounds is allowed."


The appeal before me


    7. The respondent advances three grounds of appeal.  First, there are no
       findings by the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to whether the appellant
       meets the requirements of the immigration rules under either Appendix
       FM or 276ADE(i) or indeed any consideration as to the extent to which
       the appellant fails to meet the requirements of the  rules.   Second,
       contrary to the decision of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others -v-
       SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, the First-tier Tribunal Judge used Article 8  as
       a general dispensing power, whereas the Supreme Court held  that  the
       opportunity for a promising student to complete his  course  in  this
       country, however desirable in general terms, is not in itself a right
       protected under Article 8.   Third,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       failed to afford sufficient weight to the expression of  the  'public
       interest' as set out in the Immigration Rules and s117B of  the  2002
       Act.


    8. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Andrew  on
       22nd July 2016. The matter comes before me to consider whether or not
       the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane involved  the  making
       of a material error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to  re-
       make the decision.


    9. At the hearing before me, Mr Duffy  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal
       relied upon  by  the  respondent  and  submitted  that  there  is  no
       reference in the findings of the Judge to Appendix FM  and  paragraph
       276ADE of the immigration rules. He submits that at paragraph [6]  of
       the decision, the Judge refers to the fact that the rules  could  not
       be met, but it was incumbent upon the Judge to examine the extent  to
       which the rules were not met. Mr Duffy submits that in  reaching  his
       decision, the Judge does  not  have  any  proper  regard  to  section
       117B(v) of the 2002 Act, and in particular the precarious  nature  of
       the appellant's immigration status throughout his time in the  United
       Kingdom. Mr Duffy submits that the  appellant  could  return  to  Sri
       Lanka and make an application for leave to enter as a Tier 4  student
       to complete his course, should he wish to do so. He submits that  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material error of law
       and should be set aside.  In a re-making the decision, he invites  me
       to dismiss the appeal.


   10. In reply, Mr Spurling submits  the  evidence  of  the  appellant  was
       accepted by the Judge and that read as a whole, it is clear from  the
       decision that the Judge properly directed himself as to the facts and
       the law.  If there is any error of law,  that  error  is  immaterial.
       Mr Spurling submits that the respondent's grounds of appeal amount to
       a disagreement as to the conclusions reached by the Judge  that  were
       properly open to him.  Mr Spurling relies upon the  decision  in  CDS
       (PBS: "available" : Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305  and  submits
       that the appellant does not seek settlement in the UK, but  simply  a
       short period of leave to remain, to enable him to complete the degree
       course that he has started.


   11. Mr Spurling submits that it was enough for the  Judge  to  record  at
       paragraph [6] of his  decision  that  the  parties  agreed  that  the
       appellant could not succeed under the immigration  rules,  and  there
       was therefore no need for the Judge to examine the  claim  under  the
       rules. Mr Spurling submits that the immigration  rules  cannot  cover
       every circumstance, and that the question for  the  Judge  here,  was
       whether the circumstances are sufficiently  compelling,  to  outweigh
       the public interest.  Mr Spurling submits that the  authorities  that
       are relevant to Article 8 claims generally, concern situations  where
       a person is challenging deportation or seeking  permanent  settlement
       in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  submits  that  the   public   interest
       considerations in those cases, will weigh heavily in  favour  of  the
       respondent, but the public policy considerations will not  always  be
       the same.  Contrary to the submissions made by Mr Duffy, Mr  Spurling
       submits that it was open to the Judge to find  that  there  are  very
       good reasons why the appellant could not complete the course that  he
       had embarked upon.  He submits that the Judge was  plainly  conscious
       of the relevant public interest considerations as set out in s117B of
       the 2002 Act, and of the issues in the appeal.  Mr  Spurling  submits
       that the Judge reached a decision that on the facts, was open to him.


 Discussion


   12. I have carefully considered the evidence that was before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge and which is set out at paragraph [2] to [5]  and
       [8] to [9] of the decision.  As the Judge noted at paragraph [12]  of
       his decision, the credibility of the appellant is not in issue.   The
       Judge made findings of fact in line with the applicant's evidence.


   13. As the Judge noted at paragraph [6] of his decision,  it  was  common
       ground between the parties that the appellant is  unable  to  satisfy
       the requirements of the immigration rules and the sole  issue  before
       the Tribunal  was  whether  removal  of  the  appellant  would  be  a
       disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8  rights.
       The Judge did not consider the Article 8 claim through  the  lens  of
       the Immigration Rules.


   14. The Judge does not refer in his  decision  to  the  decision  of  the
       Supreme Court in Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72,  or  to  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014]
       UKUT 00025.  Neither decision appears  to  have  been  cited  by  the
       parties before the First-tier Tribunal.


   15. I have had regard to the decision of the Supreme Court in Patel. That
       served to re-focus attention on the nature and purpose of  Article  8
       of the ECHR, and, in particular, to recognise the  Article's  limited
       utility  in  private  life  cases  that  are  far  removed  from  the
       protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity.


   16. In Nasim the Upper  Tribunal  found  that  Patel  was  a  significant
       exhortation from the Supreme  Court  to  re-focus  attention  on  the
       nature and purpose of Article 8. The  limitation  arises,  both  from
       what will at that point normally be  the  tangential  effect  on  the
       individual of the proposed interference,  and  from  the  fact  that,
       unless there are particular reasons to reduce the public interest  of
       enforcing  immigration  controls,  the  interest  will   consequently
       prevail in striking the proportionality balance, even  assuming  that
       the stage is reached - at [20]. The use of Article 8 has very limited
       use for private life cases which do not  interfere  with  a  person's
       moral and physical integrity.


   17. In my judgement, the appellant gains no assistance from the  decision
       in CDS (PBS: "available" : Article 8) Brazil.  In CDS  (Brazil),  the
       Tribunal noted that a person who was admitted to follow a course that
       has not yet ended may build up a private life that deserves  respect,
       so that the public interest in removal before the end of  the  course
       may be reduced where there are ample financial  resources  available.
       In CDS (Brazil), the Tribunal found that a student's right to private
       life was engaged on the facts of that  particular  case.      In this
       case, it appears that the reason why  the  appellant  was  unable  to
       complete the third and final year of his degree course was  that,  at
       least in part, the appellant was unable to pay the outstanding course
       fee and secure a CAS.  There is no doubt that the appellant had  been
       studying until he returned to Sri Lanka to visit his mother. No other
       evidence has  been  given  by  the  appellant  of  any  relationships
       developed, unique or otherwise, after coming to the UK in 2009 beyond
       those associated with his education.


   18. In Nasim, it was noted that the Tribunal in CDS (Brazil) acknowledged
       that it was unlikely that a person would be able to show an Article 8
       right by coming to the UK for temporary purposes. The chances of such
       a right carrying the day have,  the  Tribunal  in  Nasim  considered,
       further diminished, in the light of the judgement in Patel.


   19. In my judgement, the Judge erred in treating Article 8 as a means  by
       which the appellant should be permitted to remain in the UK so as  to
       enable him complete what the Judge describes at paragraph [6] of  his
       decision as the "deep seated desire to complete his degree course  in
       the UK".  As the Supreme Court held in Patel, Article 8 is  concerned
       with the protection of an individual's moral and physical  integrity.
       In my judgment, the circumstances relating to the  appellant  do  not
       meet the threshold set by Nasim.  The  refusal  of  leave  to  remain
       would not interfere with the moral  and  physical  integrity  of  the
       appellant.  At paragraphs [14] to [18] of  his  decision,  the  Judge
       failed to have any regard  to  the  fact  that  it  is  open  to  the
       appellant to return to Sri Lanka and make the necessary  arrangements
       to return to the UK as a student  should  he  wish  to  complete  his
       course.  The Judge records at paragraph  [9]  of  the  decision,  the
       evidence given by the appellant as to why he did not wish  to  return
       to Sri Lanka to make an application, but the Judge did  not  consider
       whether it is reasonable in all the circumstances to expect him to do
       so. I am prepared to accept that there would be  some  disruption  to
       the appellant in having to return to Sri Lanka and make the necessary
       arrangements to secure a CAS to enable him to  complete  the  course,
       but that  in  my  judgement  is  not  sufficient  to  find  that  the
       circumstances are so exceptional as to warrant  the  grant  of  leave
       outside the rules.  The error of law is material to the decision  and
       it follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.




   20. The Judge found at paragraph [20] of his decision that the removal of
       the appellant from the United Kingdom would amount to an interference
       by the respondent which would have consequences of  such  gravity  as
       potentially would engage the operation of Article 8.  He  found  that
       the respondent discharged the burden of proving  to  the  balance  of
       probabilities that the  interference  thereby  caused,  would  be  in
       accordance with the law and necessary in a democratic society in  the
       interests of the maintenance of an effective immigration control.  He
       then turned to the question of proportionality.


   21. At paragraph [3] of his  decision,  the  Judge  notes  the  financial
       difficulties caused by the sudden nature of the appellant's  mother's
       illness.  The Judge notes that the  strain  on  the  family  finances
       resulted in the appellant being unable to pay  the  full  third  year
       tuition fees and that on account of his inability  to  pay  the  full
       year's fees, he was not able to complete the third year of his degree
       course.  It is uncontroversial that the  appellant  cannot  meet  the
       requirements of the immigration rules, but that does  not  mean  that
       where an individual fails to meet the requirements of the Immigration
       Rules, this Tribunal can take what  might  be  termed  a  broad-brush
       approach, and find therefore that  it  will  be  disproportionate  to
       require the appellant to leave the UK. The appellant may not wish  to
       return to Sri Lanka to make the  appropriate  application  for  entry
       clearance, but that does not equate to a good reason  for  permitting
       him to remain in the UK.  Parliament through procedures amending  the
       Immigration Rules, has very clearly set out specific  provisions.  In
       relation to a student wishing to continue to remain on that basis  in
       this country, such provisions are clear. They are specific,  and  the
       appellant needed to satisfy them.


   22. In SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the Court  of  Appeal  made
       quite clear  that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  the  main  point  of
       assessment under  Article  8  and  it  is  only  where  they  do  not
       sufficiently  cover  the  particular  circumstances  relating  to  an
       individual applicant, that one might turn to consider  whether  there
       are any circumstances that would justify  granting  leave  to  remain
       outside the Immigration Rules.  In this case the  appellant  did  not
       meet the admittedly strict requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He
       does not meet the private or family life  requirements  contained  in
       paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM  respectively.  What  the  Court  of
       Appeal made clear in  SS  (Congo)  was  that  it  would  only  be  in
       compelling circumstances that an infringement of Article 8  would  be
       found if an appellant, did not otherwise meet the requirements of the
       Immigration Rules.


   23.  Leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules  is  reserved  for  the  most
       exceptional cases and should not be used as a means to circumvent the
       requirements under the rules which are in themselves  in  general,  a
       complete code. The rules make  adequate  and  proper  provision  for
       students that wish to enter the UK to study or to complete  a  course
       upon which they have embarked.  Having regard to the circumstances as
       a whole, I find that the decision to refuse the  appellant  leave  to
       remain in the UK is not disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  public
       end, relating to the maintenance of a coherent  and  fair  system  of
       immigration control.   The appellant may not wish to  return  to  Sri
       Lanka to make an application for entry clearance  to  enable  him  to
       complete his course, but there is in my judgement no reasonable basis
       upon which I should  find  that  he  cannot  do  so,  or  should  not
       reasonably be expected to do so.


   24. I accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
       remake the decision, dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  the
       respondent's decision to refuse his application for leave  to  remain
       in the UK.


 Notice of Decision


   25. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane is set aside.


   26. I remake the decision, dismissing the appeal by Mr Rajitha Arachchige
       against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  his
       application for leave to remain in the UK.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have allowed the appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  and  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I also set aside the  fee  award  made
by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have gone on to dismiss the  appeal,  and  no
fee award is therefore appropriate


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
