
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04608/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th February 2015                |On 25th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                        miss lucia onyekachi duruaku
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 23rd December  1978.  She
    first came to the UK on 20th June 2000 when she entered  the  UK  as  a
    student. She had leave to remain as  a  student  until  30th  September
    2002. She then overstayed until  23rd  March  2005  when  she  made  an
    application to remain on  the  basis  of  her  marriage  to  Mr  Obinna
    Onyemaechi Ike. She was granted discretionary leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of this marriage from 28th August 2008 until 20th  October  2011.
    She attempted to extend  her  leave  on  11th  October  2011  but  this
    application was rejected due to errors with the  application  form  and
    fees. She made an application which was accepted on 15th March 2012 for
    further discretionary leave on the basis  of  her  long  residence  and
    private life in the UK, her relationship with Mr Ike having broken down
    by this time.  This application was refused on 8th  January  2014.  She
    appealed  on  16th  January  2014.   Her  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a
    determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kainth promulgated on
    13th November 2014.

 2. On 14th January 2015 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Osborne  found
    that there was an arguable error  of  law  and  granted  permission  to
    appeal because it was arguable that Judge Kainth had not  given  proper
    consideration to the appellant's legal  stay  and  qualification  as  a
    nurse. Whilst these issues were  not  determinative  of  the  issue  of
    proportionality they should have been considered before making a proper
    decision.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions

 4. Ms Record drew my attention to the fact  that  the  appellant's  bundle
    included her nursing qualifications, her conditional job  offer  for  a
    position with the NHS and newspaper  articles  about  the  shortage  of
    nurses. She accepted that Judge Kainth had applied the correct test for
    establishing whether the refusal was proportionate but argued  that  he
    had failed to put the appellant's ability to contribute  the  community
    through her work into the balance when considering proportionality. She
    drew my attention to UE  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  975  at
    paragraph 42 to 45. She argued that Judge Kainth had erred  in  law  in
    applying principles derived from Nasim and others  (Article  8)  [2014]
    UKUT 00025 as that case was about  students  wanting  to  extend  their
    leave to remain. The fact that Nasim found  that  contributing  to  the
    economy was not a matter which made the student appellants'  Article  8
    cases stronger should not have guided  Judge  Kainth  given  that  this
    appellant had a more complex background situation. Judge Kainth  should
    have been guided by UE (Nigeria). Ms  Record  argued  that  the  points
    based system was not relevant here as the respondent had no argued that
    the appellant should apply in this way in her refusal letter.

 5. Mr Shilliday argued that it was highly significant that  the  appellant
    had conceded she could not meet the Immigration  Rules.  As  stated  at
    s.117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  immigration
    control was in the economic interests of the UK. He  relied  upon  what
    was said at paragraph 64 of Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 that unless
    the case raised issues not dealt with by  the  Immigration  Rules  that
    there was no need to conduct a  separate  consideration  of  Article  8
    ECHR. If the appellant argued her work was in the economic interests of
    the UK she needed to make a points'  based  application  and  show  she
    could qualify in this way. UE (Nigeria) had been decided on  the  basis
    of the Immigration Rules prior to the points based system. Judge Kainth
    had sufficiently considered the appellant's work skills at paragraph 30
    of the determination and his determination disclosed no error of law.

 6. As the end of the hearing I informed the parties that I found that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had not erred in law. I set out my reasons below.

Conclusions

 7. Ms Record conceded that Judge Kainth had applied the  correct  test  at
    paragraph 19 and 30 of his determination when looking at the  issue  of
    the proportionality of the interference with the appellant's Article  8
    ECHR rights outside of the Immigration Rules.

 8. Judge Kainth had clearly  considered  the  matter  of  the  appellant's
    ability to contribute to the UK economy and society. He explicitly says
    that he has done so at paragraph 30 of his determination and  from  his
    summary at paragraph 13 was clearly aware  that  she  was  a  qualified
    nurse with a job offer in a skill shortage area.

 9. Judge Kainth did not err in law in  concluding  that  this  factor  was
    sufficiently strong to  outweigh  the  public  interests  in  upholding
    immigration control, particularly given the  guidance  in  Nasim,  that
    such factors were not to be given significant weight  when  considering
    proportionality under Article 8 ECHR. I can  see  no  reason  why  this
    factor should be given greater weight in  the  appellant's  immigration
    situation than in the context of the students in Nasim.

10. As Mr Shilliday has pointed out if it is in the economic  interests  of
    the UK for her to be able to work here as a nurse  then  the  appellant
    ought to succeed in an application to return  to  the  UK  with  points
    based system entry clearance. She had not  demonstrated  this  was  the
    case, by making an application or otherwise however, and  so  this  did
    not form part of the evidence before Judge Kainth. This may be a matter
    for her to discuss with her solicitors in the future.

Decision

      1. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.

      2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date 23rd February 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date 23rd February 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
