
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04125/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 3 October 2013                             |On 10 October 2013           |
|Prepared 3 October 2013                       |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SIDHU BALWINDER SINGH

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, of Counsel instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hunter  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated 31 July 2013 allowed the appeal of  Sidhu  Balwinder  Singh
    against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to  grant
    indefinite leave to remain under the provisions of paragraphs  245HF(B)
    and 322(3) of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) to the  limited
    extent that  he  referred  the  appellant's  application  back  to  the
    respondent for consideration under the points-based system.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant in this appeal  before
    me I will for ease of reference refer to her as the respondent  as  she
    was the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly  although
    Mr Sidhu Balwinder Singh is the respondent before me I will for ease of
    reference refer to him as the appellant as he was the appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant had applied for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  2  (Skilled
    Worker) Minister of Religion.  That application followed  a  number  of
    extensions of stay in that capacity.

4.   The respondent refused the application on  the  basis  that  there  was
    evidence that the appellant had, contrary  to  the  conditions  imposed
    upon him,  taken  work  other  than  as  a  minister  of  religion  and
    therefore fell for refusal under the provisions of Rule  322(3)  as  he
    had not complied with the conditions attached to the grant of leave  to
    enter or remain.

5.   Although  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  taken  work  in
    contravention of the conditions imposed upon  him  the  judge,   noting
    that the refusal under the  provisions  of  paragraph  322(3)  was  not
    mandatory concluded that the Secretary of State should  have  exercised
    his discretion differently  and,  the  Presenting  Officer  before  him
    having requested that should he so find the appeal should  be  remitted
    to the Secretary of State he referred back the application for  further
    consideration under the points-based system.

6.   The grounds of appeal argued that the judge should not have taken  that
    course of action in that the Secretary of State's  refusal  letter  had
    not explicitly shown that discretion had been exercised.

7.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr  Deller  stated  that  having
    considered the letter of refusal he considered that the grounds were in
    error in that the Secretary  of  State  had  exercised  her  discretion
    before making the decision.  He therefore accepted that  there  was  no
    merit in the appeal before me and that it would be appropriate  for  me
    to find that the decision of the Immigration Judge should stand.

8.   Mr Malik agreed to that course of action.

9.   Mr Deller was correct to concede that the appeal did  not  have  merit.
    I find that there is no error of law in the determination of the  judge
    and therefore that his decision allowing the appeal to the extent  that
    it was referred back to the  respondent  for  consideration  under  the
    points-based system shall stand.


Decision

The appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  is  allowed  to  the  extent  of
referring  the  appellant's  application  back   to   the   respondent   for
consideration on the points-based system.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

