
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04902/2015
                                                               IA/04906/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [CM]
                                    [AU]
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hulse of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. [CM] is a Jamaican national born on  4  April  1969.  [AU]  is  her
         daughter, is also a Jamaican national, and was born  on  5  October
         2007 in the United Kingdom. The  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
         applications for Indefinite Leave to Remain on 19 January 2015. The
         appeals against that decision were allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Majid ("the Judge") following a hearing on  27  August  2015.
         For the sake of consistency with the  decision  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal I will hereafter refer to [CM] and [AU]  either  by  their
         names (where appropriate) or as the Appellants and to the Secretary
         of Sate as the Respondent.

      2. In the letter of 19 January 2015 the  Respondent  noted  that  [CM]
         entered the United Kingdom on 20 February 2002 as  a  visitor.  Her
         leave was extended to 20 August 2002. Her application for leave  to
         remain was refused on 3 December 2002. She has been  an  overstayer
         since then. Subsequent applications on 18 February 2004,  31  March
         2010, and 28 September 2012 for leave to remain were refused.

      3. The basis of this refusal was that;
          1) [CM] had been in breach of immigration laws by overstaying  by
             more than 28 days,
          2) [CM] had not been here for 20 years,
          3) Despite [AU] having lived here for 7 years and all  her  life,
             it would not be  unreasonable  to  expect  her  to  return  to
             Jamaica with [CM] (who had sole  responsibility  for  her)  as
             they would go as a family unit,
          4) It is accepted that there may be some  initial  difficulty  on
             returning to Jamaica, and, whilst the material quality of life
             in Jamaica may not be the same as here, this does not  give  a
             right to remain,
          5) Temporary hardship can be overcome given the  common  language
             and [CM]'s familiarity with Jamaican customs and culture,
          6) Family life was established in  the  knowledge  she  could  be
             removed at any time,
          7) Removal is proportionate with the need to maintain immigration
             control,
          8) [CM] has not lost ties to Jamaica having lived  there  for  32
             years,
          9) As [CM] does not have leave to remain here, [AU] does not have
             a parent who provides sole care for her who has  any  form  of
             leave to remain here,
         10) [AU] is able to adapt to life in Jamaica given her tender  age
             and as she will have the support of [CM] who can maintain  and
             accommodate her,
         11) [CM] has 2 sons in Jamaica  with  whom  they  can  reside  and
             support each other,
         12) [CM] can be treated for epilepsy  and  depression  in  Jamaica
             where there is a functioning health service,
         13) [AU]'s ADHD, obstructive sleep  apnoea,  asthma,  eczema,  and
             Sickle Cell  trait  are  not  life  threatening  and  are  all
             treatable in Jamaica,
         14) [AU] can be educated in Jamaica where there is  a  functioning
             education system, and
         15) Taking all the above into account removal would be lawful,  in
             accordance with the immigration rules, and bearing in mind s55
             of  the  Borders,  Citizenship,  and  Immigration  Act   2009,
             proportionate  to  the  need  to  maintain  the  integrity  of
             immigration control.

The Judgement

      4. In the determination the Judge said;
         "[2]     I have read this refusal carefully  and  have  taken  into
         account its text in assessing this case, paying specific  attention
         to the justifications advanced for the negative  decision  appealed
         against.
         [3]      I put on record that in considering this  appeal  I  shall
         bear in mind the legal provisions of the relevant paragraphs of the
         Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended). They  are  detailed  but  I
         have borne every provision of these paragraphs in mind meticulously
         during the assessment of the Appellants' case.  I  am  also  taking
         into account the new changes in the Rules brought into force  on  9
         July 2012 which materially changed the application of Article 8  of
         the ECHR. The provisions of the Immigration Act 2014 are also taken
         into account.
         ...
         [6]      ex parte Gondolia [1991] Imm A.R..591 ...  advises  junior
         judges not to give reasons for every  finding  of  fact  and  waste
         paper in detailing obvious reasons ...
         ...
         [8]      I have outlined the evidential elements  of  the  evidence
         adduced on behalf of the Appellants which are relevant to the  fair
         disposal of thus appeal. I have  taken  into  account  all  of  the
         documentary and oral evidence in  making  up  my  mind  on  factual
         issues. To avoid repetition, I shall refer to some evidence  in  my
         deliberation below.
         [9]      It is not incumbent upon me to isolate every single  piece
         of evidence and indicate whether I have found it  relevant  to  the
         issue. I am  only  obliged  by  the  superior  precedents  to  give
         "sufficient and adequate" reasons and I am  not  under  a  duty  to
         refer to each and every piece of evidence and it therefore does not
         follow that because I have not referred to certain specific  facts,
         they have not been taken into account.
         [10]     In this Determination I am confining  my  reasons  to  the
         dispositive aspects of the  case.  I  have  carefully  perused  the
         statements of the Principal Appellant as well as other documents to
         reach the following conclusions:-
               a) I do have sympathy for the Principal  Appellant  that  the
                  Consent Order of 31 March 2015 did not bring any relief to
                  her. Indeed the "best interests" of  the  child  ought  to
                  have been considered and the Appellant  should  have  been
                  given the benefit of discretion in light of this fact.
               b) The Appellant's child has lived here over 7 years  in  the
                  UK and she should be helped, bearing in mind that  persons
                  from Jamaica were given especially lenient treatment by UK
                  immigration law. The fact that the child's father  is  not
                  very cooperative with the Principal Appellant  should  not
                  undermine  the  generous  treatment  of   the   child   by
                  immigration law  and  her  best  interests  are  expressly
                  stated not to be undermined by the fact that  the  conduct
                  of other people has the aim of facilitating immigration to
                  the  UK  -  children  should  not  be  penalised  for  the
                  misconduct of others over  which  they  do  not  have  any
                  control.
               c) This case has to be dealt with by  focusing  on  the  best
                  interests of the child and the lenient  support  given  to
                  children by the law of the UK as clear from the subsequent
                  elaboration of the relevant law on this issue.  Of  course
                  the Children's Convention 1989 should not  be  ignored  by
                  this law."

      5. The findings made by the Judge are;
         "[13]    the Second Appellant has lived in the UK for more  than  7
         years and (sic) that  her  best  interests  should  be  taken  into
         account and on that basis alone, any judge could allow this appeal.
         ...
         [25]     the child should not be uprooted ...

      6. The Judge summarised aspects of the law regarding Article 8 of  the
         ECHR, and s55 of the Borders, Citizenship, and Immigration Act 2009
         [15 to 24].

      7. The Judge stated;

         "[26]    Accordingly, in view of my deliberations in the  preceding
         paragraphs and having taken  into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence as well as the submissions at my disposal  ...
         I am  persuaded  that  the  Appellants  come  within  the  relevant
         immigration law, as amended."

The grant of permission

      8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal
         (7 January 2016) on the ground that;
         "... an arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  extent
         of the reasoning set out by the Judge in making his findings and in
         relation to the application of the law to the facts".

The Respondent's position

      9. There is an absence of reasoned findings. The only  explanation  is
         that  the  Judge  was  persuaded  by  the  evidence.  There  is  no
         indication of balancing the evidence, or considering  the  relative
         merits of different strands of evidence. No  regard  was  given  to
         s117B (6) of the Immigration  Act  2014  or  EV  (Philippines)  and
         Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, and the guidance in Azimi-Moayed
         and others (decisions affecting children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]
         UKUT 00197 (IAC) has not been applied.

The Appellant's position

     10. It states in the rule 24 notice [6] that [CM] is not  arguing  that
         her medical condition requires her to have leave to remain.  It  is
         based on both of the Appellants medical conditions and the  private
         and family lives they have established. [CM]  has  given  birth  to
         [DU] on 6 January 2016. [AU] has lived here all her life  which  is
         over 8 years and attends primary school, and [CM]  has  lived  here
         for almost 14 years. There have to be clear reasons  for  departing
         from  the  duty  under  s55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship,   and
         Immigration  Act  2009.  There  are  compelling   and   exceptional
         circumstances that warrant discretion being applied. Article  3  of
         the ECHR has not been applied. The Judge made findings open to him.
         The grounds  are  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  those
         conclusions.

     11. Ms Hulse added that  the  Judge  was  not  required  to  give  full
         reasons. The Respondent had made  no  findings  under  s55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship, and Immigration Act 2009. There  is  Judicial
         knowledge that Jamaicans are treated more leniently than others  as
         there are  no  visa  restrictions.  The  Judge  simply  used  legal
         shorthand to show what facts he had considered. Reliance was placed
         on her skeleton argument  and  JO  and  Others  (section  55  duty)
         Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) and ZH  (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
         UKSC 4.

Discussion

Ground 1 - "adequacy of reasons"

     12. Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085  (IAC)
         was followed by Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT
         00341 (IAC). They guide  me  to  the  view  that  it  is  generally
         unnecessary and unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal  judgments  to
         rehearse every detail or issue raised in  a  case.  This  leads  to
         judgments  becoming  overly  long  and  confused  and  is   not   a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary
         for Judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms their  reasons,  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost.

     13. The Judge's determination is wholly inadequate. The Judge  entirely
         failed to engage with the Respondent's case and the concerns I have
         identified at [3] above. The exposition of some legal principles in
         the Judgement [15 to 24] is not  a  substitute  for  analysing  the
         evidence and making findings on contested core issues in the  case.
         There was no attempt, for example, to make findings on  the  extent
         of the Appellants health issues, what support they  would  have  in
         Jamaica from family or professionals, and there is no  evidence  to
         back up the bald assertion [10 (2)] "that persons from Jamaica were
         given especially lenient  treatment  by  UK  immigration  law".  As
         pointed out by Ms Hulse the Judge entirely ignored  the  Article  3
         claim however unmeritorious it may seem.

Ground 2 - Section 117B of the Immigration Act 2014

     14. The Judge made no reference to s117 of the  Immigration  Act  2014.
         The only oblique reference  to  it  is  in  the  reference  to  the
         Immigration Act 2014 [3 of the Judge's determination]. There is  no
         analysis of the public  interest  provisions  of  s117  or  how  it
         applies or weighs in the balancing exercise in  this  case.  In  my
         judgement there was therefore a material error of law in the manner
         in which the Judge dealt with S117 as he simply ignored it.

Ground 3 - s55 Best interest of child

     15. The Judge referred [10 (c)] to the "Children's Convention 1989".  I
         am unaware of any such Convention and he  gives  no  indication  of
         what he is talking about or what relevance it has. In  taking  into
         account  a  Convention  that  does  not  appear  to  exist  he  has
         materially erred. Perhaps he meant the Children Act 1989. If he did
         he gives no indication of which provisions he was referring to.  He
         refers to Azimi-Moyad but does not explain why the  starting  point
         of remaining with her mother who was to be removed  and  who  gives
         her stability is over shadowed in the  balancing  exercise  by  the
         benefits of staying here.  Indeed there is no balancing exercise at
         all.

Decision

     16. For all  these  reasons,  in  my  judgement  there  were  therefore
         multiple material errors of law in the manner in  which  the  Judge
         dealt with the Respondent's concerns as he simply ignored them, and
         the Respondent had no idea why she had lost.  Gondolia, Budhakothi,
         and Shizad do not provide an exemption for a Judge  to  ignore  the
         core disputes in the case or make findings upon them.

Remaking the decision

     17. The making of the decision by the Judge did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law for the reasons I have already given  on
         both grounds contended.

     18. I set aside the decision.

     19. Mr Avery submitted that it was appropriate to remit the matter back
         to the First-tier Tribunal as there had been no findings. Ms  Hulse
         agreed.  I agreed given the wholly  inadequate  determination  that
         there was no alternative but to remit the matter back to the First-
         tier Tribunal.

     20. I therefore direct that the matter  be  set  down  for  a  de  novo
         hearing at Taylor House on the first available  date  with  a  time
         estimate of 3 hours given the number  of  potential  witnesses.  No
         interpreter is required.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
23 February 2016
