
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04234/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 November 2014             |On 26 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                               Namrata Gurung
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Parkes of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, born on  22  December  1989.   She
    applied on 9 September 2013 for leave to remain on  Article  8  grounds
    which was refused by  the  respondent  on  31  December  2013  with  an
    accompanying decision to remove the  appellant  by  way  of  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal  was  dismissed
    by Judge P-J White (the judge) in a  determination  promulgated  on  23
    July 2014.  He found that the appellant was not at risk of  any  breach
    of her rights under Article 3 raised before him at the hearing, whether
    from threatened violence on  the  part  of  her  father  or  from  more
    generalised difficulties of a societal nature.  As regards  Article  8,
    the judge found she could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE bearing in  mind
    Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) and  that
    Article 8 outside the Rules was not engaged.

 3. The grounds claim the judge materially erred because he was obliged  to
    carry out an Article 8 assessment outside the Rules.  He  misunderstood
    the approach required.  See Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC)  and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin).  The grounds argue that a full Article 8 analysis outside  the
    Rules was required because of the appellant's circumstances but in  any
    event, the judge erred because he found that the respondent's  decision
    was not such as to engage Article 8, failing to  take  account  of  the
    test in AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801.

 4. As regards Article 3, the judge failed to make adequate  findings  with
    regard to the appellant's evidence against which to consider the expert
    report.  Further, that he failed to take the appellant's mental  health
    issues into account.  See [12]-[13] of the appellant's statement.

 5. The appellant's permission to appeal was out of time.   She  said  that
    the delay in serving the application was due to the failure  of  clerks
    in Counsel's chambers not passing the determination to Counsel with the
    solicitor's request to draft and file  the  grounds.   On  that  basis,
    Judge Ford found it would be unjust not to extend time.   Nevertheless,
    she found that there was no reasonable prospect of success with  regard
    to the argument that the judge  erred  in  not  considering  Article  8
    outside the Rules and in particular  not  considering  proportionality.
    That was because the judge clearly stated that even  if  he  had  found
    that there were circumstances warranting such consideration,  he  would
    not find Article 8 engaged in respect of family or  private  life  such
    that the issue of proportionality did not arise.  Judge Ford  took  the
    view that the judge did fully consider the mental health  evidence  and
    found that the appellant was not currently suffering from mental health
    difficulties.  The judge had made it very clear at [33] that he was not
    satisfied to the "low standard applicable" on  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant's father had made threats to kill her.  Judge Ford considered
    that finding was open to the judge to make on the evidence and  it  was
    misleading to suggest that he did not make clear findings on that issue
    such that there was no arguable material error of law.

 6. The grounds were renewed to the Upper  Tribunal  maintaining  that  the
    judge misdirected himself as to the legal test in  determining  whether
    an assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules was required.   See  [128]
    of MM [2014] EWCA CIV 985.  It was claimed that Judge  Ford  failed  to
    give adequate reasons as to why  the  arguments  at  [16]-[18]  of  the
    grounds were rejected and that in any  event  there  were  insufficient
    findings of fact in the judge's determination.

 7. In granting leave, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  said  that  it  was
    properly arguable that the judge "may"  have  erred  in  assessing  the
    appellant's entitlement under Article 8.  Whether his  error  made  any
    material difference would have to be decided, but Judge  Chalkley  said
    "......I would not wish to unduly raise the appellant's hopes".

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Ms Parkes relied upon her skeleton argument.  She submitted that  Judge
    White erred in concluding that he was not obliged to consider Article 8
    outside the Rules and relied in that  regard  upon  Ganesabelan  [2014]
    EWHC 2712 (Admin).  In particular at [10]  "Unlike  other  Rules  which
    have a built-in discretion based on exceptional circumstances, Appendix
    FM and Rule 276ADE are not a  'complete  code'  so  far  as  Article  8
    compatibility is  concerned"  and  at  [12]  "These  Immigration  Rules
    operate alongside important  guidance  which  is  itself  part  of  the
    relevant overall code and  which  guidance  recognises  the  discretion
    outside the Rules and the duty on the Secretary of  State  to  consider
    exercising that discretion in the individual case."

 9. Ms Parkes submitted that the judge found the appellant had  established
    a private life in the United Kingdom and she therefore had an  arguable
    case that there might have been good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules and erred in concluding that Article 8 was not
    engaged. If Article 8 was engaged a proportionality test was  required.
    Alternatively or in addition,  Ms  Parkes  submitted  that  there  were
    sufficient compelling circumstances which the judge ignored in terms of
    a proportionality exercise, in particular, that she had become pregnant
    and had to give up the child for adoption, threats  to  kill  from  her
    father, estrangement from her siblings and lack of friends in  her  own
    country.

10. Mr Kandola relied upon the Rule 24 response.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge directed himself appropriately.   He  carried  out  a  clear  and
    detailed analysis of the appellant's circumstances and  concluded  that
    there was no good arguable case for further consideration of Article  8
    outside the Rules.  The judge had made a clear finding at [32] that the
    appellant would not be at risk after a proper analysis  of  her  claim.
    He did not misdirect himself with regard to Article 8.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. Success on Article 8 grounds under the Immigration Rules was  dependent
    upon showing that the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and/or  paragraph
    276ADE were met.  The fundamental changes brought in  on  and  after  9
    July 2012 were far from straightforward.  Prior to 9 July 2012, where a
    person lost under the  Rules,  judges  would  generally  determine  the
    Article 8 ground of appeal by proceeding to make an assessment  outside
    of the Rules.  Odelola [2009]  UKHL  25.   The  Rules  represented  the
    Secretary of State's policy on  immigration  matters  but  private  and
    family life ties  were  still  required  to  be  weighed  in  assessing
    proportionality.  That broad approach still remains as  is  clear  from
    Patel [2013] UKSC.  In that  case  Lord  Carnwath  described  the  most
    authoritative guidance on the  correct  approach  of  the  Tribunal  to
    Article 8 as remaining that of  Lord  Bingham  in  Huang.   A  person's
    failure to qualify under the Rules was the point at which to begin, not
    end, consideration of the claim under Article  8.   The  terms  of  the
    Rules were relevant to that consideration but not determinative.  Since
    the changes on 9 July 2012, there has been much  consideration  in  the
    courts concerning the precise impact of the Rules which for  the  first
    time sought to encapsulate the Article 8 assessment.  The Secretary  of
    State's ambition was to make provision under the Rules for Article 8 so
    that there would be no need to make any assessment outside  the  Rules.
    The Court of Appeal held in MF [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  at  least  with
    regard to deportation, that the Rules were  a  complete  code.   Having
    said that, the Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the  public  interest  in
    deportation  could  be  outweighed   by   compelling   or   exceptional
    circumstances which produced a  disproportionate  response.   In  other
    words, a proportionality assessment would  still  be  required  in  the
    deportation context. Whether that was an exercise conducted  completely
    within the Rules or as a two stage analysis, Rules first  and  then  an
    assessment outside them, was academic.  The position is  not  so  clear
    with regard to the rest of the Rules outside deportation.   In  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 640, the Upper Tribunal set out what it  considered  to  be
    the correct approach.  After applying the requirements  of  the  Rules,
    only if the were "arguably good grounds for granting  leave  to  remain
    outside them" would it be necessary for Article 8 purposes to  consider
    whether  there  were   "compelling   circumstances   not   sufficiently
    recognised under them" which built on the approach taken  by  the  High
    Court in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  The  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM
    (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985  took  the  view  that  where  the  Rules
    provide a complete code for dealing with a person's human rights in the
    context  of  an  individual  Rule  or  statutory  provision,  then  the
    balancing exercise, weighing the competing interests, must be  done  in
    accordance with the code.  Nonetheless,  references  in  the  Rules  to
    "exceptional circumstances" will require  a  proportionality  exercise.
    If the particular Rule or Rules do not amount to a complete  code  then
    the proportionality test  will  be  more  at  large  guided  by  Huang.
    Helpful guidance might come from Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558  where
    the Court of Appeal appeared to endorse the Upper  Tribunal's  approach
    in Gulshan and particularly so because MM was strictly  concerned  with
    an earlier Upper Tribunal decision in the  same  proceedings  regarding
    the minimum income threshold and that the comments  about  the  correct
    approach to the Rules generally and to Gulshan and  Nagre  were  obiter
    only.  See also Nasim [2014] UKUT 00025.

12. The grounds raised issues with regard to Article 3 and Article 8  which
    I will address in turn:

Article 3

13. The grounds claim that the judge failed to make  adequate  findings  in
    relation to whether or not the appellant's  father  had  threatened  to
    kill her and whether she would be at risk on  return.   The  judge  was
    told at the outset that the appellant was not relying  upon  Article  3
    although as  the  hearing  progressed,  Ms  Parkes  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant  changed  her  position.   That  evidence  relating  to   the
    appellant's father was  set  out  by  the  judge  at  [5]-[19]  of  the
    determination.  See also  [24]  where  the  judge  summarised  that  as
    regards Article 3, he had heard repeated evidence  from  the  appellant
    that she feared ill-treatment and that she would be at risk on  return.
    The judge took into account the expert report of  Dr  Malagodi  in  his
    findings and reasons at [25]-[35].  He reminded himself  of  the  lower
    standard with regard to Article 3.  See [32] and [34].

14. As regards the appellant's  ill-treatment  by  her  father,  the  judge
    considered that at [32] pointing up the inconsistencies in her evidence
    and the qualification the appellant made  that  the  ill-treatment  she
    claimed  was  "......not  in  a  bad  way."   Apart  from  two  limited
    references in the appellant's oral evidence before the judge, there was
    no reference anywhere to actual violence of any kind from  her  father.
    The judge carried out a comprehensive assessment of  the  risk  to  the
    appellant on return in terms of the high Article 3 threshold and  found
    that she was not at risk  either  from  threatened  violence  from  her
    father or from more generalised difficulties of a societal nature.  See
    [35].  Those were cogent findings that the judge was entitled  to  come
    to on the evidence before him and disclose no arguable error of law.

15. The judge carried out a comprehensive  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    medical condition and the documentation she had  provided  relating  to
    the provision of mental health care in Nepal.  See [33].  He took  into
    account that the appellant claimed it was reasonably likely  she  would
    need mental health treatment on return.  He took into account that  she
    said in her witness statement that she had contemplated suicide and was
    seeking counselling as of July 2014  although  he  noted  that  medical
    evidence of any kind was conspicuous in its absence.   He  nevertheless
    took into account a letter from Open Mindedness Limited which  was  the
    extent of the evidence that the appellant had  with  regard  to  mental
    health issues.  There was  no  evidence  she  had  sought  or  received
    treatment from her GP or any other medical professional and  there  was
    no evidence that she was suffering from any mental health issues or  in
    need of any  treatment  notwithstanding  that  she  was  said  to  have
    suffered from severe postnatal depression.  On the evidence before  the
    judge and for the reasons  he  set  out,  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had not shown herself to  be  suffering  from  mental  health
    issues of any kind.  His finding that her attempt to put forward such a
    case was an attempt to bolster the claim was a finding he was  entitled
    to come to on the evidence before him.

16. The judge took into account that the appellant would  be  returning  to
    Nepal as a single woman and would have  to  make  a  life  for  herself
    there.  See [34].

Article 8

17. The judge correctly addressed himself to the  appropriate  approach  to
    Appendix FM and 276ADE at [36].  He found that she  could  not  satisfy
    either provision.  No issue was taken  by  Ms  Parkes  in  that  regard
    except that she said that if I found the judge  erred  and  I  was  not
    minded to remit the  matter  for  a  fresh  hearing,  I  must  consider
    paragraph 276ADE as amended which by virtue of the Statement of Changes
    HC-532 applied to all decisions made on or after 28 July 2014.  The new
    test in 276ADE(1)(vi) was less onerous than that of  "no  ties",  inter
    alia, "......but there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into the country to which he would have  to  go
    if required to leave the UK."  Further, that  I  must  have  regard  to
    s.117B of the Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002.

18. Having found the appellant did not satisfy  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE, the judge went  on  to  consider  whether  there  remained  the
    possibility of an appeal under Article 8 outside the  Rules.   He  took
    into account Gulshan.  At  [37],  he  found  there  was  undoubtedly  a
    strikingly compassionate circumstance  in  that  the  appellant  became
    pregnant, had a  child  and  gave  up  that  child  for  adoption.   He
    commented  that  he  had  no  doubt  that  would  have  been  extremely
    distressing for the appellant but observed  that  the  fact  of  having
    given up a child was not advanced as a reason for  a  grant  of  leave.
    The justification for the grant of leave as put forward by Ms Parkes on
    behalf of the appellant was said to be the  adverse  consequences  that
    would flow in Nepal from having had the child here.  The judge assessed
    the  appellant's  circumstances  on  return.   He  accepted  that   the
    appellant might find life in Nepal significantly  more  difficult  than
    would have been the case had she not got pregnant but simply  completed
    her studies and returned but he did not accept that  the  circumstances
    were worse than that and further, said that he did  not  consider  that
    unfortunate  and  distressing  incident  in  her  life  amounted  to  a
    circumstance sufficient for a full consideration of Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  I find  in  such  circumstances,  in  accordance  with  the
    development of the case law I have set out above,  the  judge  directed
    himself correctly and did not err.  Nevertheless, the judge went on  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules in the event that as  he  put  it,
    his view was too  harsh.   He  went  on  to  consider  the  appellant's
    circumstances in terms of Razgar which he considered  at  [38]  of  his
    decision.

19. I find on the evidence before the judge he  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the appellant's circumstances were  not  such  as  to  necessitate
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules, but that he  nevertheless
    carried out such an assessment and was  further  entitled  to  conclude
    that Article 8 was not engaged.

Conclusion

20. In summary I  conclude  that  the  determination  does  not  contain  a
    material error of  law,  such  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 26 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have found that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no  error
of law and shall stand such that there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 26 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


