
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04917/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4th August 2016                       |On 9th August 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                nedhal j ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt of Counsel instructed by Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Ransley of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 20th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a female national of  Iraq  born  5th  July  1948  who
    appealed to the FtT against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  her
    application for leave to remain based  upon  her  human  rights.   That
    refusal was dated 9th October  2014,  and  on  14th  October  2014  the
    Respondent made a decision to remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. The FtT heard evidence from the Appellant, her son and her daughter-in-
    law, and dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules, and on human
    rights grounds and humanitarian protection grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon two grounds.

 5. Firstly it was contended that the FtT had erred in law in her treatment
    of the medical evidence.  It  was  contended  that  the  FtT  erred  in
    paragraph 11 by stating;

         "Mr McIndoe also confirmed that the Appellant's appeal on Article 8
         grounds does not rely on her medical/health conditions."

 6.  It  was  contended  that  the  Appellant's  legal  representative  had
    confirmed the Appellant's medical needs were not relied on in  relation
    to Article 3, but her health was a relevant factor when considering the
    necessity and proportionality of her removal pursuant to Article 8.  It
    was therefore submitted that the  FtT  erred  in  failing  properly  to
    attach due weight to the medical evidence.

 7. It was contended that the FtT had erred at paragraph  28  by  observing
    that the Appellant, at the hearing, did not appear to have any mobility
    problems, observing that the Appellant moved around the  courtroom  and
    went  in  and  out  with  relative  ease  and  without  any  need   for
    aid/support.  It was submitted that  the  FtT's  failure  to  refer  to
    medical evidence in the course of reasoning, and offering an impression
    of the Appellant's mobility, was indicative of a failure to give weight
    to material evidence.

 8. The second ground related to the Article 15(c) aspect of the case.  The
    Appellant's home in Iraq is in Anbar Governorate and it  was  submitted
    that the FtT ought to have taken notice that the current  situation  in
    that area was unstable.  The FtT had drawn an  adverse  inference  from
    the fact that Captain Tharwat had submitted a letter  of  support,  but
    made no mention of the Appellant's house in Iraq  having  been  seized.
    It was contended that  it  would  have  been  very  difficult  for  the
    Appellant to provide independent  evidence  that  her  house  had  been
    seized, and the FtT had imposed a requirement for corroboration of this
    aspect of the Appellant's claim.

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker in the following terms;

         1.   This  application  is  in  time.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             Ransley dismissed the Appellant's appeal, against the decision
             of the Respondent to remove her from the United Kingdom.  This
             application is in time.

         2.   It is arguable that the judge erred in  her  approach  to  the
             medical evidence and it is further arguably  Robinson  obvious
             that there  is  an  error  of  approach  generally  given  the
             guidance in AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544
             (IAC), of which the judge could not have been aware  when  she
             decided the case.

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the FtT had not  erred  in  law
    and had taken into account the medical evidence.  The FtT was  entitled
    to comment on the Appellant's presentation at the hearing.

11. The FtT had considered the country guidance which was in force  at  the
    date of hearing, and was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  claim  for
    humanitarian protection had not been made  out.   The  decision  in  AA
    (Iraq) was not promulgated until approximately three months  after  the
    FtT decision.

12. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

13. Mr Holt relied and expanded  upon  the  grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.  Mr Holt submitted that  the  FtT
    was factually incorrect in recording at paragraph 11 that the appeal on
    Article 8 grounds did not  rely  upon  the  Appellant's  medical/health
    condition.  I was asked to note there was reference in paragraph 12  of
    the skeleton argument which  was  before  the  FtT,  to  the  Appellant
    needing daily care.  I was also asked  to  note  the  medical  evidence
    contained within the Appellant's bundle that was before the FtT.

14. With reference to the Appellant's bundle that had been prepared for the
    Upper Tribunal  hearing,  Mr  Holt  confirmed  that  the  reference  to
    admission of further evidence pursuant  to  rule  15(2A)  of  the  2008
    Procedure Rules, did not relate to the error of law  hearing.   It  was
    not suggested that fresh evidence should be considered at the error  of
    law hearing, which had not been before the FtT.  That would be relevant
    if the FtT decision was set aside.

15. Mr Holt submitted that there  was  very  little  reference  to  medical
    evidence within the FtT decision, because the FtT wrongly believed that
    the Appellant did not rely upon her medical condition.

16. In relation to Article 15(c) Mr Holt pointed out that Anbar  is  now  a
    contested area, although at the date of the FtT hearing, which  is  the
    relevant date,  it  was  not.   However,  credible  evidence  had  been
    submitted to the FtT which pointed to the  risk  of  Anbar  falling  to
    ISIS.  Mr Holt submitted that the FtT  had  imposed  a  requirement  of
    corroboration when considering this issue which was an error of law.

17. Mr Holt submitted that the Robinson  obvious  point  mentioned  in  the
    grant of permission, related to paragraph  4  of  the  headnote  to  AA
    (Iraq) which for ease of reference I set out below;

         4.   In accordance with the principles  set  out  in  Elgafaji  (C-
             465/07) and QD (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases
             should assess the individual  characteristics  of  the  person
             claiming  humanitarian  protection,  in  order  to   ascertain
             whether those characteristics are such as to put  that  person
             at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

18. Mr Holt explained that it was accepted that  AA  (Iraq)  had  not  been
    published when the FtT decision was made, but the  approach  in  taking
    into account the individual  characteristics  of  the  person  claiming
    humanitarian protection, already existed prior to the publication of AA
    (Iraq).  I was asked to accept that the FtT had not taken into  account
    the Appellant's individual characteristics and therefore this  amounted
    to an error of law.

The Respondent's Submissions

19. Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 response and submitted that the FtT
    had not erred in law.  I was asked to note that the  FtT  had  in  fact
    found against the Appellant  on  credibility  and  I  was  referred  in
    particular to paragraphs 18 and 21 of the FtT decision on that point.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. Dealing firstly with the consideration of medical evidence, I  find  no
    material error of law disclosed in the FtT decision.

21. I am satisfied that the Appellant's representative did make the comment
    that the claims pursuant to Articles 3 and 8 did not  rely  on  medical
    grounds.  The FtT has recorded this in the Record of  Proceedings,  and
    would not have done so had this not been stated.

22. I note that there is no specific reference to the  Appellant's  medical
    condition in the Grounds of Appeal submitted to the FtT, and  the  only
    reference in the skeleton argument  is  at  paragraph  12  which  makes
    reference to the Appellant being helped with her daily care needs.

23. I am  however  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  in  her  evidence  made
    reference to her medical condition, and that there is medical  evidence
    contained within the Appellant's bundle which was before the FtT.

24. I find no error at paragraph 28 of the FtT decision.  In this paragraph
    the FtT makes specific reference to  medical  evidence,  that  being  a
    letter from the Appellant's GP dated 8th January 2013 and sets  out  an
    extract from that letter.  The FtT was clearly  aware  of  the  medical
    evidence  because  in  the  same  paragraph,  there  is  reference   to
    "subsequent GP letters" containing the same information.  I do not find
    that the FtT erred in making an observation that the Appellant did  not
    appear to have mobility problems at the hearing, as  this  comment  was
    qualified by the FtT stating, "I am not medically qualified  and  I  do
    not propose to make clinical judgment."

25. The weight to be attached to evidence is decided by the  judge  hearing
    the case.  I do not find in this case, that  the  FtT  has  disregarded
    relevant medical evidence, and I am satisfied, reading the decision  as
    a whole, that the FtT has considered the medical evidence.

26. It is relevant, that the  FtT  made  adverse  credibility  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant and her son.  At paragraph 21  the  FtT  made
    the following findings;

         21.  In the light of the above, I find that the Appellant and Mr Al-
             Rahman have not told the truth about her family ties in  Iraq.
             They gave the distinct impression that they tried to  minimise
             her family connection in her home country.

27. At paragraph 32 the FtT made reference to a letter from Captain Tharwat
    in which he made no mention of the Appellant's  house  in  Iraq  having
    been seized.  This was not a requirement of corroboration.  The FtT was
    entitled to note the absence of any reference to the house being seized
    in the letter of support.  The FtT also found the Appellant had in fact
    a teacher's pension and the financial support of  her  son,  and  found
    that the Appellant has a married sister with a son and daughter  living
    in the Appellant's home area in Iraq, and the Appellant has  maintained
    contact with this sister.  The FtT was not satisfied  that  the  sister
    and her children would be unable  or  unwilling  to  provide  practical
    support to the Appellant on her return, including taking her into their
    home if that should be necessary.

28. The FtT therefore found that the Appellant  would  have  accommodation,
    and financial and practical support, and did not disregard the  medical
    evidence.

29. I do not find that the FtT erred in considering Article 15(c).  The FtT
    applied the country guidance case law that was in force at the date  of
    hearing.  I do not accept the submission that the FtT  failed  to  take
    into account the individual characteristics of the Appellant.

30. In my view, it is clear that the FtT did not accept that the  Appellant
    had been entirely truthful about her circumstances in Iraq.  There  has
    been no challenge to the credibility findings made by the FtT.  The FtT
    was clearly aware  of  the  Appellant's  age  and  that  she  would  be
    returning as a single woman, but found as previously stated,  that  she
    would have access to financial and family  support  and  accommodation.
    It was not suggested that she would be unable  to  access  any  medical
    treatment.

31. The grounds display a disagreement with the findings made by  the  FtT,
    but they do not disclose any material error of  law.   If  the  country
    guidance case law and background objective evidence indicates that  the
    situation in the Appellant's home area has now changed, then  that  may
    give rise to a further claim, but the FtT has to consider the  evidence
    as at the date of hearing, and did not err in law in doing so.





Notice of Decision

The FtT did not materially err in law.  I do not  set  aside  the  decision.
The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been  no  application
for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.


Signed                              Date 5th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 5th August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
