








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04106/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 January 2015                   |On 4 February 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Arinze Zakari  Enemuo
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. For the sake of convenience I shall  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
    secretary of state and the respondent as "the claimant."

 2.  The  secretary  of  state  appealed  with   permission   against   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, promulgated on 25  June
    2014, allowing the claimant's appeal against the secretary  of  state's
    decision to refuse his application for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.

 3. On 5 December 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted the secretary  of
    state permission to appeal on the basis that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    "was incorrect" in his approach  to  the  claimant's  history  and  the
    weight given to the withdrawal of licences at two of the colleges  from
    whom the claimant obtained a CAS.

 4. The claimant's refusal letter was produced, which established that were
    his current application to be granted, he would have obtained leave for
    three years, 11 months and 13 days for study at below degree level.

 5. The grounds submitted that the Judge had not adequately  addressed  the
    refusal letter itself. It was evident that the claimant's first college
    withdrew sponsorship due to  the  claimant's  lack  of  attendance  and
    lateness. The refusal  acknowledged  that  the  claimant  had  in  fact
    submitted a new application four months after the UKBA was notified  of
    the withdrawal of sponsorship and the licence was revoked for  the  new
    college, but nevertheless, taking into account the period in which  the
    claimant was supposed to be studying, and "due to his own actions"  was
    not, and the period of the proposed study still  exceeded  the  maximum
    three years permitted in his case.

 6. The Judge did not address the fact that the sponsorship  was  withdrawn
    as a result of the claimant's actions and not that of the secretary  of
    state. The period after 11 November 2011could be counted and taken into
    account because the claimant did not explain why he failed to study  at
    the institute where he was granted leave to enter.

 7. Immigration Rule 245ZX(h) provides that if the course is  below  degree
    level, the grant of leave to remain the appellant is seeking  must  not
    lead to the applicant's having spent more than three years in the UK as
    a Tier 4 Migrant since the age of 18, studying  courses  that  did  not
    consist of degree level study.

 8. The claimant has  never  explained  why  he  failed  to  study  at  the
    institute where he was granted leave to enter. Accordingly, the  period
    after 11 November 2011  should  be  counted  for  the  purpose  of  the
    immigration rules.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal accordingly involved the making
    of an error on a point of law. I accordingly set it  aside  and  remake
    it.

10. I am satisfied that the claimant had been properly notified as  to  the
    date and time of hearing of the secretary of state's appeal.  There has
    been no attendance by the claimant or any representative.

11. Mr Melvin informed me  during  the  course  of  the  hearing  that  the
    claimant was no longer in the UK, having departed  for  Nigeria  on  13
    January 2015.

12. He produced a disclaimer from the claimant  relating  to  the  case  of
    voluntary departure. In the written notice, signed  and  dated  by  the
    claimant, he stated that he wished to voluntarily  depart  the  UK  for
    Nigeria. He had been notified that he was liable to  be  removed  under
    immigration powers.

13. He was given the opportunity to access legal advice. He confirmed  that
    he  was  aware  that  his  case  is  still  under   consideration   but
    nevertheless wished to leave the UK without waiting for the outcome  of
    this consideration.

14. He stated in the signed notice that he wished to formally withdraw  his
    appeal  against:  "refusal  of  T4-General  Student  -  LTR  Lodged  on
    20/03/2013 and authorise you to inform the appropriate  authorities  as
    necessary."  He also wishes to withdraw any and all outstanding  claims
    or applications he has made to stay in the UK.

15. I have had regard to  s.104(4)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 which provides that an appeal under s.82(1) brought  by
    a person while he was in the UK shall be treated as  abandoned  if  the
    appellant leaves the UK.

16. The claimant's appeal is accordingly still pending.   However,  he  has
    voluntarily left the UK and his current appeal is treated as abandoned.



17. Pursuant to Rule 17A(2), it is provided that where an appeal is treated
    as abandoned pursuant to s.104(4) of the 2002 Act, the  Upper  Tribunal
    must send the parties a notice informing them that the appeal is  being
    treated as abandoned.

18. I accordingly direct that  the  Tribunal  send  the  parties  a  notice
    informing them that the appeal is treated as abandoned.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Date 3/2/2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

