
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04370/2014
                                                              Oral judgement

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2014                               |On 03 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Ms Nana Abena Asirifi

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Anyene, Counsel instructed by Michael & Co
Legal Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent  (whom  I  shall  refer  to  in  this  decision  as  the
    appellant as she was  during  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal), is citizen of Ghana and her date of  birth  is  9  September
    1969.  She made an application for a residence  card  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (hereinafter
    referred to as the 2006 Regulations) on the basis of her marriage to  a
    Portuguese national, Mr Rui Oscar Ivo  Rangel  Alberto  (the  sponsor).
    The appellant had produced a marriage certificate dated 19  April  2012
    in order to establish that she and the EEA sponsor had married by proxy
    in Ghana on 16 February 2012.

2.   The application was refused on 23 December 2013 because  (according  to
    the Secretary of State), the marriage was not  recognised  in  Ghanaian
    law, the relationship between the appellant and the EEA sponsor was not
    durable and there was insufficient evidence that the  EEA  sponsor  was
    exercising treaty rights.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    on the basis that the marriage and registration were properly conducted
    in accordance with the laws of Ghana.  The matter was determined on the
    papers at the request of the appellant by First-tier Tribunal Judge A M
    Baker who went on to allow  the  appeal  because  the  respondent  "was
    trying to set the bar at  a  higher  level  than  is  legitimate  under
    current case law and legislation".

4.   The Judge at [9] found as follows:

         "I find that the material facts relevant  to  this  appeal  are  as
         follows.   Firstly  I  can  place  no  reliance  on  the  submitted
         purported statement of  the  appellant  dated  4/3/2014  as  it  is
         substantially drafted  as  being  on  behalf  of  her  sponsor  and
         therefore is in part utterly  illogical,  as  in  paragraph  7  for
         example.  That said,  I  have  carefully  read  the  whole  of  the
         appellant's substantial bundle as well as that  of  the  respondent
         and have come to the  conclusion  that  for  reasons  unknown,  the
         respondent indeed does appear to be trying to  set  the  bar  at  a
         higher  level  than  is  legitimate  under  current  case  law  and
         legislation.  I am persuaded by the submissions on the  appellant's
         behalf and the documentation provided in support of that,  for  the
         purposes of Ghanain law, the parties hereto have contracted a valid
         and genuine marriage.   I  can  find  no  legitimate  flaw  in  the
         paperwork as is claimed by the respondent,  nor  any  statutory  or
         other justification for her raising the points of concern mentioned
         above  which   are,   frankly,   beyond   her   legitimate   remit.
         Accordingly, not only do I accept the marriage is  valid,  but  the
         corollary is that the appellant is so  entitled  to  the  residence
         card sought, so the appeal is allowed under  Regulation  7  without
         need for consideration of Regulations 6 and 8(5)."


5.   Permission to appeal against the decision was granted to the  Secretary
    of State by Judge Chambers in a decision  of  7  May  2014.   Thus  the
    matter came before me.

The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions

6.        The grounds seeking permission to appeal argue that  the  decision
    is not in accordance with Kareem (Proxy marriages  -  EU  law)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 24. The Judge should have considered  whether  or  not  the
    marriage was valid in Portugal and the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that
    there was no need to consider Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.

7.   I heard oral submissions from both representatives.  Mr  Anyene  argued
    that in his view the Judge had made a typographical error  in  relation
    to Regulation 6 at [9].  In his view it was obvious that the First-tier
    Tribunal had found  that  the  sponsor  was  a  qualified  person.   In
    relation to the marriage, there was only a need to consider whether the
    marriage was recognised in the  EEA  country  should  the  marriage  be
    doubted as valid in Ghana, but in this case the Judge went on  to  find
    that the certificate was genuine. Mr Whitwell made oral submissions  in
    the context of the grounds of appeal.

Conclusions

8.   In my view the  Judge  materially  erred.   It  was  obvious  from  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter that  whether  or  not  the  sponsor  was  a
    qualified person was an issue and I do not accept that the Judge made a
    typographical error at [9] when he concluded that there was no need  to
    consider Regulation 6. It was incumbent on the Judge to  make  a  clear
    reasoned finding relating to whether  the  appellant  was  a  qualified
    person.  I do not accept that it is implicit in the determination  that
    the Judge found that the sponsor was a qualified person.  I  set  aside
    the decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and remake the decision under Section 12(2)(b)(ii)
    of the 2007 Act.

9.   The parties agreed that I could remake  the  decision  and  that  there
    would be no need for a rehearing. Mr Anyene qualified  this  submitting
    that should I find that the evidence in relation  to  Regulation  6  is
    insufficient, the appellant should be given a  further  opportunity  to
    provide evidence on this issue. It is my view that  the  appellant  has
    had a considerable period of time to adduce further and better evidence
    relating to his appeal.    I have taken  into  account  the  directions
    issued by the Upper Tribunal on 15 May  2014.  The  appellant  did  not
    produce any further for the hearing before me. There is no good  reason
    for me to give him a further opportunity to provide evidence. To do  so
    would be contrary to the overriding objective (Rule 2 of  The  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008),

10.  There is no evidence that the  marriage  is  recognised  in  Portuguese
    law.  There is no evidence relating to this issue before the First-tier
    Tribunal and there has been no  attempt  to  produce  further  evidence
    before the Upper Tribunal.  The  appeal  must  be  dismissed  for  this
    reason as the appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof  in
    accordance with Kareem.

11.  However, in my view the first consideration should be  whether  or  not
    the sponsor was exercising treaty rights in the UK.  I asked Mr  Anyene
    to refer me to the evidence on which the appellant relied to  establish
    that the sponsor was a qualified person.  He referred me to page 77  of
    the appellant's bundle which is an undated letter from AS Trading  Ltd.
    to the Home Office. The letter is a response to the assertion  made  by
    the decision maker in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  that  they  had
    attempted to contact AS Trading Ltd without success. I  note  that  the
    appellant  also  submitted  two  payslips  relating  to  the  sponsor's
    employment.

12.  It was asserted by the  Secretary  of  State  that  a  Companies  House
    search did not establish that the address given on the letter  from  AS
    Trading Ltd. was the registered address.     Written  submissions  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal in which it was asserted that there  may
    be a good reason why the telephone call made by UKBA to AS Trading  was
    not answered.  Whilst that  may  be  the  case  in  my  view  there  is
    insufficient evidence to establish  that  the  sponsor  was  exercising
    treaty rights at the date of the decision or the hearing.  There is  no
    evidence from the sponsor on this issue and there is  no  reference  to
    the sponsor's employment in the appellant's witness  statement.   There
    is no persuasive evidence that he was exercising treaty rights

13.  The appeal must be dismissed because  the  appellant  cannot  establish
    that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights regardless of the  Kareem
    point or whether or not the relationship is durable. In any event, I do
    not accept that the  evidence  establishes  that  the  relationship  is
    durable. The evidence of the appellant and the sponsor living  together
    and the durability of their relationship is insubstantial and it is not
    persuasive.  There is no evidence from  the  sponsor  relating  to  the
    issue and there is no evidence from friends or  family  of  the  couple
    which relates to the issue of durability.  I have  taken  into  account
    the documents relating to the proxy marriage in Ghana at pages 70 to 76
    of the appellant's bundle.  However,  considering  the  evidence  as  a
    whole I find that these documents are not reliable in  the  context  of
    Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD (Pakistan) [2002] UKAIT 00439.

14.  The appeal is dismissed because the  appellant  cannot  establish  that
    the EEA sponsor is a qualified  person  under  Regulation  6.   In  any
    event, if the sponsor had been found to be  qualified,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed under Regulation  7  in  accordance  with  Kareem  and  under
    Regulation 8 on the basis that the relationship between  the  appellant
    and the EEA sponsor is not durable.






Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 1 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


