
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/04911/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On February 17, 2016                 |On February 23, 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MRS SURINDER KAUR
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Bellara, Counsel, instructed by S & S Immigration Law
Respondent  Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India. The appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor in 2009, following  a  successful  appeal  to  the
    Tribunal on January 5, 2009. She overstayed and was served with form IS
    151A on October 6, 2009. She thereafter  applied  for  asylum  but  her
    claim was certified as unfounded on October 27, 2009. She  renewed  her
    application but this was refused, with no right of appeal, on  December
    15, 2009. On April 28, 2012 she applied for leave to remain outside  of
    the Immigration Rules but this was refused on June  26,  2013  with  no
    right of appeal.

 2. On October 27, 2014 supplemented by further representations on  January
    7, 2015 she applied for leave to remain under outside of the  Rules  on
    article 3 and 8 grounds.  The  respondent  considered  her  application
    under the Immigration Rules and outside of the Rules and on January 21,
    2015 refused her application.

 3. The appellant appealed this decision on February 5, 2015 under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Telford on  May
    28, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on July 3, 2015 he  refused  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

 5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on July 17, 2015 submitting  the
    First-tier Judge had erred in  failing  to  have  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the appellant's nephew. Designated Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Zucker refused permission to appeal on October 6, 2015.

 6. Permission to appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal on  October  23,
    2015 arguing the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  law.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Frances gave permission to appeal on the  basis  it  was
    arguable Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Telford  had  not  considered
    the best interests of the child sufficiently.

 7. In a Rule 24 letter dated December 15, 2015 the respondent opposed  the
    appeal. She argued the First-tier Judge  had  considered  the  evidence
    submitted and had made adequate findings.

 8. The matter came before me on the above date  and  I  heard  submissions
    from both  representatives.  The  appellant  and  her  family  were  in
    attendance.

 9. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

10. At the outset of the hearing I indicated to Mr Bellara that the renewed
    ground of appeal alleging the decision was not in accordance  with  the
    law could only be argued if he  could  demonstrate  the  appellant  had
    raised this in her original application. After a short  adjournment  Mr
    Bellara accepted this had not been raised. Case law is  clear  that  if
    the respondent is unaware of a Section 55 issue when making a  decision
    then the appellant could not  later  argue  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. The Judge would have power to  deal  with  the
    issue at the hearing.

SUBMISSIONS

11. Mr Bellara submitted that the Judge  had  erred  in  dealing  with  the
    section 55 issue. He should have either adjourned  the  case  for  more
    information, remitted it back to the Secretary of State or carried  out
    his own fact finding during the hearing. He argued the Judge had chosen
    the latter option but had failed to have full  regard  to  the  witness
    evidence contained in the witness statements of  the  appellant,  Avtar
    Singh  or  Mrs  Dass.  Whilst  counsel  could  have  applied   for   an
    adjournment, and did not, the Judge  should  have  been  aware  of  the
    changing landscape  and  sought  more  information.  He  submitted  the
    decision was flawed.

12. Mr Tarlow relied on the Rule 24 response dated December  15,  2015.  He
    submitted the Judge had had regard to the report at pages 13 and 14  of
    the appellant's bundle and then reached findings why it was not in  the
    child's best interest that the appellant remain. There was no  material
    error.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

13. I raised with Mr Bellara the fact the evidence submitted was of a  poor
    nature. There were no reports relating to the child and the  Judge  had
    to deal with the evidence presented. I also pointed  out  that  Counsel
    who represented the appellant could have applied for an adjournment  if
    further evidence was needed but  chose  not  to.  Mr  Bellara  did  not
    disagree with either of these points.

14. The appellant applied to remain based on her own medical condition  and
    circumstances. The appellant did not raise her nephew and the effect of
    removal on her nephew at all in either the application or  the  grounds
    of appeal.

15. The statements touched on the relationship but the Judge was placed  in
    the position of having been given a medical report that did not portray
    the appellant in a favourable light when it  came  to  suitability  for
    contact. There was nothing before the Judge that supported any argument
    that her remaining  in  the  country  would  be  in  the  child's  best
    interests.

16. This was an appeal where there was little or no evidence to support the
    argument now being advanced.

17. I indicated to Mr Bellara that based on the evidence before the  First-
    tier Judge I was not persuaded there was an error in law. It  may  well
    be that if further  evidence  had  been  produced  to  the  Judge  that
    addressed the child's best interests then the position would have  been
    different.

18. There was no material error of law. The First-tier  Judge  had  reached
    findings open to him and could not be faulted for the sensitive way  he
    had dealt with this difficult case.

DECISION

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point  of  law.  I  uphold  the  First-tier
    decision.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
