
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04690/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 September 2013                          |On 4 October 2013            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Bilal Khan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Pakistan against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissing his appeal against  a  decision  of
    the respondent on 29 January 2013 to remove him from the United Kingdom.
     It is the appellant's case that he is entitled to remain in the  United
    Kingdom by reason of fourteen years' unlawful residence.  He  failed  to
    satisfy the Secretary  of  State,  and  in  due  course  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that he had resided in the United Kingdom for the  time  said.
    In order to prove his claim under the rules he would have  had  to  have
    satisfied the judge that he had resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    1998.

 2. It  is  infuriating  that  this  appeal  comes  before  me  because  the
    determination  is  only  a  few  short  paragraphs   away   from   being
    unimpeachable but, as it is, there are difficulties in it which  led  to
    permission to appeal being granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley  and
    my having to give think  carefully  about  Mr  Dhanji's  thoughtful  and
    carefully crafted submissions.

 3. When I stand back and look what happened, it is clear how the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge reached the conclusion that he did.  He had  before  him,
    as Mr Dhanji recognises, essentially three strands of evidence going  to
    the crucial date.  The first was a document from  an  employer  which  I
    call the "Chicken and Spice" letter, the second was the  oral  testimony
    of the appellant and the third was the oral testimony of  Mr  Khan,  who
    was a friend of the appellant's who claimed  to  have  accommodated  him
    when he arrived in the United Kingdom in 1998.

 4.  There  was  other  evidence  before  the  Tribunal.   It  consisted  of
    supporting references from people such as local councillors, people  who
    knew the appellant socially, a supporting reference from a  mosque  that
    the appellant attends and a small number of documents  relating  to  his
    life in the United Kingdom.  This evidence was rather lumped together by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge but with some justification  because  none
    of it actually placed  the  appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the
    material time.  It all referred to  knowing  the  appellant  at  a  time
    which, even if the claim was accepted, did not establish fourteen years'
    residence.  Mr Dhanji says that  some  of  these  letters  or  documents
    additionally made favourable comments about  the  appellant's  integrity
    and good faith which ought to have been considered expressly.

 5. A real difficulty I have in the determination  is  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge does not at any point say in terms  that  he  disbelieved
    the appellant or disbelieved Mr  Khan.  Neither  does  it  give  express
    reasons  for  rejecting  their  evidence.   This  gave  Mr  Dhanji   the
    opportunity, which he took properly, of saying  that  the  determination
    was entirely unsatisfactory and the case had to be re-decided.

 6. I anticipated this line of argument when I read the case and  I  thought
    about more when the case  was  argued.  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
    argument is well-founded.  I say that because the determination  clearly
    shows that the judge considered the evidence.  Significant parts of  the
    oral evidence and cross-examination are recorded It is quite clear  that
    the evidence was in the judge's mind when he went on to say that he  was
    not satisfied that the appellant had been in the United Kingdom for  the
    time that he says.

 7. What the judge did was to balance the oral evidence that he  heard  with
    other features of the case.  He noted, for example, the almost  complete
    lack of documentary evidence.

 8. The judge made a stray remark about the appellant not having a gym  card
    and much was made of this, but I find that this is a distortion of  what
    had really happened.  At paragraph 12 of the determination the judge was
    expressly looking for something outside the  oral  evidence  that  would
    have helped the case and reminding himself, as is settled law,  that  he
    can bear in mind that certain kinds of documents could be  expected  and
    their omission can be a proper matter for comment.  He  did  not  decide
    the case because there was not a gym card. Rather he  decided  the  case
    because there was nothing,  or  almost  nothing,  from  the  appellant's
    allegedly long stay in  the  United  Kingdom  that  confirmed  the  oral
    evidence.  This was a point he was entitled to take into account and  it
    is impossible for me to say on the material before me that he gave  this
    strand of evidence disproportionate or unlawful weight.

 9. Similarly, he did look at the other documents about the appellant's stay
    in the United Kingdom and noted for example that the  supporting  letter
    from the mosque, which might be expected to be authoritative and honest,
    did not put him  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  nearly  long  enough  to
    establish the  case.   It  merely  referred,  with  possibly  deliberate
    ambiguity, to knowing the appellant for several years.  In  other  words
    the judge was clearly looking  at  the  evidence  apart  from  the  oral
    evidence to find things that would help the  appellant.  He  found  that
    there were none.

10. Ms Kiss has also made the point that  the  failure  to  comment  on  the
    approving remarks on the appellant's  character  is  not  of  any  great
    significance when it is remembered that it is a matter of record,  being
    an essential element of the  appellant's case, that he was in the United
    Kingdom without permission. Those who spoke favourably of his  character
    either thought  it  unimportant  that  he  was  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully or  were  unaware  of  his  immigration  history  and  either
    explanation would mean that their evidence about his character was of no
    great value to anyone.  Whether this was something the Tribunal actually
    considered is something we do not know, but I agree with  Ms  Kiss  that
    the omission does not have any material significance.

11. It is vexing  from  the  appellant's  point  of  view  that  no  express
    consideration at all was given to the Chicken  and  Spice  letter.   The
    letter was potentially very helpful because it purported to be from  the
    person who allegedly employed the appellant when he arrived in 1998.  It
    was  mentioned  expressly  in  the  skeleton  argument  and  so  it   is
    unfortunate that it was not considered expressly in  the  determination.
    However, the letter itself is of unimpressive quality.   It  is  not  on
    official printed notepaper.  It is computer generated and is  initialled
    rather than signed.  There is some sort of stamp on it which gives it an
    additional air of authenticity  but,  most  significantly,  it  actually
    conflicts with the appellant's own evidence. It refers to  him  being  a
    full-time worker when it was the appellant's case that he  was  a  part-
    time worker.

12. I have not been able to find any explanation in the papers why  in  this
    case that is notably lacking in documents this  one  document  allegedly
    from 2001 seems to have been preserved and kept.

13. It is regrettable that it  was  not  considered  expressly  but,  having
    looked at it with  care,  it  is  not  something  which  has  compelling
    qualities that means its admission is necessarily material.

14. I then look at the oral evidence.  It would have  been  very  much  more
    helpful if the First-tier Tribunal Judge had come out and said in  terms
    that he did not believe the evidence that he was given and gave  reasons
    for his finding.  The fact is that he did not believe it and he did give
    reasons.  He did not believe it because he dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    reasons are that the evidence comes from either the appellant who had  a
    vested interest in being untruthful, from a friend  of  the  appellant's
    who had an incentive to reorganise his memory to assist a friend, and it
    was not supported in any other way.

15. What the judge has clearly done is to have evaluated the oral  testimony
    against the other features in the case and  the  submission  which  have
    been commented upon, before reaching the conclusion  that  the  evidence
    that he heard was not persuasive.

16. There are criticism that  can  be  made  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination but I am satisfied that the determination is good  enough.
    When it is read fairly it is clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    applied his mind to the things that mattered but was unpersuaded by  the
    oral evidence heard. He reached a conclusion that was open to him on the
    material before him.  I am satisfied that the determination is sound  in
    law, and therefore I dismiss the appeal before me.







|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 3 October 2013                 |








