
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04646/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On             the              9th              September              2016
               On the 22nd September 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                                  GRACE [A]
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr S Unigwe (Counsel)
For the Secretary of State:  Ms  Fijiwala  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Higgins promulgated on the 24th February 2016,  in
      which he allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision to revoke her residence card and to refuse her  entry
      into the United Kingdom under  Regulation  19(2)  of  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

   2. Within the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Higgins,  he  found
      that the Claimant was a Nigerian national who was  born  on  the  22nd
      August 1989.  He found that the Claimant was said to have married a Mr
      [GV] in the United Kingdom on the 29th June 2010,  and  that  she  had
      been issued with a residence  card  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA
      national exercising treaty rights on the 22nd December 2010, which was
      valid until the 22nd December 2015.  Mr [V] is a German national.

   3. On the 30th January 2015, the Claimant arrived at Heathrow Airport and
      sought entry to the United  Kingdom.   It  is  said  that  immigration
      officers at the border enquired into her circumstances  and  concluded
      that her marriage to Mr [V] had been a  marriage  of  convenience  and
      therefore she was refused entry clearance under Regulation  19(2)  and
      her residence card was revoked.

   4. The Claimant had appealed against that decision to First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Higgins.  Judge Higgins found, having heard  from  the  Claimant
      and from Mr [V], for the reasons which are set out in full within  the
      judgement and are therefore not repeated in their entirety here,  that
      although he was satisfied that the Claimant had attempted initially at
      least to mislead the officer who conducted her formal interview  about
      where she was living  and  she  was  found  to  provide  contradictory
      accounts of when she had last spoken to Mr [V] at  [22]  and  although
      First-tier Tribunal Judge  Higgins  had  noted  that  on  her  initial
      landing card the Claimant had said that Mr [V] was variously Japanese,
      British, Spanish and German at [3], he went on to find  that  she  had
      been able to state Mr [V]'s name, his nationality, his date  of  birth
      and date of their marriage, his current address and  telephone  number
      at [23] and went on to say that having heard from Mr [V] he found  him
      to be a plausible witness, who had given  his  evidence  spontaneously
      and in  an  understated  fashion.   The  Judge  found  that  Mr  [V]'s
      explanation of the circumstances which led to the deterioration of his
      relationship with the Claimant he found to be  entirely  credibly  and
      not one which might readily have been fabricated at  [24].   He  found
      that the Claimant was constitutionally anxious  and  easily  unnerved,
      but found that it was plain from her formal  interview  that  she  was
      aware that her husband was German and found that he was satisfied that
      the Claimant's performance at Heathrow was probably the product of her
      unwillingness to disclose the address at which she was at  that  stage
      living and concern about the consequence of the fact that she  was  in
      the process of  divorcing  an  EEA  national  on  whom  her  right  of
      residence depended, which she delayed disclosing at [25].

   5.  The Judge went on to find to that "Having regard to the  totality  of
      the information before me, and bearing in mind the favourable  view  I
      take of Mr [V]'s evidence and the fact that the Appellant continued to
      live at [~] Road as an address for  her  correspondence  for  4  years
      after they were married, the Respondent has not satisfied me that  the
      Appellant's  marriage  was  more  likely  than  not  a   marriage   of
      convenience and I allow the appeal on the ground that the Respondent's
      decisions breached the Appellant's rights under the Community Treaties
      in respect of her residence in the UK.".

   6. The Secretary of State has now sought to appeal that decision for  the
      reasons set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  This again, is a matter
      of record, but in summary, within the Grounds of Appeal it  is  argued
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in giving substantial  weight
      at paragraph 25 of his decision to the fact that  the  Appellant  kept
      [~] Road as her correspondence address for 4 years after her  and  the
      Sponsor were married.  It  is  said  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to
      consider that the address in question was a  shared  accommodation  at
      which at least 1 other of  the  Claimant's  friends,  other  than  the
      Sponsor resided and was an address where she had stayed prior  to  the
      commencement of her alleged relationship with Mr [V] and at which  she
      could have resided purely as a paying  guest.   It  was  said  in  the
      second ground of appeal that the Judge has given inadequate weight  to
      the numerous errors and credibility issues highlighted  at  paragraphs
      7, 8, 20, 21 and 25 of the decision,  which  he  accepts  damages  the
      Claimant's credibility.  It is argued  that  the  Claimant  was  still
      maintaining the charade of blaming 2 separate immigration officers for
      fabricating evidence against her, a fact found to be without merit  by
      the Judge and that this should have been given considerable weight  in
      favour of the Secretary of State.

   7.   Within the third ground of appeal it is argued that  the  Judge  has
      given undue weight to the evidence of the Sponsor and that  the  Judge
      found at paragraph 24 that Mr [V]  had  an  incentive  to  give  false
      evidence and that therefore the Judge  approached  his  evidence  with
      caution, but the Judge went on to allow the case on the  basis  of  Mr
      [V]'s evidence along with the fact that the Claimant used [~] Road  as
      her correspondence address for 4 years, despite not  being  there  for
      the whole time.  It is  argued  that  the  Judge  had  to  assess  the
      evidence in the round and that he has failed to do  so  and  that  the
      judgement is in error.

   8. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Kelly on the 26th September 2016, when he found that:

      "Whilst not characterised as such, the matters complained  of  in  the
      grounds give rise to an argument of irrationality  in  the  Tribunal's
      findings of fact.  This includes (but is not limited to) the fact that
      the Tribunal gave weight to the Appellant's testimony in spite of  its
      earlier finding that she had  (among  other  things)  falsely  accused
      immigration officers of fabricating their records  of  interview  with
      her.  Permission to appeal is accordingly granted."

   9. In her oral submissions to me, Miss Fijiwala relied upon  the  Grounds
      of Appeal and argued that it was paragraph 16 of  the  decision  which
      was of primary concern to the Secretary of State  in  that  there  the
      Judge had found that if the couple had lived  together  at  [~]  Road,
      shortly before the marriage on the  29th  June  2010  until  the  25th
      August 2012 when the Claimant left him, their marriage was unlikely to
      have been a marriage of convenience.  She argued that  the  Judge  had
      concentrated on this fact and not looked at the evidence in the round.



  10. In his oral submissions on behalf of the Claimant,  Mr  Unigwe  argued
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not simply  have  the  evidence
      regarding the address at [~] Road, but had the entire evidence of  the
      Claimant and Sponsor before him before reaching  his  conclusion.   He
      argued that the couple had got  married  in  2010  and  there  was  no
      dispute about that and that she had been granted a  residence  permit.
      He argued that although there was a dispute as to the period  of  time
      during which the Sponsor and the Claimant lived  together,  the  Judge
      had the evidence that the Claimant had lived at [~] Road from  between
      2010 and 2012 and that thereafter the Claimant had used  that  address
      as a correspondence address until her divorce in 2015.

  11. In respect of ground 1 of the Grounds of Appeal  he  argued  that  the
      couple had occupied 1 room at the premises, and the fact that  it  was
      therefore shared accommodation was irrelevant.   He  argued  that  the
      Judge's reasoning was well reasoned and that the Judge had found  that
      the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  established  on  the  balance  of
      probability that it was a marriage of convenience and  the  Judge  had
      looked at the demeanour of the witnesses and found the Sponsor to be a
      credible witness.  In respect of the second ground of appeal he argued
      that the Judge had properly considered the evidence and  assessed  the
      areas in which he did not find the Claimant to be  credible,  but  had
      found the Sponsor to be credible  and  had  decided  accordingly.   He
      further argued that in respect of  the  third  ground  of  appeal  the
      weight to be attached to the evidence of the Sponsor was a matter  for
      the Judge and did not disclose an error of law.

  12. In her submissions in reply, Miss Fijiwala argued that the  Judge  was
      not clear in his findings regarding Mr [V] given that he had said that
      Mr [V] had an incentive to give false evidence.  She argued  that  the
      findings at paragraph 25 of the decision were contradictory.

  13. I formally reserved my decision on error of law and materiality.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  14. Although Miss Fijiwala argued that paragraph 16 of  the  judgement  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins was of concern, the  Judge  at  that
      paragraph stated that:

      "16.  If as the Appellant and Mr [V] claim is  the  case,  they  lived
      together at [~] Road from shortly before their marriage on  29th  June
      2010 until 25th August 2012 when  she  left  him,  their  marriage  is
      unlikely to have been a marriage of convenience".

  15. I do not accept that the Judge erred in considering the question as to
      whether or not the couple had genuinely lived at [~] Road,  which  was
      said to have been the matrimonial home.   Further,  in  my  judgement,
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins could not be said to have  erred  in
      finding that if  the  couple  had  genuinely  lived  together  at  the
      property for over 2 years, their marriage was unlikely to have been  a
      marriage of convenience.  That was a consideration which I  found  was
      perfectly open to the Judge in this case.

  16. Further, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Higgins  had  clearly  noted  the
      discrepant  evidence  given  by  the  Claimant  on  her  landing  card
      regarding the nationality of Mr [V] as to  whether  he  was  Japanese,
      British, Spanish or  German,  and  the  Judge  went  on  to  carefully
      consider between paragraphs 19 and 21 of  his  decision,  the  serious
      allegations  that  had  been  made  by  the  Claimant  regarding   her
      accusations that 2 border officers had  fabricated  their  records  of
      conversations with her.  As the Judge stated he had  also  given  very
      careful consideration to the contents of the notes of  the  record  on
      the reverse of the landing card and the record of her formal interview
      and  found  that  the  lack  of  coherence  and   completeness   which
      characterised the answers the Claimant recorded as having provided  at
      Heathrow, which she found was strikingly  similar  to  the  manner  in
      which she answered questions put to her at the appeal hearing.

  17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that he could see  no  reason  why
      border officers with whom the Claimant  dealt  might  have  chosen  to
      knowingly mis-record what was said to them and he found  that  he  was
      satisfied that the records of information she provided  were  made  in
      good faith and that he could rely upon them at [21]  and  went  on  to
      find specifically that the Claimant had attempted, initially at least,
      to mislead the officer who conducted her formal interview about  where
      she was living and she provided contradictory accounts of when she had
      last spoken to Mr [V] at [22].

  18. However, the Judge I find was  entitled  then  to  conclude  that  the
      Claimant had  thereafter  been  able  to  state  her  husband's  name,
      nationality, date of birth and date of marriage, his  current  address
      and phone number.  Further, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  the
      benefit of hearing oral evidence from the live witnesses, and although
      clearly he was unimpressed by  the  evidence  given  by  the  Claimant
      herself, it is clear  from  the  Judge's  findings  at  [24]  that  he
      accepted the evidence given by Mr [V], having  heard  from  him.   The
      Judge at [24] took note that Mr [V] would have  had  an  incentive  to
      give false evidence in support of the Claimant's appeal to avoid being
      accused of having fabricated the marriage and stated specifically that
      he had approached his evidence with caution, yet the Judge  found  him
      nevertheless to be a plausible witness and found that he had given his
      evidence spontaneously in an understated fashion.

  19.  The Judge went on to explain that the explanation provided as to  the
      circumstances which led to the deterioration of the relationship  with
      the Claimant was found to be entirely credible and not one which might
      readily have been fabricated.  It is clearly a matter for  the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge to assess the quality of the evidence given by the
      witnesses, and in my judgement,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
      correct in noting that Mr [V] may well have had a  reason  for  giving
      false evidence and that he had approached his evidence  with  caution,
      but then quite properly went on to give reasons as to why he found him
      to be a credible witness regarding the relationship and the  breakdown
      of the relationship.

  20.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on at [25] to give clear, adequate
      and satisfactory reasons as to the  evidence  given  by  the  Claimant
      herself and found that she was  constitutionally  anxious  and  easily
      unnerved and that her performance at Heathrow was probably the product
      of her unwillingness to disclose the address at which she was at  that
      stage living and concerned about the consequences of the fact that she
      was in the process of divorcing the EEA national upon whom  her  right
      of residence depended.  This I find, was a finding that  was  open  to
      the Judge upon the evidence before him.  Further, I find that  it  was
      open to the Judge on the evidence to find that  the  Claimant  had  in
      fact continued to use [~] Road as an address for correspondence for  4
      years after they were married, up until the date of their divorce.

  21. In respect of the allegation  that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  giving
      substantial weight at paragraph 25 of the decision  to  the  fact  the
      Claimant kept [~] Road as a correspondence address for 4  years  after
      she and the Sponsor were married, and that he  had  appeared  to  have
      allowed the case predominantly on  this  matter,  but  had  failed  to
      consider the fact the address in question was a  shared  accommodation
      at which at least 1  other of the Claimant's friends resided and was a
      property where she  had  stayed  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the
      relationship with Mr [V], was a property where she could have  resided
      herself purely as a paying guest, I find that this  ground  of  appeal
      has no merit.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled to
      consider whether or not the Claimant had lived at [~]  Road  with  the
      Sponsor as the matrimonial  home  up  until  the  breakdown  of  their
      relationship in 2012, and he  properly  considered  the  documentation
      provided by the Claimant at [18] in that regard.  It was also open  to
      him having heard from the Sponsor whose evidence he  accepted  and  in
      respect of whom he gave adequate and sufficient  reasons  for  finding
      him credible at [24], to find that the account that the  Sponsor  gave
      of having continued to  use  [~]  Road  as  a  correspondence  address
      despite having moved  out  was  credible.   He  has  given  clear  and
      adequate reasons as to why he accepted that  the  Claimant  had  lived
      there with Mr [V] during the period of  their  relationship  up  until
      2012, and  thereafter  used  it  as  a  correspondence  address.   The
      assertion by the Secretary of State that the reasons of the judge  are
      contradictory, is simply not made out, when one reads the paragraph in
      its entirety.

  22. Further, in respect of the second ground of appeal, which alleges that
      the Judge has given  inadequate  weight  to  the  numerous  errors  in
      credibility as highlighted within the determination at  paragraphs  7,
      8, 20, 21 and 25, and the fact that the Claimant was still maintaining
      her charade that 2 separate immigration officers  had  fabricated  the
      evidence against her, it is clear that the Judge did take  account  of
      the discrepancies in the evidence, as his  fully  recorded  the  same.
      Further, he noted specifically the inconsistencies on the lantern card
      and in her formal interview,  and  found  specifically  that  she  had
      initially at least attempted to mislead  officers  who  conducted  the
      formal interview.  However, the Judge went on at  [25]  to  find  that
      there were reasons why the Claimant had attempted to mislead  officers
      at Heathrow, in terms of her being in the process of divorcing an  EEA
      national and not wishing to disclose the address at that  stage  where
      she was living.  This again was a finding open to the Judge,  and  the
      weight to be attached to these discrepancies and inconsistences, again
      was a matter for the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  His reasoning in that
      regard was clear and adequate. It cannot  be  said  that  the  Judge's
      findings in  that  regard  were  perverse,  or  irrational,  and  such
      findings were open to him on the evidence.

  23. Further, in respect of the third ground of appeal that the  Judge  has
      given undue weight to the evidence of the Sponsor, the  Judge  clearly
      noted that the Sponsor had an incentive to give  false  evidence,  but
      the weight to be attached to the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor  and  his
      finding that the Sponsor was credible, was  clearly  sufficiently  and
      adequately explained, and his findings in that regard having  assessed
      the evidence of the Sponsor were open to him.  It was clearly a matter
      for the Judge to assess the credibility of the witnesses, which he has
      properly, sufficiently and adequately done.  The amount of weight that
      should be attached to that evidence is a matter for the Judge  in  the
      absence of an irrationality or perversity, and there  is  no  evidence
      that the Judge's findings in that regard  were  either  irrational  or
      perverse.  In my judgement the Grounds of Appeal simply  amount  to  a
      disagreement with the Judge's findings, and do not reveal any material
      error of law.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Higgins  not
      disclosing any omission or error of law, the decision is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Higgins  does  not  disclose  any
material error of law and is maintained.  The Secretary  of  State's  appeal
is dismissed;

I make no order in respect of anonymity, no such order  having  been  sought
before me.

Signed

RF McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 17th September 2016
