
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04133/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 August 2013                              |On 20 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

                         nikunj ashokbhai rupareliya

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ali of Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on 13 April 1990 and is a national of India.

2.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 24 January 2011 as  a  Tier
    4 (General) Student. He had leave until 13 May 2012.  He studied at the
    London School of Finance for an MBA.  His course started on  6  January
    2011 and was completed on  13  January  2012.   He  did  not,  however,
    receive his award of the MBA until 14 November 2012.

4.   On 4 April 2012 he applied for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant.   On  22  January  2013  that
    application was refused.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Boyd  on  18  April  2013.   The
    appellant had been refused leave because he had not complied  with  all
    the requirements as set out under paragraph 245FD.  It is a requirement
    under that paragraph  that  the  appellant  was  awarded  his  eligible
    qualification no more  than  twelve  months  before  the  date  of  the
    application. At the time of  the  application  the  appellant  had  not
    received his award of the MBA  from  Wales  but  at  the  date  of  the
    decision on 22 January 2012 he had.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  considered  and  applied  the  case  of
    Khatel and Others (S.85A: effective continuing application) [2013] UKUT
    00044 (IAC).

7.   In essence that case held that the  application  was  continuing  until
    the date of decision.  Therefore as the award had been  made  prior  to
    the decision it was sufficient  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  Thus it was that it was deemed by the judge that the  appellant
    had the requisite points and thus the appeal was allowed.

8.   The respondent sought to appeal against that  decision  essentially  on
    the basis that Khatel was wrongly decided.  It was  contended  that  if
    Khatel  had  been   wrongly  decided  then  Section  85A(4A)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  precluded  the  Tribunal
    from taking into account  material  that  was  not  submitted  both  in
    support of and at the time of making the application to the SSHD.

9.   Leave to appeal was  refused  on  the  basis  that  Khatel  and  Others
    reflected the law on the  matter  and  that  the  judge  had  therefore
    applied the law correctly.

10.  Subsequently however the case of Khatel was considered by the Court  of
    Appeal in Raju and Others [2013] EWCA Civ 754.   The  Court  of  Appeal
    considered that Khatel  had  been  wrongly  decided  on  the  point  in
    question and that in relation to the Immigration Rules and the award of
    points, the date of the application was the  operative  date  and  that
    there was no concept continuing application.  In other words Khatel was
    overturned.

11.  Arising therefore from that decision permission to appeal  was  granted
    on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal,  although  acting  entirely
    properly in applying Khatel, had  in  fact  erred  in  law  given   the
    statement as to the law by the Court of Appeal in Raju.

12.  Thus the matter comes before me in pursuance of that leave.

13.  Both parties, namely Mr Ali who represents the appellant and  Mr  Smart
    who represents the respondent, were in agreement that the  decision  in
    Raju had established that the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    were to be considered at the time of application and not at decision.

14.  Mr Ali, however, invited me to uphold the decision  of  Judge  Boyd  on
    the basis that it was good law at the time  that  he  had  applied  it.
    Unfortunately it is to ignore the general jurisprudence as to error  of
    law.

15.  In those circumstances it is inevitable  that  the  decision  of  Judge
    Boyd should be set aside and remade in the light of  the  statement  of
    the law that now applies..

16.  Mr Ali submits that the  appellant  was  placed  in  a  very  difficult
    situation in regards to the  timing  of  his  application.   The  Rules
    relating Post-Study Work (Migrant) were to be changed  within  a  short
    period of time. Therefore it was necessary for the  appellant  to  make
    the application.

17.  Mr Ali submits that the application was not dealt with  fairly,  having
    regard to the decision of Rodriguez (Flexibility  policy)  [2013]  UKUT
    00041 (IAC).  Further what had not been considered, either in Khatel or
    in Raju ,was the operation of the policy which was the  subject  matter
    of the decision.  Given that the award was made before the decision, he
    submits that it was altogether unreasonable for the respondent to  have
    acted as she did.  Indeed he points to two important documents  in  the
    respondent's bundle, the  first  document  at  D2  was  an  information
    request from  Rob  Gregory,  the  caseworker  dated  24  December  2012
    relating to the question as to whether or not the award had  been  made
    and a reply from the college of 4 January 2013 to be found at Annex  D1
    confirming that the course had been  completed.  He  submits  therefore
    that it was fundamentally unfair of the respondent to have acted in the
    way that has been described having found out prior to the decision that
    the appellant had the award.

18.  Mr Smart, on behalf of the respondent, invites  me  to  find  that  the
    Immigration Rule means what it says.  Whether it is  unfortunate  in  a
    particular case is to some extent irrelevant.  The requirements are set
    out in that  Rule.  The  points-based  system  was  designed  to  avoid
    discretion and arguments but to give certainty as to  the  position  of
    individuals.  He invites me to find that the decision of Rodriguez does
    not apply in the circumstances of this case but is concerned more  with
    correcting errors of documentation rather than providing a  flexibility
    as to the interpretation of the Rules.

19.  It is to be noted that the flexibility policy  which  was  the  subject
    matter of Rodriguez arose  in  the  aftermath  of  the  application  of
    Section 85A(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It
    was designed to mitigate  the  otherwise  unfortunate  consequences  of
    persons having the correct documentation but not submitting it  at  the
    time of the application and thereby being prohibited from  adducing  it
    at a later stage by the Regulations.   It  was  a  policy  designed  to
    ensure that proper documentation had been provided and  that  originals
    rather than copies were to hand or that a  missing  document  could  be
    retrieved or that an incorrect document  could  be  substituted  for  a
    correct one prior to decision being made.

20.  The purpose of the policy was not to challenge the application  of  the
    Immigration Rules but rather to make sure that all those who sought  to
    comply with those Rules had been  given every  opportunity  to  present
    the proper documentation as required under those Rules.

21.  As the Court of Appeal said  in  paragraph  12  of  that  decision  the
    policy

         "heralded unequivocally the introduction of a  new  policy  whereby
         all appellants would  be  notified  of  the  absence  of  mandatory
         evidence from their application and will be given  the  opportunity
         to rectify the relevant shortcomings prior to rejection."

22.  In one sense the argument as to whether or  not  Rodriguez  applied  to
    the  facts and circumstances for this case is largely academic  because
    it is entirely clear, as I so find that the  caseworker,  Rob  Gregory,
    applied for himself that policy.  What was  clearly  missing  from  the
    application was the award.  If the appellant had that award at the time
    of the application he would have succeeded under the Immigration  Rules
    and if he did not he would not.  Thus it is understandable that  at  D2
    the caseworker on 24 December 2012 prior to making any decision  writes
    to the college to confirm that the appellant had been awarded a  degree
    from the University of Wales and the date of that award.  He received a
    reply to his query as set out in D1 and at 4 January 2013.  It gave the
    information that the award was made and that it was made on 14 November
    2012.  Thus it is clear that  the  caseworker  has  made  the  relevant
    inquiries as to the missing information.

23.  What is done with that information is clearly set out in  the  decision
    itself.  It reads as follows:

         "You made your application under Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  on  4
         April 2012.  I have contacted the University of Wales and they have
         confirmed  your  date  of  award  as  14  November  2012.   As  the
         Immigration Rules state that the date of award must be  within  the
         twelve months directly prior to the date of  application  and  your
         date of award is after this date, in line with Appendix  A  of  the
         Immigration Rules, we have been unable to award points."

24.  Thus it  seems  to  me  that  the  caseworker  has  done  all  that  is
    reasonably required of him to do, namely to clarify  the  date  of  the
    award and having  clarified  it  as  having  been  after  the  date  of
    application it falls to be refused.

25.  I can detect no unfairness or impropriety in that procedure.

26.  Mr Ali contends that there have been  similar situations in  which  the
    respondent has granted the leave.  He contends  that  inconsistency  in
    decision making is unfair and unreasonable. Mr Smart submits that there
    is  no  evidence  provided  in  concrete  form  that  that   particular
    contention is substantiated in fact.  He repeats that the whole  policy
    of points is to ensure consistency of decision  making  and  to  remove
    individual discretion from the equation.

27.  It seems to be quite  clear  from  the  Immigration  Rule  itself  that
    having the award  prior  to  making  the  application  is  a  mandatory
    requirement.  The appellant was unable to satisfy that requirement  and
    the late production of the award did not in  any  sense  undermine  the
    requirement that had been made. It is therefore understandable  why  it
    was that the Immigration Rule did not apply to the appellant.

28.  Mr Ali also seeks to raise the issue of Article 8  contending  that  it
    was inadequately dealt with by the judge.  In that  connection  I  note
    that that specific challenge is not made  in  the  written  grounds  of
    appeal.

29.  The appellant came to the United Kingdom in January 2011 to  study  for
    his MBA.  He gave some evidence about his situation  and  circumstances
    to me at the hearing.  He said he wanted to use  his  qualification  in
    business in India.  His family were very much involved in the  business
    enterprise in India.  He wanted to stay on after he passed his  MBA  in
    order to obtain better exposure to the market place.  In the year  that
    has elapsed from his application he has been working in a warehouse  as
    an operator.  It would be his hope,  however, were he to succeed in his
    appeal to join a multi-national company.

30.  He said that all his family in India were involved in business.  As  to
    his private life, he rents accommodation.  He has a girlfriend whom  he
    met some four years ago.  She  works  in  Leicester  and  he  sees  her
    weekly.  She too is on a post-study visa which expires in nine  months'
    time.  she is also from India.  In addition to that relationship he has
    friends in the United Kingdom and attends parties and social functions.



31.  Although Mr Ali initially made is submissions to us on the  basis  that
    the appellant had a legitimate expectation of remaining in  the  United
    Kingdom it is clear that certainly, when he embarked upon  his  studies
    he was intending to return to his family.  It is clear that most of his
    roots are in India and I  have  little  detail  about  the  nature  and
    seriousness of the relationship that he has with his  girlfriend.   She
    herself has limited leave to remain and no reason has been advanced  as
    to why it would not be appropriate for her to return  to  India  to  be
    with him in the future.

32.  I do not find that simply by being granted leave to study such  creates
    a legitimate expectation to be able to remain.  Were he  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom depends clearly upon his satisfying the requirements
    to do so and in this case the appellant did not meet  the  requirements
    at the time of his application.

33.  I direct myself of course to the structured  approach  as  set  out  in
    Razgar but do not find that the circumstances of the appellant are such
    as to entitle a decision that he should remain under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.  I note that the Section 47 decision  has  been  set  aside.   In
    those circumstances there remains a right of the appellant to challenge
    any removal decisions which may be made  against  him  and  he  can  of
    course at that stage raise matters in respect of Article  8  should  he
    choose to do so.

34.  Although it would seem therefore that the appellant cannot  succeed  in
    his appeal in relation to the Immigration Rules or in relation to human
    rights it is to be  noted that the appellant was  to  all  intents  and
    purposes a bona fide student who obtained his qualification  and  seeks
    to further his experience in business before returning to India  to  be
    with his family firm.  It is clear  that  he  has  the  award  that  is
    required albeit not in time to satisfy the  Rules.   I  hope  that  the
    Secretary of State might favourably consider any further application by
    the appellant which may be made.

Decision

36.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd shall be set aside.  The
    appeal in respect of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  dismissed.  That  in
    respect of Article 8 of the ECHR is dismissed.












Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

