

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04761/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|3 July 2014                                   |On 8th July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mrs T. Nefjodova
                                                                  Respondent


 Notice of intention to determine the appeal without a hearing and proposed
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. As this is not a s.82 appeal but an  appeal  under  the  Immigration
       (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (2006  No  1003),  the
       abandonment provisions in s.104 of the 2002 Act are not available.


    2. I propose to determine the appeal without a  hearing  in  accordance
       with Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


    3. Mrs Nefjodova (whom I shall refer to as 'the appellant') was refused
       a  permanent  residence  card  evidencing  her  right  of  permanent
       residence under the 2006 Regulations.  She appealed.  Her appeal was
       successful.  The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal
       to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  thereby   challenging   the   appellant's
       entitlement to a permanent residence card.


    4. The Secretary of State has now granted  the  appellant  a  permanent
       residence card which, by implication, evidences that the  respondent
       is no longer maintaining her challenge to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge's determination.


    5. I therefore propose to dismiss the respondent's appeal  against  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge with the effect  that  the
       determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


    6. The respondent is to notify the Tribunal within 14 days of today  if
       she seeks to challenge the Upper Tribunal's disposal of  the  appeal
       as set out above.


    7. Absent such notification, the respondent's and the decision will  be
       in the following terms:


"For the reasons, given in the notification of 3 July 2014:

DECISION

 1. The Secretary of State's appeal against the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal is dismissed.
 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error on a point of law  and  the
    original determination of the appeal shall stand."






                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL






