
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04061/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 5th January 2015                          |On 22nd January 2015           |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES


                                   Between

                       MRS AICHA DIALLO EPOUSE WATERS
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Stephen Vokes, instructed by Chattertons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  the  Ivory  Coast  who  applied  for  a
    derivative residence card under the EEA Regulations as confirmation  of
    the right of residence as the primary carer of  two  British  children.
    Her application was refused by the Respondent on 31st December 2013 and
    the Appellant has exercised her right  of  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State has been granted permission to  appeal  and  therefore,  strictly
    speaking, the Secretary of State is the Appellant and Mrs Aicha  Waters
    is the Respondent.  However, in order to avoid confusion I  propose  to
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  i.e.
    Mrs Waters  is  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Respondent.

 2. The appeal was dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal by First-tier Judge
    Gurung-Thapa on 2nd September 2014.  On that occasion the Appellant was
    represented by Mr Vokes and the Respondent was represented  by  a  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Aigbokie.  The appeal was allowed by  the
    First-tier Judge under the 2006 Regulations and on human rights grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).

 3. The Respondent's representative applied for permission  to  appeal  and
    permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 9th October  2014.
    The judge who granted permission  considered  that,  in  the  light  of
    Damion Harrison  (Jamaica)  and  SSHD,  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    reflected a situation of choice rather  than  necessity.   Furthermore,
    the judge considered it arguable that the First-tier  Judge  overlooked
    the fact that the Appellant's husband had  his  office  in  the  Canary
    Islands.  The judge did not  appear  to  have  considered  whether  the
    family could relocate there in which case the  children  would  not  be
    forced to leave the EU.  On that basis it was directed that all grounds
    could be argued.

 4. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper  Tribunal  on  5th  January
    2015 for an error of law  hearing.   Representation  was  as  mentioned
    above.

 5. The Appellant's representatives served a Rule 24 response,  drafted  by
    Mr Vokes, and upon which he relied in submissions.

 6. The background to the appeal  is  that  the  Appellant  applied  for  a
    derivative right of residence under the 2006 Regulations as a result of
    unexpectedly giving birth to two UK  citizen  children,  Kimberley  and
    Andrew, who were born on 24th October 2012 while she and  her  partner,
    Mr Harry Waters, a UK citizen were visiting relatives in the  UK.   The
    Appellant had visited the UK on many previous occasions and had a  five
    year multi-visit visa valid until 31st July 2016.

 7. In submissions, Miss Johnstone relied upon  the  grounds  submitted  in
    support of the application for permission to appeal.  She  referred  in
    particular to paragraph 3 of Ground 1 which submit that the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in finding that the decision was disproportionate as the
    Appellant had leave until 2016 and  was  not  currently  subject  to  a
    removal decision.  Miss Johnstone repeated that the Appellant had leave
    until 2016 which had not been revoked.  As at the date of  the  hearing
    she still had leave and was not required to leave the  United  Kingdom.
    Therefore she would not be separated from her children.  Miss Johnstone
    submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge's  determination  contained   a
    material error of law and should be set aside.  She  asked  for  a  re-
    hearing.

 8. For the Appellant, Mr Vokes began his submission by pointing  out  that
    the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal make no reference to Section  19  of
    the Immigration Act 2014 which came into force on 28th July 2014.  This
    is referred  to  by  the  First-tier  Judge  at  paragraph  34  of  her
    determination.  Section 19  amends  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 by introducing a new Part 5A  which  contains  Sections
    117A, 117B, 117C and 117D.  Part 5A does not apply to EEA appeals  i.e.
    appeals brought under Regulation 26 of the 2006 Regulations.   Schedule
    1 to the 2006 Regulations had not been amended and makes  no  reference
    to the provisions of Part 5A.  Mr Vokes pointed out that there  was  no
    challenge to this part of the determination.

 9.  Mr  Vokes  further  submitted  that  the  Respondent's  grounds   were
    fundamentally flawed.  Contrary to the assertion made by the Presenting
    Officer, he submitted that the Appellant has no right to  remain  until
    2016 as the holder of a multi-visit visa.  Such a visa only permits the
    holder to remain in the United Kingdom for a fixed number of days after
    which he or she has to leave.  It does not allow the holder  to  remain
    continuously in the United Kingdom for the full term of the visa.

10. Mr Vokes reminded me that the Appellant's premature twins were under  2
    years of age.  He submitted that the Sponsor could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to look after such young babies with their  special  needs  on
    his own.

11. He further pointed out that the Appellant is not an  EEA  national  and
    argued that the Respondent had put forward no evidence  to  demonstrate
    how the Appellant would be able to gain access to Spain.  He said  that
    it was mere speculation on the part of the Respondent to  say  that  it
    was open to her to go to Las Palmas with her EU Sponsor.

12. Mr Vokes referred to paragraph 41 of the determination  which  confirms
    that the children are British citizens  and  therefore  European  Union
    citizens and, in the opinion of the  First-tier  Judge,  could  not  be
    expected to relocate to the Ivory Coast with the Appellant.   Mr  Vokes
    pointed out that there was no challenge by the Respondent to the First-
    tier Judge's reasons as to proportionality.

13. I accept Mr Vokes' argument concerning the  requirements  of  a  multi-
    visit visa.  I do not accept that this conferred  leave  to  remain  as
    contended on behalf  of  the  Respondent.   The  First-tier  Judge  has
    rightly taken into account of the best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    children as a primary consideration.   Exceptional  circumstances  have
    been identified at paragraphs 41 and  42  of  the  determination.   The
    First-tier Judge has given proper reasons in support of her  conclusion
    that there were compelling circumstances involving  UK  children  which
    meant that the Appellant should not be expected to leave the UK.

NOTICE OF DECISION

I am not persuaded that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  involved  the
making of a material error on a point of law.  I  uphold  the  decision  and
dismiss the Respondent's appeal.

I make no order for anonymity.



Signed        Date 19th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates

