
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04993/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 August 2013                              |On 24 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 FUNGJUAN YU
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Katani, Katani & Co Solicitors, Glasgow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience we shall refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  China  born  on  6  January  1990.   She
    appealed against the Secretary of State's  decision  dated  25  January
    2013 refusing her leave to remain in the United Kingdom under the  1951
    Convention relating to the  status  of  refugees  and  on  humanitarian
    protection and human rights issues.  The appeal was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mozolowski and in  a  determination  promulgated  on  19
    April 2013 she dismissed the appeal.  An application for permission  to
    appeal was made and permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J M Lewis on 8 May 2013.  The  grounds  argue  that  the
    judge did not take into account a report of the Immigration  &  Refugee
    Board of Canada dated 1 October 2012, although the judge  did  consider
    the background evidence in the COI Report and the Country Guidance case
    of AX China [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC).  The grounds also argue  that  the
    judge did not take into account the best interests of  the  appellant's
    child under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009.  The child was 7 months old at the date  of  the  decision.   The
    grounds state that,  given  that  the  Canadian  report  indicated  the
    possibility of detriment to the child upon return to China, the judge's
    apparent omission to consider it may have compromised consideration  of
    the child's best interests.

 3.  There  is  a  Rule  24  response  from  the  respondent  opposing  the
    appellant's appeal.  This asserts that the judge  was  not  obliged  to
    note and refer to every  piece  of  evidence  submitted  and  there  is
    nothing to indicate that the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the
    Canadian report.  The judge was bound to follow  the  Country  Guidance
    and  could  only  depart  from  its  guidelines  if  there  was  strong
    alternative evidence.  There is nothing in the grounds  that  indicates
    that the Canadian report should or  could  have  led  the  Tribunal  to
    refrain from following the country guidance.  The response states that,
    in any event, the Canadian report appears to  refer  to  couples  whose
    children are born in China not children born outside China and further,
    the evidence of some areas denying Hukou to some parents was  anecdotal
    and speculative at best.   The  respondent  considered  that  there  is
    nothing to indicate that  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the child was flawed to any material degree.

The Hearing

 4. Mr Katani for the appellant submitted that the issue of outright denial
    of a Hukou has not been looked at  and  that  what  the  panel  has  to
    consider is whether there is a real risk of a Hukou not  being  granted
    to the appellant's child, as if this happens the child  may  be  denied
    access to education, health care and other services.

 5. We asked Mr Katani to consider paragraph 63 of the determination  which
    refers particularly to the Canadian report. Mr  Katani  submitted  that
    the grounds focus upon an outright denial of a  Hukou  outside  Chinese
    law and, although the background evidence refers to social  maintenance
    fees which can be paid by instalments, this may not be what happens  in
    practice. If the child has no legal identity and is not  considered  to
    be a Chinese citizen he may be deprived of the rights accorded to other
    Chinese citizens.  The Canadian report suggests that  this  is  a  real
    risk and this may be being widely applied. Chinese officials are  known
    for ignoring the law, so the risk is real.

 6. The appellant had the child out of  wedlock  and  the  Canadian  report
    refers to a Beijing lawyer, who specialises in household  registration,
    stating that the practice of denying Hukou to unauthorised children  is
    not legal but is widely applied at local levels and the  risk  to  this
    child lies in the outright denial of a Hukou.

 7. Mr Katani submitted that the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada is
    a reliable source and the report post-dates  the  promulgation  of  AX,
    which, in any case, only focuses on law rather than practice.

 8. The Presenting Officer referred us to R [2012]  EWHC  56  (Admin).   At
    paragraph 57, the court observed  that,  "whilst  not  diminishing  the
    broad nature of the enquiry, of  central  and  critical  importance  in
    assessing the reasonableness of this are likely to be two things -  the
    interest of a child in  remaining  within  the  family  unit;  and  the
    soundness of the environment within which the child will be brought up.
     The cases and the Guidance lay heavier emphasis on ensuring that basic
    rights and freedoms from risk are guaranteed, and that there is freedom
    to enjoy and develop a full family life, than they do upon  comparative
    standards of economic, educational and social provision in one state as
    opposed to another."  A  child  has  to  be  protected  from  harm  and
    economic, social and educational rights play a very minor  part.   This
    is the framework that has to be considered.

 9. The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  only  one  lawyer  had  been
    interviewed in connection with the Canadian report and that had been in
    2010.  Although the lawyer interviewed stated that outright denial of a
    Hukou is widespread, too much weight cannot be put on this one  source.
    The geographical context of the article had to be considered and it  is
    not known whether the practice was  widespead  throughout  China.   The
    Tribunal in AX clearly found that denial of a Hukou is not a real risk.
      The  Presenting  Officer  referred  us  to  paragraph  63  of   Judge
    Mozolowski's determination, where the Canadian report  is  referred  to
    specifically. The judge found that denial of a Hukou  would  not  be  a
    real risk to the child if he returns to China with  his  parents.   She
    properly finds that, on payment of a social  upbringing  charge,  which
    the judge found that the appellant will be able to pay, the child  will
    be registered. The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  there  is  no
    reliable evidence which indicates that children are denied Hukous  even
    without the payment of a social upbringing charge and there is  nothing
    in the objective evidence to show that a  child  who  is  automatically
    denied a Hukou will be unable to access education and health care.  The
    background evidence refers to teenagers coming forward for registration
    in 2010. In any case, the Canadian report refers to  children  born  in
    China; the appellant's child has been born outside China. On return the
    child cannot be concealed from the Chinese  authorities  and  when  the
    background evidence is considered in the round, outright  denial  of  a
    Hukou is unlikely to happen as a consequence of the appellant  and  her
    husband and child being removed to China


Determination

10. Judge Mozolowski has referred specifically in her determination to  the
    relevant parts of the COI Report and the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
    said case of AX.  The report by the Canadian Board of Canada points  in
    a different direction to the rest  of  the  objective  evidence.  Judge
    Mozolowski has noted this and has specifically referred to  the  report
    at paragraph 63 of her determination.  She compared the report  to  the
    part of the COI Report  on  unauthorised  children  which  states  that
    unregistered children can apply for household registration  and  get  a
    Hukou  upon  payment  of  a  reduced  fine,  in  order   to   encourage
    participation in the census.  The judge found that any difficulty which
    the appellant might encounter with registration could be resolved.

11. Mr Katani's argument is that the child is  at  real  risk  of  outright
    denial of a Hukou.  The Canadian report states that  this  can  happen,
    although it is not in accordance with the law  which  states  that  all
    children in China have to be protected.  We have not been supplied with
    clear evidence of the outright denial of  a  Hukou  to  a  child.   The
    Canadian report is based on an interview with a single lawyer.  We  are
    satisfied that Judge Mozolowski anxiously considered this report  along
    with the rest of the background evidence. It was open to  her  to  find
    that the Canadian report did not require her to depart from the country
    guidance of AX. Based on the evidence before the judge she was entitled
    to come to the decision that she did.  She has properly  explained  her
    decision and has referred to the relevant sources.

12. The child will be returning to China with both of her parents. It is in
    his interests to be with both his parents. The environment in China  in
    which he will be brought up would appear to be satisfactory. It is  not
    arguable, in our view, that  any  application  of  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in  this  instance  would
    alter the outcome of the appeal reached by the First-tier Tribunal.


                                  DECISION

13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make a  error  of  law  such  that  its
    determination falls to be set aside.  This appeal is dismissed.

14. No anonymity direction has been made.




Signed                                  Date


Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



