
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04692/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                              |On 6 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            ANDREW MUGERWA MUKASA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Mallick, Counsel, instructed by Rose Samuel
Odele &       Partners


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department who sought and was granted permission to  appeal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rowlands who in a Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 25 August 2015 allowed  the  appeal  by  the
    Respondent, who I shall refer to as the Claimant.

 2. The Claimant is a citizen of Uganda born on 7 February 1979.   He  came
    to the United Kingdom on 3 May 2000 with a student visa valid  for  six
    months.  It would appear that he then overstayed until on 27 June 2014,
    when he applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  his  family  and
    private life. This was initially refused without the  right  of  appeal
    but eventually on 13 January 2015 he was provided with the right of in-
    country appeal.

 3. The basis of his application is  that  he  had  formed  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship with a British citizen who was  pregnant  with
    his child.  The judge heard evidence from the Claimant and his partner,
    Miss Smith. He accepted the credibility of their evidence and noted  at
    [14] that the Respondent had in the refusal letter  accepted  that  the
    Claimant and his partner had a genuine and subsisting  relationship and
    that the only  issue  arising  was  whether  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles which would prevent them returning together Uganda.  This  is
    an accurate reflection of the  content  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal letter.  At [17] of the refusal letter, the Secretary of  State
    cites paragraph EX1B of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
    provides

         "The applicant has a genuine and subsisting   relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen settled in the UK
         or in the UK with refugee legal humanitarian protection  and  there
         are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  with  that  partner
         continuing outside the UK."

 4. Paragraph EX2 defines  insurmountable  obstacles  as  very  significant
    difficulties which will be faced by the applicant or their  partner  in
    continuing their family life together outside the UK  and  which  could
    not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
    or their partner.

 5. The Secretary of  State's  position  at  [18]  of  the  refusal  letter
    provides:

         "It is considered that your client does not meet  the  requirements
         above because it is not  accepted  that  there  are  insurmountable
         obstacles that would prevent your client returning to  Uganda  with
         his partner. It is accepted that the change in  culture  may  be  a
         factor in your client's partner integrating into society in Uganda.
         However a significant degree of hardship  does  not  amount  to  an
         insurmountable obstacle."

     The Judge's findings

 6. In allowing the appeal, the judge took into account at  [15]  the  fact
    that the Claimant's partner had  suffered  problems  in  childhood,  in
    particular, she had been the victim of abuse over a long period of time
    and was still helped to a great extent by her sister  and  her  mother.
    Moving to Uganda would inevitably mean the loss of  day-to-day  contact
    with them which the judge accepted would have a significant  affect  on
    her mental state.

 7. He also noted at [16] that the Claimant's partner was in employment  in
    the UK, is unlikely to get work of any kind in Uganda and  he  accepted
    her concerns as to the heath of her unborn child by  giving  birth  and
    living in Uganda, and the difficulties they may have in having a second
    child given the problems in conceiving the  child  with  whom  she  was
    currently pregnant. He  was  satisfied  that  this  constituted,  on  a
    cumulative basis, insurmountable obstacles.

 8. The judge at [17] went on  to  allow  the  appeal  in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules and then stated: "I must also  reach  the  conclusion
    that it would be an unlawful interference with his  family  life  under
    Article 8, as it is not in accordance with the law".

     Grounds of appeal

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on 4 September  2015
    on three grounds. Firstly, that  the  judge  had  given  weight  to  an
    immaterial matter i.e. the pregnancy of the Claimant's  partner.   Part
    of that ground asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  explain  why  the
    Claimant could not return to Uganda in order to make an entry clearance
    application and referred to the cases of R (on the application of Chen)
    v Secretary of State IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

10. Secondly, that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons  on  material
    matters. In particular that in allowing the case with regard to Article
    8, he had failed to consider  the  public  interest  inherent  in  such
    consideration  and,  thirdly,  that  the  judge  had  given  weight  to
    immaterial matters and that was the relationship between the Claimant's
    partner and her sister which it was asserted did not impact on  whether
    the Claimant could return to Uganda.

11. Permission to appeal was granted  on  1  February  2016  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Colyer, essentially on the basis that the points  raised
    by the Secretary of State in the grounds of appeal were arguable.

     Hearing

12. At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke appeared for the Home Office and Ms
    Mallick on behalf of the Claimant.  Mr  Clarke  argued  that  the  test
    under EX1 of Appendix FM  of the Rules encompassed  the  making  of  an
    entry clearance application and that has to be considered as part of  a
    consideration  of  that  test.  He  submitted   that   there   was   no
    insurmountable obstacle to family life continuing if the  Claimant  had
    to return to Uganda  and  apply  for  entry  clearance.   He  submitted
    correctly  that  at  [17]  the  judge  had  essentially  conflated  his
    consideration of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 and had failed  to
    apply the correct test.  He submitted that family life would not  cease
    if the Claimant had to go abroad for a short time in order to  make  an
    entry clearance application and EX1 was specific to family life between
    the Claimant and his partner and the reference to his partner's  sister
    was an immaterial factor which had been taken into account.

13. In response Miss Mallick submitted  that  the  case  of  Chen  did  not
    assist.  She  submitted  that  the  judge  at  [14]   had   looked   at
    insurmountable obstacles both  objectively  and  subjectively  and  the
    judge had considered  all  the  relevant  circumstances  including  the
    inability of the Claimant's partner to obtain work in  Uganda  and  the
    importance of the relationship between the Claimant's partner  and  her
    mother and sister. She submitted it was not necessary for the judge  to
    consider whether or not the Claimant  could  make  an  entry  clearance
    application as this was not a requirement of the Rules.  She  submitted
    even if she was wrong about that and it was relevant for the  judge  to
    have considered entry clearance, the Claimant's partner was pregnant at
    that time. The child had now been born and it was unreasonable for  the
    Respondent to expect the Claimant to go to  Uganda  to  make  an  entry
    clearance application. She submitted the judge would have come  to  the
    same conclusion based on his findings of fact and if there was an error
    it was not material.

14. In response Mr Clarke said that the interpretation of EX1 encompasses a
    long term interpretation of family life and includes the requirement to
    apply for entry clearance.

15. I asked the parties to comment on the judgment of the House of Lords in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40  and  whether  this  was  consistent  with  Mr
    Clarke's interpretation of  paragraph  EX1  of  the  Rules.  Mr  Clarke
    responded that Chikwamba was not determinative of  EX1.   Miss  Mallick
    essentially repeated her previous submission.

Decision

16. I find no material error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rowlands to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.   I  do
    not accept that paragraph EX1 requires a judge to consider  whether  or
    not an application for entry clearance must be made by an applicant.  I
    also note that nowhere  in  the  refusal  letter  does  the  Respondent
    address the effect of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and the  requirement  to
    apply for entry clearance and given that this was simply not raised  by
    the Respondent, it was not incumbent upon the judge to  deal  with  the
    point: see the judgment of Mr Justice Nicol in R on the application  of
    Thakral IJR [2015] UKUT 00096 (IAC).

17. It is clear from EX2 that the definition of insurmountable obstacles in
    EX1B  has  a  number  of  potential  meanings  viz   very   significant
    difficulties which will be faced by the applicant or their  partner  in
    continuing family life together outside the  UK,  which  could  not  be
    overcome, or would entail very serious hardship for  the  applicant  or
    their partner. I further note that in her refusal letter  at  [18]  the
    Respondent acknowledged that  the  Claimant's  partner  would  face  "a
    significant degree of hardship" but contended that this did not  amount
    to "insurmountable obstacles."

18. It is further clear, in my view, that what EX1  is  envisaging  is  the
    couple  relocating  to  another  country  rather   than   a   temporary
    separation, in the sense that the applicant has to leave  and  make  an
    entry  clearance   application.   Moreover,   to   read   Mr   Clarke's
    interpretation into EX1 would not fulfil the purpose of  this  part  of
    the Immigration Rules, which  is  to  legitimise  and  grant  leave  to
    overstayers who fulfil the requirements of those Rules and thus  comply
    with the stated intention of the Rules and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

19. I find that it was incumbent upon First tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands to
    consider the impact upon the Claimant's partner if she had  to  go  and
    live permanently in Uganda with the Claimant.  He did  so  in  that  he
    found that a number of factors relating to her particular circumstances
    would constitute insurmountable obstacles, for the reasons that he sets
    out at [15] and [16] of his decision, summarised at [6]-[7]  above.  On
    the basis of these findings of fact, I find that he  was  justified  in
    concluding that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.  It is the case that  the  judge
    did not give consideration to the public interest set  out  in  section
    117B of the NIAA 2002 in relation to consideration of Article 8 outside
    the Rules. However, I find that this is not a material error, given the
    Judge's decision to allow the appeal under the Rules, for reasons which
    are justifiable and which I uphold.

20. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed, with the effect that  the
    decision of First tier Tribunal Judge  Rowlands  to  allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules is upheld.

21. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

