
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04395/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th May 2016                          |On 19th May 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     N N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Saifolahi, Counsel instructed by Tower Hamlets
Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  the  Secretary  of  State,
      with permission, against a decision of the First tier Tribunal,  Judge
      Callow, promulgated on 14th October 2015 following a hearing at Taylor
      House on 10th August 2015.  In that decision the Judge  dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and
      under Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR  but  allowed  the  appeal  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR.


   2. For the purposes of continuity and clarity, in this decision  I  shall
      continue to refer to NN as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as
      the Respondent.


   3. The Appellant has an uncontested,  estimated  date  of  birth  of  1st
      January 1997, making him now 19 years of age.  The  Appellant  arrived
      in the UK and claimed asylum on 17th March 2009, at a time when he was
      12 years of age.  His asylum application was  rejected  in  August  of
      2009 and his appeal against that decision dismissed in October of  the
      same year.  However, in accordance with her policy  the  Secretary  of
      State granted the Appellant discretionary leave on 26th  October  2009
      valid until 13th October 2010.  By that time he was aged 13.  Prior to
      the expiry of that leave the Appellant made a further application  for
      leave to remain, again on the basis of the Refugee  Convention.   That
      was rejected for the same reasons as previously  but  he  was  granted
      further discretionary leave to remain valid until 10th July 2014.   He
      did not appeal against that decision.


   4. Prior to the expiry of the Appellant's discretionary leave he  made  a
      further application on 13th June 2014 re  stating  his  asylum  claim.
      That application was rejected by a decision taken on 15th January 2015
      and at the same time a decision was made to remove him  under  section
      47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality act  2006.   It  was  his
      appeal against those  decisions  which  came  before  the  First  tier
      Tribunal in August of 2015.


   5. There is no necessity to rehearse the basis of the Appellant's  asylum
      claim as it was once again rejected and that rejection  has  not  been
      challenged before the Upper Tribunal.  Having rejected his  claim  for
      international protection the Judge went on to consider Article 8.  The
      Judge's consideration of Article 8 commences from paragraph 28 of  the
      Decision and Reasons concluding with the decision after paragraph 38.


   6.  The  Judge  identified  that  the  private  life  requirements   find
      expression in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and  set  out
      that the  only  relevant  provision  as  far  as  this  Appellant  was
      concerned was paragraph 276ADE (vi).  Paragraph 276ADE (vi)  provided,
      at that time, that the Appellant must be aged 18 years or  above,  has
      lived continuously in the UK for less that 20 years but  has  no  ties
      (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to  which  he
      would have to go if required to leave the  UK.   So  far  as  that  is
      concerned the Judge found that it had not been  established  that  the
      Appellant met the requirements of 276ADE (vi) as it was  in  force  at
      the time of the Respondent's decision.  The  Judge  then  went  on  to
      consider  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  identifying,  correctly  at
      paragraph 23 that it is for the Appellant to demonstrate that  he  has
      an arguable case and that there may be good grounds for granting leave
      to remain outside the Rules and if so it is then necessary to apply  a
      proportionality test with reference to Article 8 standards.


   7. The Judge then set out the law and a variety of cases relevant  to  an
      Article 8 consideration and at paragraph 30 referred  himself  to  the
      case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  He then identified that this case  was
      clearly  about   proportionality,   the   Appellant   having   clearly
      established a private life in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 38 the
      Judge considered section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002, as he was required to do, noting that it  is  in  the
      public interest to uphold immigration control.  The Judge  noted  that
      currently the Appellant is not financially  independent  but  he  then
      noted that it must be accepted that in due course he is likely  to  be
      qualified  with  a  degree  and  thereafter  will  establish  his  own
      financial independence.  He noted that whilst it might be argued  that
      his leave became precarious once the Respondent refused further  leave
      to remain in June 2014, a conclusion is nonetheless  reached  that  it
      was during the periods  of  discretionary  leave  that  the  Appellant
      established a meaningful private life and that that  is  deserving  of
      weight.  He noted the country guidance shows  that  as  a  very  young
      person returning to Kabul on his own there are obstacles in the way of
      integration.  The current  socio  economic  situation  for  returnees,
      together with all the other facts commented upon, make the Appellant's
      removal a disproportionate interference with his right to respect  for
      a private life and the Judge accordingly allowed the appeal.


   8. It is fair to say that these comments are  not  the  totality  of  the
      facts upon which the Judge based his comments.  He had considered  the
      Appellant's position earlier in the  decision  when  setting  out  the
      Appellant's background.  The  Appellant  comes  from  Kabul  province;
      about thirty five minutes drive from Kabul.  At the time he left Kabul
      his parents were there but he has since found out from his mother that
      his father has been killed.


   9. When he first arrived in the UK the Appellant was subject to the  care
      of Monmouth County Council and placed with foster  parents.   However,
      once he had established contact with his aunt and uncle, who  live  in
      the UK, he moved to live with them  and  has  lived  with  them  since
      approximately 2010.


  10.  The Judge noted the contents of  the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal
      dated 15th July 2015 wherein it was said that the British  Embassy  in
      Kabul did not have the facility to  trace  families  of  unaccompanied
      asylum seeking children from Afghanistan but noted that the  Appellant
      had had no contact with his family there.


  11.   At paragraph 29 of the decision the Judge noted once more  that  the
      Appellant arrived in the UK at the age of 12 and  that  for  the  most
      part has lived  with  his  uncle  and  members  of  his  family  which
      constitutes an important element in his private life.  The Judge  also
      noted that he has attended school and was  at  that  time  awaiting  A
      level results with a plan to study chemistry at the  City  University.
      By the time the case came before me he had in fact secured a place  to
      study bio chemistry at Kingston  University  and  he  plans  to  be  a
      teacher      .


  12. The Secretary of State's grounds on which permission  to  appeal  were
      granted submit that the Judge  erred  in  assessing  the  case  on  an
      Article 8 basis outside the Rules.  It  is  said  that  the  Appellant
      cannot meet paragraph 276ADE as he has not been in the United  Kingdom
      for over half his life and had not been here for seven  years  at  the
      date of the application for further leave.  It is also  asserted  that
      the Judge erred in his application of section 117B of  the  2002  Act.
      The Judge found that he is not currently financially  independent  and
      the  Judge  erred  in  looking  to  the  future  as  that  was  highly
      speculative.  The Judge failed to count the cost to the  UK  education
      system if the  Appellant  obtains  grants  or  loans  to  further  his
      education as he wishes.   There  is  also  criticism  of  the  Judge's
      consideration  of  his  leave  having  been  precarious  when  he  had
      discretionary leave.  The Secretary of State argues that discretionary
      leave is precarious.


  13.  Before me Miss Pal relied on the grounds particularly at paragraph  2
      arguing that the Judge failed to adequately  assess  the  claim  under
      paragraph   276ADE   (vi)   and   had   not   considered   exceptional
      circumstances.   She  also  argued  that  the  Judge  erred   in   his
      consideration of what was precarious and in looking to the future.


  14. Miss Saifolahi, on the Appellant's behalf, referred  to  the  Rule  24
      notice, submitted late but which I gave  permission  to  admit.   That
      argued that the decision did not contain errors of law.  In particular
      where the Judge had indicated at paragraph 38 of his decision that the
      Appellant had established a meaningful private life during the periods
      of discretionary leave that private life is deserving  of  weight  was
      not a finding in error of law and she  submitted  that  while  section
      117B (5) states that little weight is to be attached to a private life
      established when a persons immigration status is precarious,  it  does
      not state that no weight is to be attached and as  such  there  is  no
      error of law.


  15.  Before me she expanded upon this ground with, I find, some force.  It
      must be remembered that when the Appellant arrived in the UK he was  a
      very young child, aged  only  12  and  unaccompanied.   He  was  given
      discretionary leave in accordance with the Secretary of States  policy
      and on the basis that he could not be removed.  That being the case he
      cannot  be  criticised  for  establishing  a  private  life;  such  is
      inevitable.  Whilst his asylum claim was rejected, again note must  be
      taken of his extreme youth at the time of the incidents he  relied  on
      and his age coming  to  the  United  Kingdom.   He  ought  not  to  be
      criticised for making such a claim given his extreme youth and it  was
      not rejected on credibility grounds.


  16.  Miss Saifolahi referred me to  the  case  of  Treebhawon  and  others
      (section 117B (vi)  )  [2015]  UKUT  00674  (IAC).   She  specifically
      referred me to paragraph 17 of that case which reads as follows;-

           "the two "little weight"  provisions  of  section  117B  do  not
           readily satisfy the appellation of Parliamentary  statements  of
           the public interest, in view of the  terms  in  which  they  are
           phrased compared with the formulation of  the  public  interests
           statements in subsections (2), (3) and  (6).   Furthermore,  the
           two "little weight"  provisions  relate  to  matters  which,  in
           practice, are invoked by the person concerned  rather  that  the
           Secretary of State, namely a private life and/or a  relationship
           formed with a qualifying partner during such persons sojourn  in
           the United Kingdom.  It is noted in Deelah, at [21],  the  focus
           of these discrete statutory provisions is choices and  decisions
           which have been made by the person or persons concerned in their
           lives and lifestyles."


  17. The point Miss Saifolahi makes in this regard is that the  Appellant,
      as a child with discretionary  leave  and  no  aility  to  return  to
      Afghanistan, had no choice in the matter.


  18.  She  also  referred  me  to  the  case  of  Forman   (SS   117   A-C
      considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) which makes  clear  that  the
      matters to be considered under section  117  are  not  an  exhaustive
      list.  She noted that the Judge had found the Appellant and his uncle
      - his witness, to be entirely credible.  It is accepted that  he  had
      arrived at the age of twelve.  It  was  accepted  that  he  had  lost
      contact with his mother and that his father  had  been  killed.   The
      Secretary of State had undertaken traces so far as she was able which
      effectively  was  none  and  the  Appellant   had  been  living  with
      relatives in the UK since 2010 and had established a very  meaningful
      and significant private life in that time.


  19. She argued that at the date of hearing he was 18 years and 7  months.
      He has now been offered a place to study  Bio-Chemistry  at  Kingston
      University with a plan to teach those  subjects  thereafter.   He  is
      supported emotionally and financially by his uncle and there  was  no
      error of law on the part of the Judge to look to the  future  on  the
      basis of how the Appellant has done thus far with his studies and his
      plans for the future that he is likely in future  to  be  financially
      independent.


  20. It is also of note that the Appellant's level of English is excellent
      particularly on the basis that he has been studying since his arrival
      as a child.  The Judge's decision, whilst it may not been a  decision
      reached by every Judge, was nevertheless not perverse and open to him
      on the basis of the evidence.  She also pointed out that  his  asylum
      claim had not  failed  on  credibility  but  rather  the  lack  of  a
      Convention reason and matters of risk on return.


  21. Having read the First tier Tribunal's decision with care  and  taking
      into account the Secretary of State's grounds, the Rule 24  response,
      the case law relied upon  and  the  submissions,  I  agree  that  the
      Judge's conclusions were not perverse and were properly based on  the
      evidence and open to him on the basis of that evidence.  True  it  is
      that another Judge may have decided the  case  differently  on  these
      facts but that  does  not  render  this  Judge's  decision  perverse.
      Section 117 is not an exhaustive list and it is of  note  that  there
      are no factors counting against the appellant.  I accept that  whilst
      section 117 indicates that little weight should be given to a private
      life built up whilst a person's position is precarious, a young child
      given discretionary leave and who is not returnable has to  be  given
      more latitude in that regard than an adult who has chosen to overstay
      and build up a private life.  It is self evident that  a  child  from
      the age of 12 upwards who masters the language,  who  makes  friends,
      who succeeds in the education system and lives  with  relatives  will
      have built up a very significant private life and it is also far from
      insignificant that this Appellant has lost contact with his family in
      Afghanistan who he hast saw when he was aged only 12.


  22. I find that the First tier Judge's is not tainted by an error of  law
      and it is upheld.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 13th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings




 Signed                             Date 13th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
