
IA 04294 2013
                                                               IA 04293 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 August 2013                              |On 13 August 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                              FILOFTEIA CIOBOIU
                                ALEX CIOBOIU

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms H  Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Romania. The second named appellant  is
      the adoptive son (aged 12) of the first named appellant.

   2. The appellants applied under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 on the basis of their relationship to  Robert  Mircea
      Tiban, a Romanian national exercising Treaty Rights in the UK.

   3. These applications were refused by the respondent on 17 January  2013.
      Among other points it was said Mr Tiban's birth  certificate  had  not
      been produced.

   4. The appellants appealed and their appeals  came  before  a  First-tier
      Judge on 16 May 2013.

   5. The judge was not assisted by virtue of the  fact  that  neither  side
      appeared, a paper hearing having been  requested,  and  there  was  no
      respondent's bundle and scant material from the appellants.

   6. The judge issued two determinations,  which  may  have  added  to  the
      confusion, since in the son's appeal there is  reference  to  a  birth
      certificate being included whereas in the mother's appeal it  is  said
      Mr Tiban's birth certificate had not been produced.

   7. Permission to appeal was granted on the birth certificate issue.

   8. Happily before me the appellants and Mr Tiban appeared.

   9. Mr Tiban said  that  documents  sent  to  the  Home  Office  had  been
      misplaced.

  10. From the Court Documents in the bundle it appears that the first named
      appellant Filofteia Cioboiu was married to Ioan Tiban  in  1981,  that
      Robert Mircea Tiban was born on 21 December 1982, and  that  following
      the divorce the appellant reverted to her maiden name Cioboiu. She was
      given responsibility for  the  upbringing  of  Robert  and  the  other
      children. Alex was adopted on 26 July 2011. It is said that the  child
      had been in her family since August 2001 and that it was in  the  best
      interests of the child to be adopted by the appellant.

  11. Ms Horsley said the appeal of the mother could now  be  determined  in
      the light of the fact that  Mr  Tiban's  birth  certificate  had  been
      produced. Ms Horsley did not contest the validity of the document  and
      was content that I allow the appeal under  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

  12. The position in relation to Alex was somewhat more  complex.  She  did
      not have the file or indeed much paperwork. She considered that  there
      would need to be evidence of some dependency in Romania (or membership
      of the household of the EEA national) although she  acknowledged  that
      it would be difficult to envisage a 12 year old being returned on  his
      own.

  13. Having carefully considered matters with her and the family Ms Horsley
      accepted that  in  the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case  the
      appropriate course, having allowed the appeal of  Alex's  mother,  the
      first named appellant, was to allow Alex's appeal  to  the  extent  of
      remitting his case to be re-assessed by the Secretary of State in  the
      light of the changed circumstances.

  14. This does appear to me to be the appropriate course. The appeal papers
      are too scant to do justice to a child's appeal and  the  Home  Office
      has to bear some responsibility  for  not  furnishing  the  First-tier
      Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal with a bundle of  material.  I  am  not
      able to comment  on  Mr  Tiban's  assertion  that  material  has  been
      misplaced by the Home Office. Ms Horsley did not cast  doubt  on  such
      documentation as had been put forward. There is of course  a  need  to
      have full regard to Alex's best interests in important issues such  as
      pertain here.

      Accordingly and by agreement:


      The First-tier Judge made a material error of law and  I  re-make  the
      decision.


      1. The appeal of the  first  named  appellant  is  allowed  under  the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


      2. The appeal of the second named appellant is allowed to  the  extent
      of remitting it to the respondent for further consideration.



                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               9 August 2013





