
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04363/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             LINDA BOAKYE DANSO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Amunwa, Counsel, instructed by Ravi Sethi
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State was granted permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal promulgated on  21  May  2015
    allowing the claimant's appeal against her decision  to  refuse  her  a
    residence card under Regulation 17 with reference to Regulation  15  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended.

2.   The claimant applied for a residence card  on  5  November  2013  as  a
    family member of a European Economic Area  national.   Her  application
    was made on the basis that she was the spouse of an  EEA  national  who
    was exercising their free movement rights in the  UK.   The  respondent
    rejected that application on  the  basis  that  the  claimant  had  not
    demonstrated that the proxy marriage was valid. The respondent  further
    concluded that the claimant was not in a durable relationship  with  an
    EEA national.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the claimant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national and the Secretary of State  does  not
    challenge that finding.

4.   Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  on  10
    August 2015 on the basis that the issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
    extended family member is subject to the discretion of the Secretary of
    State. Where an applicant is found to be in a durable relationship  but
    that discretion has not been exercised the proper course  is  to  allow
    the appeal on the basis that the decision is not in accordance with the
    law and remit the application to the Secretary of State.

5.   Regulation 17(4) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  provides
    that
         "The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
         family member not falling within Regulation 7(3) who is not an  EEA
         national on  application  if  (a)  the  relevant  EEA  national  in
         relation to the extended family member is a qualified person or  an
         EEA national with a permanent right of residence  under  Regulation
         15; and (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of
         State appropriate to issue the residence card."

6.   The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  claimant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national which had existed for more  than  two
    years and that she met the requirements of Regulation 8 (5) of the  EEA
    Regulations. The First-tier Tribunal then allowed the appeal  outright.
    It is clear both from Regulation 17 (4) and from the cases  of  MR  and
    Others (EEA family members) Bangladesh  [2010]  UKUT  449  and  Ihemedu
    (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 that  Regulation  17(4)  (b)
    makes the issue of a residence card to  an  extended  family  member  a
    matter of discretion for the respondent.

8.   Where the Secretary of State has  not  exercised  that  discretion  the
    proper course is to set the decision aside and remake it  allowing  the
    appeal to the extent that the claimant's application  for  a  residence
    card as an  extended  family  member  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State for a lawful decision.

Notice of Decision

9.   I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    remake the decision.  The appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the
    question whether a residence card should be issued to the  claimant  is
    outstanding before  the  Secretary  of  State  for  a  lawful  decision
    thereon.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
