
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04369/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 November 2014                  |On 26 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    MR KK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Ndi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (  Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The Appellant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings, unless  and
until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise.   No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


1.   The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast and his date of birth  is
    24 May 1965.

2.   On 12 October 2013 the appellant made an application to vary his  leave
    to remain in the UK under the parent route of Appendix FM on the  basis
    that he has regular access with his British citizen  child  here.   The
    application was refused because the Secretary of State was of the  view
    that the appellant had failed to provide evidence of access.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Baldwin in a decision that was promulgated on 21 August 2014  following
    a hearing on 15 August 2014.  The appellant  made  an  application  for
    permission to appeal which was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Brunnen in a decision of 8 October 2014.  Thus the matter came
    before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The appellant's evidence was that he has a daughter, S,  who  was  born
    on 1 January 2011.  He is separated from the child's  mother.   He  has
    regular contact with S.  He produced a letter from  the  Child  Support
    Agency of 14 October 2013 in order to  establish  that  he  was  paying
    maintenance.  He produced a parental responsibility agreement signed on
    6 January 2014 and an application for contact dated 6 February 2014 and
    documentation establishing that there had been a court hearing  in  the
    family court on 1 April 2014.  The appellant's evidence  was  that  the
    case in the family court had  been  adjourned  twice.   He  produced  a
    letter from CAFCASS which indicated that he  had  an  appointment  with
    them on 12 May 2013.  His oral evidence at the hearing was that a court
    date had been fixed on 10 September 2014.

5.   The Judge made the following findings at paragraphs 17-20

         "17. I have given careful consideration to all the documents before
             me and to the oral evidence and submissions which are set  out
             in the record of proceedings.  In relation to Article 8 I have
             had  regard  to  the  considerations  set  out  in  S.117  and
             conducted the balancing exercise required.


         18.  In considering my Findings of Credibility  and  Fact,  it  has
             become  clear  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  needs  to  be
             approached with a degree of caution.  He came to the  U.K.  in
             2000 on a 6-month Visa but did not leave when he  should  have
             done.   The  next  year  he  made   an   unsuccessful   spouse
             application.  Served with an IS15A1 in August 2004, he did not
             leave.  In 2009 he made an unsuccessful application for an EEA
             Residence Card.  Eventually he was granted discretionary leave
             until 20.10.13.  Shortly before the expiry of this  leave,  he
             sought an extension on the basis  that  the  circumstances  in
             which  his  leave  had  been  granted   remained   the   same.
             Subsequently his claim in that regard began to unravel and  he
             has now made it clear that his situation had changed  quite  a
             lot and he had moved in with  another  lady  in  August  2012.
             Neither this other lady nor any  other  friend  have  provided
             evidence about his relationship with his wife or their  child.
             There is no evidence to confirm that  the  letter  purportedly
             signed by his wife was signed by her and neither her  Passport
             nor her Driving Licence has been provided.  His claim that  it
             is genuine has to be considered in light  of  the  fact  that,
             just a few months  earlier,  he  had  led  the  Respondent  to
             believe he was still in a relationship with her, one which had
             come to an end 14  months  previously.   It  also  has  to  be
             considered in the light of the fact that it  would  appear  to
             make very little sense for him to have had to go to  Court  to
             make a Contact Application  in  February  2014  following  her
             refusal to sign a Parental Agreement,  and  for  the  case  to
             continue in April 2014 and beyond if he was having regular and
             unrestricted contact with the child, as the letter in her name
             asserts.  It is  of  course  possible  that  the  letter  from
             CAFCASS is genuine and that the Application is still  pending,
             but the alteration of the date of that  letter  from  2013  to
             2014 does not inspire confidence in it  being  a  very  recent
             letter.  It was simply not possible to determine  whether  the
             child on a Fairground ride to  which  I  was  pointed  on  his
             mobile phone is the Appellant's daughter and the photograph of
             a child on a Father's Day Card looked to me to be  one  rather
             older than one not yet three years old, though appearances can
             of course be deceptive and little  weight  should  perhaps  be
             attached to that last point.


         19.  A number of the factors above are singularly unhelpful to  the
             Appellant's  credibility.   The  evidence  presented  is  also
             striking as much because of the lack of  evidence  of  a  kind
             which one might expect to  see  in  a  case  of  this  kind  -
             particularly one where the Appellant has been represented from
             the time he  submitted  his  misleading  Application.   Not  a
             single friend has been called to corroborate his claim  to  be
             playing a very active role in his daughter's life and the fact
             he has taken out court proceedings for contact with the  child
             suggests his claim in this regard is not likely to be genuine.
              The timing of it suggests he may well only have  done  so  in
             order to try and provide a less inadequate basis for remaining
             in the U.K.   If  his  claim  to  have  undertaken  invaluable
             voluntary work over a number of years were  well-founded,  one
             might also expect to see letters from organisations for  which
             he has worked voluntarily, but the documentation  relating  to
             his work here would appear to be limited to that for which  he
             has been paid.  The Appellant, I find not  to  be  a  credible
             witness and I conclude that his claim to have ongoing  contact
             with his daughter not proven and improbable.  It is clear that
             his marriage came to an end, in practice if  not  in  law,  at
             least two years ago, and it would seem clear that any violence
             which did take place was two-sided.


         20.  The Appellant has, I find, not proven that he  is  having  any
             contact with his child who resides with his wife with whom  he
             has not lived for two years.  Given the  number  of  occasions
             upon which the Appellant has put forward a partner in order to
             try and found a claim to remain in  the  U.K.,  and  his  most
             recent attempt to try and lead the Respondent to  believe  his
             relationship with his wife was still extant in  October  2013,
             it is not unreasonable to  believe  that  his  wife  may  well
             believe their daughter's best interests are not well served by
             allowing him to play any part in their  lives.   There  is  no
             proof that a Contact Hearing is scheduled for September  2014.
             However, if that is indeed the case, and the  Court  concludes
             in the knowledge of the factual and  Credibility  Findings  in
             this Determination, that the child's best interests  would  be
             served by her having regular contact with the Appellant,  then
             he will be able to  make  a  further  and  properly  evidenced
             Application.  In the absence, however, of any proven  contact,
             I find that the Appeal must  fail  under  the  Rules  in  this
             respect."
Conclusions

6.   At the hearing before me it was  established  that  the  appellant  had
    submitted with the permission application a copy of a  court  order  in
    relation to S which was  made  on  10  September  2014.  There  was  no
    challenge to this by Mr Melvin.  It was an order  for  contact  between
    the appellant and S.  Both  parties  agreed  that  should  there  be  a
    material error of law I would be able to go on  to  make  the  decision
    without the need for a further hearing.

7.   The court order was  not  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin;
    however, it  is  a  fact  that  a  court  order  has  been  made  which
    establishes that the appellant has access rights to  his  daughter  and
    that this was the only issue raised by the respondent  in  relation  to
    Appendix FM.   The Judge cannot be blamed  for  failing  to  take  into
    account evidence that was not before him; however, the result  of  this
    is that there has been unfairness which amounts to a material error  of
    law.     In light of the evidence  now  before  me,  I  find  that  the
    appellant has established that he meets the requirements of Appendix FM
    and the appeal should be allowed under the Immigration Rules.

8.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss  the  appeal  under
    the rules is set aside and I remake the decision and allow the appeal.



Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 24 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

