
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04555/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd September 2014                           |On 11th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                              MR daljeet singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Awan - Solicitor of Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell - Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by  Daljeet  Singh,  a  citizen  of  India  born  7th
    September 1990. He appeals  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker issued on 17th June  2014  dismissing  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regs) and on human  rights
    grounds his application for a residence card as confirmation of a right
    to reside in the UK.  The Sponsor is a Polish citizen.

 2. On 8th July 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson  granted  permission
    to appeal.  She noted the grounds to be as follows

         "(a) That the judge materially erred in law in failing to apply the
             correct burden of proof i.e. at paragraph 8  where  he  stated
             that since this was a case where the Respondent  was  alleging
             'a marriage of convenience' and not genuine, the  burden  lies
             on the Respondent - see Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of
             convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 and

         (b)  Failed to note that the burden of proof to  establish  a  sham
             marriage is to a higher standard and rests on the Respondent."

    Judge Simpson continued

         "Dealing with 2(a) above, the Judge did apply the correct burden of
         proof at [34].  Put simply, in IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia
         [2008] UKAIT 31 the Tribunal concluded that there was no burden  on
         an applicant in an EU case unless  and  until  the  Respondent  had
         raised the issue  by  evidence.   However,  if  such  evidence  was
         produced then it was for  the  applicant  to  produce  evidence  to
         address those suspicions.  Such an approach can be described as one
         of (i) an evidential burden in the first place  on  the  Respondent
         and (ii) the onus then shifting to the claimant in the light of the
         relevant information rather than a  formal  legal  burden.   As  to
         2(b), however, while the judge did refer  in  [8]  to  the  general
         standard of proof, he did not indicate that this would  be  to  the
         higher levels of the balance of probabilities."

 3. Judge Walker noted that the Appellant  had attended an  interview  with
    his EEA Sponsor, arranged by the Respondent on 17th May 2013  and  that
    the  Respondent  had  noted  a  significant  number  of  discrepancies,
    inconsistencies and irregularities in their accounts which resulted  in
    the Appellant's application being refused on 1st June  2013.   At  that
    time the Appellant and the Sponsor were of the same gender and  because
    of that the UK marriage certificate obtained by them  had  been  issued
    invalidly.  The certificate was returned by  the  Home  Office  to  the
    Registrar to be destroyed.  On 5th August 2013  the  Appellant  entered
    into a civil partnership with his EEA Sponsor  and  then  submitted  an
    application for a Residence Card under the 2006 Regs.

 4. The Judge noted that in refusing the application   the  Respondent  had
    relied on the discrepancies in the accounts given at the  interview  in
    May 2013.  Whilst it was accepted that the Appellant now holds a  valid
    Civil Partnership Certificate the Respondent was  still  not  satisfied
    that the relationship is genuine due to the findings at the  interview.
    The  Secretary  of  State  considered  the  marriage  to  be   one   of
    convenience.

 5. Judge Walker noted that the marriage  interview  had  extended  to  132
    questions and  that  the  conflicts  and  inconsistencies  between  the
    answers of the Appellant and his partner were numerous  and  extensive.
    He sets out some of these questions and answers.   He  noted  that  the
    Appellant speaks some English but his partner has very limited  English
    indeed.  She does not speak Hindi and he does not speak  Polish.   They
    use Google translate to communicate.  Judger Walker  went   into  great
    detail about several of the discrepancies such  as  the  evidence  they
    gave about their bedroom at home,  whether or not there  was  a  garden
    and whether or not the Appellant had ever given his wife a ring.

 6. Mr Whitwell's position was that there  was no error in  the  way  Judge
    Walker had dealt with the burden and standard of proof and indeed  that
    paragraph  34  of  the  determination  had  clearly  been  taken   from
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    38.

 7. It  is clear from paragraph 34  that Judge Walker was  aware  that  the
    initial burden was on the Respondent who in  his  view  had  discharged
    that burden by reference to the discrepancies in  the information given
    at interview and the conclusions reached from that.   He  rightly  said
    that subsequent to that the burden of showing that the partnership  and
    relationship are genuine rests with the Appellant.

    Judge Walker concluded:

         "If their relationship were genuine and they were  living  together
         as  partners  I  would  not  expect  this  level  and   amount   of
         discrepancies in their accounts.  These discrepancies and conflicts
         are wholesale.  They are so extensive that  they  show  a  lack  of
         credibility in the claims of the Appellant and his claimed partner.
          In all the circumstances  I  find  that  this  is  not  a  genuine
         partnership and is one of  convenience.   The  credibility  of  the
         Appellant and his Sponsor is further damaged by the fact that  they
         were both prepared to go through a registry office marriage knowing
         that they were both of  the  same  gender.   They  have  failed  to
         explain at all why they believe they could do this."

    He went on

         "The inconsistencies in the marriage interview and which have  been
         highlighted in the refusal letter are  sufficient  to  satisfy  the
         initial burden on the Respondent to  show  that  there  are  doubts
         about the genuineness of firstly the marriage and  then  the  civil
         partnership.  Subsequently the burden of  showing  that  the  civil
         partnership  and  the  relationship  and  genuine  rests  with  the
         Appellant.  He has failed to prove this to the required standard".

 8. I agree that the Respondent had initially done enough  to  satisfy  the
    initial burden on her  of  giving  adequate  reasons  to  question  the
    validity of the marriage.  The couple knew that the validity  had  been
    challenged when the refusal letter was issued and they had known  since
    their interview in August 2013 that the Respondent did not accept  that
    they were in a genuine relationship.   Notwithstanding  this  it  seems
    that they were unable at the oral hearing  to rebut  the reasons  given
    by the Secretary of State for refusing the application on the basis  of
    what was said at the interview. I note that the record  of  proceedings
    is extensive and thorough.  I can find no error of law in the  way  the
    burden and standard of proof were dealt with by  Judge Walker.

 9. Mr Awan appeared to concede that there was no  error  relative  to  the
    burden and standard of proof but   proceeded to make  submissions  that
    had not been made in the application for permission and in  respect  of
    which permission had not been granted. These submissions related to the
    findings of Judge Walker on credibility, Mr Awan's view being that  the
    Judge had erred in simply adopting the view of the Respondent based  on
    the interview and had not considered the oral evidence. I am  under  no
    obligation to deal with this but for completeness would say that having
    considered the  Record of Proceedings and noted that Judge Walker  said
    he had taken account of all the evidence,  I  find  no  merit  in  that
    submission.

10. I find therefore that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal does
    not contain an error of law.

DECISION

The appeal is dismissed and the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
shall stand.

Signed                              Date: 5th September 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

