
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04116/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 25 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                          THERESA ADESIDA ADENIKAWO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M. Vidal of counsel, instructed by Haris Ali,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr K. Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

    1. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  11  June  1975,
       claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom as a child in 1991.  Her
       partner, Mr Alaka,  is  also  a  Nigerian  citizen  and  their  three
       children,  born  in  the  United  Kingdom  while  both  parents  were
       unlawfully present are also, of  course,  citizens  of  Nigeria.  She
       appealed against a decision of the respondent,  made  on  15  January
       2015, to refuse to grant the whole family  leave  to  remain  on  the
       basis of rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR. For reasons  that
       are not relevant for present  purposes,  the  appellant  has  an  in-
       country right of appeal  whereas  her  partner  and  their  children,
       although present in the United Kingdom, may appeal  only  after  they
       have left the United Kingdom.

    2. The history of previous  applications  is  set  out  in  the  grounds
       drafted by counsel for the appellant goes unchallenged and so I  take
       the following summary from them. Applications for leave to remain had
       initially been made on 18 December 2009 and refused on 21 April  2010
       with no right of appeal. The respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  that
       decision but maintained the refusal, this time providing  a  decision
       that carried a right of appeal  that  the  appellant  exercised.  The
       respondent withdrew that decision and again reconsidered  the  matter
       with the resulting decision of 15 January 2015  that  is  subject  to
       challenge in these proceedings.

    3. In the decision of 15 January 2015  the  respondent  placed  reliance
       upon the submission of false documents in  support  of  the  original
       application that had been made in December 2009.  In  so  doing,  she
       reproduce the relevant  provision  of  the  rules,  under  a  heading
       "suitability and  saying,  so  far  as  is  relevant  (with  emphasis
       added):

           "In order for your client to be eligible for  consideration  for
           limited leave to  remain  under  Appendix  FM  and/or  Paragraph
           276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules,  your  client  must  not  be
           excluded on the grounds of Suitability under Appendix  FM  S-LTR
           1.1-3.1, which state:

           ...

                S-LTR.2.1. The applicant will normally be refused on grounds
                of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2. to 2.4 apply

                S-LTR2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge-

                 a) False information,  representations  or  documents  have
                    been submitted in relation to the application...

           ...

           It is considered that your client does not meet the  Suitability
           requirements for consideration of limited leave to remain in the
           United Kingdom ... because your client has previously  submitted
           false  documents  to  the  Home  Office  in   support   of   her
           application.  The  bank  statements  from  Nationwide   Building
           Society  and  the  Cooperative  Bank  submitted  within   Chidys
           Solicitors letter dated 18 December 2009 have been confirmed  to
           be  false  and  that  no  such  accounts   exist   with   either
           institution. It is noted that your client claims to know nothing
           about these bank statements and they were  submitted  by  Chidys
           Solicitors without her knowledge,  however,  even  if  the  bank
           statements were submitted without your client's knowledge it  is
           your client's responsibility  to  check  the  actions  that  any
           representative elected by her to act on her behalf

           Your client therefore fails to meet the requirements  for  leave
           to remain because Paragraph S-LTR.2.2.(a) of Appendix FM of  the
           Immigration Rules applies."

    4. Pausing there, it might be thought that the reasoning leading to that
       conclusion is not without difficulty. Unlike other provisions of  the
       rules, refusal is not a mandatory and inevitable consequence  of  the
       engagement of  the  provision.  S-LTR.2.1  provides  that  where  the
       provisions apply the application will normally be refused. Therefore,
       there will be cases where that will not be the outcome and  so  there
       is a discretion to be exercised. The  provision  raises  specifically
       the distinction between cases where the false documents are submitted
       with  and  without  the  applicant's  knowledge.  If  they  had  been
       submitted without the applicant's knowledge then, plainly, that would
       inform the decision as to whether this was  within  the  category  of
       applications that should normally be refused.

    5. Second, the  respondent  has  expressed  herself  in  a  manner  that
       suggests that the question of whether the applicant knew  that  false
       documents had been submitted was immaterial because, in  every  case,
       it was her responsibility to ensure that false documents had not been
       submitted. That suggests that no consideration has been given to  the
       question of whether discretion should have  been  exercised  in  this
       case, if it were to be accepted that the appellant  was  not  someone
       who was dishonestly complicit in the reliance upon  false  documents.
       Therefore, on that approach, a person who had  instructed  solicitors
       to carry out a task within their  professional  competence  would  be
       equally responsible for an unauthorised and inappropriate  act  of  a
       professional  representative  in  whom  she  was  entitled  to   have
       confidence that he would not do so. If that  were  correct  it  would
       render otiose what was plainly intended to be a qualification to  the
       normal outcome where false documents were submitted.

    6. This was one of the issues to be resolved in the  appeal  before  the
       First tier Tribunal. The judge said this,  at  paragraph  10  of  his
       decision:

           "The respondent's bundle  contained  two  Document  verification
           reports regarding Nationwide  and  Cooperative  bank  statements
           that were submitted with the appellant's  application  of  2009.
           These conclude that the documents were not issued by either bank
           for reasons that are  set  out  within  the  DVRs.  Neither  the
           appellant nor  her  partner  sought  to  dispute  the  DVRs  but
           explained that neither of them were aware that the documents had
           been submitted and placed the  blame  on  their  previous  legal
           representatives. Notwithstanding any finding of complicity I  am
           satisfied that Paragraph S-TRR.2.2.(a) (sic) is relevant whether
           or not the applicant was aware of the submission  of  the  false
           information.  Mr  Alexander  did  not  seek   to   persuade   me
           otherwise."

       Apart from  the  incorrect  paragraph  number  of  the  rule  he  was
       discussing, so far so good, but the judge continued:

           "I am therefore satisfied that the appellant cannot satisfy  the
           requirements of  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  and  cannot  meet  the
           requirements of the Immigration Rules. "

       Paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) provides:

           '276ADE (1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
           to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at
           the date of the application, the applicant:

              i) Does not fall for refusal  under  any  of  the  grounds  in
                 Section S-LTR.1.2 to S-LTR2.3 ...'

    7. The judge was simply  wrong  in  his  approach  because  it  did  not
       necessarily follow from  the  fact  that  false  documents  had  been
       submitted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet   the   suitability
       requirement of  S-LTR.2.2(a),  even  if  that  would  be  the  normal
       outcome.  Because  the  judge  had  misunderstood   the   suitability
       requirement in play, he did not make a finding of fact concerning the
       submission of false documents and so we do not know whether or not he
       accepted the appellant's evidence that she was  wholly  unaware  that
       any false documents had been submitted. Nor do we know  whether,  but
       for that error, the outcome of the assessment of the claim under  the
       rules would have been any different. That is not simply  relevant  to
       the  outcome  of  the  judge's  decision  on  the  appeal  under  the
       immigration rules but, when he turned to consider the article 8 claim
       outside the rules he said:

           "I have also given weight to the fact that the family  does  not
           meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules."

       which indicates that he had come  to  his  proportionality  balancing
       exercise with the scales  weighted  against  the  appellant  in  that
       respect when that may have been inappropriate.

    8. That, in my judgement, is sufficient to establish that  the  decision
       of the judge cannot stand. The appellant is entitled to see that  her
       claim under article 8 of the ECHR is assessed correctly, both  within
       and, should it be necessary, outside the rules. This has not occurred
       and so the decision of the judge will be set  aside  and  the  appeal
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh. Ms Vidal
       pursued a second ground of challenge, concerning  a  failure  by  the
       judge to make a clear finding of fact as to when the appellant  first
       arrived in the United Kingdom and so what is her  overall  period  of
       residence. As the appeal is to be revisited, it is sufficient to  say
       that it will be necessary for those matters to be  subject  to  clear
       findings also.


  Signed    [pic]
                               Date: 8 February 2016


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
