
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04813/2015
     IA/04816/2015 & IA/04999/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 July 2017                           |On 21st August 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                            M T - first appellant
                          M J T - SECOND appellant
                            AS - THIRD appellant

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     First appellant in person; no representation for the
                    other appellants
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grimes promulgated on  25  August  2016  dismissing
    their appeals against the decision of the respondent made on 19 and  20
    January 2015 to refuse the first appellant a  registration  certificate
    and the second and third appellants residence cards as confirmation  of
    their right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of Ireland.  She  is  married  to  the
    second appellant who is a citizen of India.  The third appellant is the
    adult son of the second appellant and is also a citizen of India.

 3. The first and second appellants were married in  India  in  2012.   The
    second and third appellants applied for  family  permits  to  join  the
    first appellant in the United Kingdom.  Those applications were refused
    but were granted pursuing an appeal ultimately to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    allowed by the President,  Mr  Justice  McCloskey.   They  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2014.

 4. The basis of the appellants' case is that  the  first  appellant  is  a
    worker who had ceased activity as set out in Regulation 5  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and had thus acquired permanent residence under  Regulation
    15(1)(c) of the Regulations.  Alternatively, it was argued that she had
    obtained permanent residence under Regulation 15(1)(a) on the basis  of
    five years' continuous residence in the United  Kingdom  in  accordance
    with the EEA Regulations.  The second and third appellants' rights to a
    registration certificate are dependent on the  first  appellant  having
    acquired a permanent right to reside under the EEA Regulations  as  she
    is not otherwise a qualified person given that she does  not  work,  is
    not self-employed, is not a student and is reliant on benefits.

 5. When the matter came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimes  on  11
    August  2016  the  appellants  were  represented  by  Mr  S   McTaggart
    instructed by McFadden Perry Solicitors.  The judge heard evidence from
    the appellants as well as the  first  appellant's  sister.   The  judge
    concluded that: -

      i) there was an inconsistency in the evidence as to whether the  first
         appellant had ceased economic activity, given she had  claimed  she
         had not worked since 1983 [11] alternatively claiming that she  had
         worked for her sister between 1990 and 1995;

     ii) she was not satisfied by the evidence that the first appellant  had
         ended her employment due to incapacity [12] as the letter from  her
         GP dated 4 February 2015 did not state when she  became  unfit  for
         work or whether she had ended employment  in  1983  or  1995  as  a
         result of permanent incapacity; and,

    iii) although the report from Dr Bell of  29  September  2015  concluded
         that the first appellant had severe  and  enduring  medical  health
         problems which rendered her permanently unfit for work, and that on
         the balance of probabilities she had  been  unfit  for  work  since
         approximately 1983, she was not satisfied that  the  appellant  had
         terminated in 1983 as a result of permanent incapacity [15];

     iv) there were inconsistencies in the evidence of the first appellant's
         claimed work  between  1990  and  1995  in  her  sister's  shop  it
         concluded evidence about  the  claimed  employment  was  vague  and
         contradictory [16] and did not establish that  she  had  left  that
         employment due to a permanent incapacity to work;

      v) she was not satisfied that the applicant had been residing  in  the
         United Kingdom in accordance with the Regulations for a  continuous
         period of five years from 1990 until 1995 and she had not therefore
         shown that she had acquired permanent residence [17];

     vi) as had been  accepted  by  their  Counsel,  the  second  and  third
         appellants' rights were parastical as the first appellant therefore
         they could not succeed.

 6. The appellants sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  in
    reaching her findings  of  fact,  the  judge  had  failed  properly  to
    consider the expert report both in respect of when the first  appellant
    had ceased work and in assessing her evidence.

 7. On 12 April 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 8. When the matter came before me, the first appellant appeared and stated
    that she wished to withdraw her appeal.  I was satisfied  that  in  all
    the circumstances of this case it would be right to accept that.

 9. After the hearing I received an email which purports to have been  sent
    by the first and second appellants.  It requested that  the  appeal  be
    adjourned owing to the first appellant's ill-health,  it  being  stated
    that she had been admitted to a mental health hospital approximately  a
    month earlier. No evidence that the first appellant had  been  admitted
    to hospital is provided although there is evidence of an appointment as
    an outpatient on 9 February 2017.

10. I am satisfied that there was no basis on which  the  appeal  could  be
    adjourned.  The sole reason given as to why it should be adjourned  was
    the claimed illness of the first appellant who had in fact attended  in
    person

11. Given that the first appellant no longer  challenges  the  findings  of
    fact made by the First-tier Tribunal, the appeals  of  the  second  and
    third appellants must inevitably fall to be dismissed.

12. Further,  and  in  any  event,  assuming  that  the  second  and  third
    appellants are still challenging the findings of fact made by the First-
    tier Tribunal I consider that there is no merit in the grounds.

13. The report of Dr  Bell  was  written  in  2015  long  after  the  first
    appellant had ceased employment be that either  in  1983  or  in  1995.
    Even  allowing  for  the  diagnosis  that  the  first   appellant   has
    significant difficulties and is  undoubtedly  a  vulnerable  adult,  it
    nonetheless  remained  for  the  appellants  to  show  that  the  first
    appellant's  employment  had  ceased  owing  to  permanent  incapacity.
    Whilst it is evident that the first appellant ceased to  work  in  1983
    and that this is shown by some of the documentary evidence to which the
    judge refers, it was open to the judge to conclude  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that this had occurred as a result of  permanent  incapacity.
    She was entitled to reach that decision on the basis  of  the  evidence
    and the reasons for doing so are adequate and  sustainable.   They  are
    not, contrary to the grounds, based  entirely  on  the  reliability  or
    otherwise of the first appellant's evidence.  Of particular note is the
    absence of any indication  in  the  letter  of  the  first  appellant's
    manager until 1983 that the first appellant had  ended  her  employment
    due to incapacity.

14. Similarly, with regard to the claimed employment between 1990 and 1995,
    Dr Campbell's evidence is not relevant to the  evidence  of  the  first
    appellant's sister which was that she had worked for one or  two  hours
    three or four days a week, hand not been paid wages and had  paid  from
    her own money.  It does not explain either the  inconsistency  in  Miss
    Crawford's evidence [16].

15. Accordingly I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to conclude that
    he was not satisfied that the first appellant had ceased work owing  to
    permanent incapacity  in  1983.  Further,  and  in  any  event,  it  is
    difficult to note how the work in 1990 to 1995 could  be  construed  as
    work which was effective.

16. Accordingly, for these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law  with
    respect to the appeals of the second and third appellants.  I therefore
    uphold these decisions.

Summary of Conclusions

1.   The appeal of the first appellant is withdrawn.  The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in respect of her appeal therefore stands.

2.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal insofar as in relation  to  the
    second and third appellants did not involve the making of an  error  of
    law and I uphold them.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

3.   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date     18 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

