
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04051/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 April 2015                              |On 5 May 2015                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           evelyn tenolete fermin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Shamsazzoha

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The appeal before us was on behalf of the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department (hereinafter referred to as "the Secretary of  State").
    The respondent is hereinafter referred to as "the applicant".

2.   The appeal by the Secretary of State was made  against  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 11 November 2014.

Background

3.   The applicant is a national of the Philippines where she  was  born  on
    10 March 1977.  She entered the United Kingdom on 13 October 2010  with
    leave as a student.  The leave was extended on 2 August  2011  until  2
    October 2013.  By way of a Tier 4 (General) application form  dated  19
    December 2013 the applicant applied for further leave to  continue  her
    studies.

4.   On 31 December 2013 the application was  refused  and  a  decision  was
    made to remove the applicant to the Philippines by  way  of  directions
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

5.   The Secretary of State's reasons for refusal were set out in  a  letter
    dated 31 December 2013 and were these:  the applicant  had  claimed  30
    points  under  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  a   valid
    confirmation of acceptance  for  studies  (CAS)  but  in  fact  no  CAS
    reference number had been  submitted  with  the  application.   As  the
    necessary points could not be awarded in consequence she could  not  be
    awarded points for maintenance.  She could not  therefore  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for this  PBS  category  and  the
    application was refused under  paragraph  245XZ(c)  with  reference  to
    paragraph 115A of Appendix A and paragraph 245XZ(d) of the  Immigration
    Rules.

6.   By notice of appeal dated 15  January  2014,  the  applicant  contended
    that  the  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the
    Immigration Rules  and  asserted  that  her  application  met  all  the
    requirements.  This also contended on her behalf that the Secretary  of
    State had not applied common law fairness to  the  decision  given  the
    circumstances prevailing at  the  time.   The  decision  therefore  was
    unlawful given  its  impact  on  the  appellant's  Article  8  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) rights.

The Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal

7.   In the proceedings before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  evidence  and
    submissions  were  directed  to  a  very  narrow  issue,  namely:   the
    applicant's failure  to  provide  a  valid  CAS  at  the  time  of  the
    application or, more precisely, within 60 days of  a  letter  dated  18
    October 2013 which was contended by the Secretary of State had notified
    the applicant of the invalidity of her CAS.  The foregoing was the sole
    basis for the Secretary of State's refusal.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal found on this narrow issue as  follows:   there
    had been no such notification to the applicant.  On the basis  of  this
    finding the First-tier Tribunal went on to say this at paragraph 17  of
    its determination:

    "Given the Appellant meets all the other criteria of the Rules and  now
    has a valid CAS I allow the appeal".

Procedure following upon the First-tier's decision

9.   The Secretary of State sought leave to appeal against this decision  on
two grounds.

    The first of these grounds was this:   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the applicant did not receive the letter  from  the  Secretary  of
    State of 18 October 2013.  It was asserted that this finding failed  to
    take into account the following factors:


    "a)  The Appellant was still in contact with the college through  until
        late 2013, indeed she attended the college in the 'Christmas  week'
        ... to try and  find  out  what  was  happening  with  the  college
        licence.
    b)   the Appellant was  sent  with  the  letter  in  October  2013  the
        valuable documents submitted with the  application,  including  for
        instance her endorsed passport.  Presumably this passport was  used
        in order to sit the English language test ... required by  her  new
        college, therefore she would have received the letter from the SSHD
        when the passport was retuned [sic]".


    On the basis of the above it was asserted  that  the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to take into  account  material  matters  in
    determining whether the applicant did in fact receive the letter.


    The second ground of appeal was this:


    In any event, the First-tier Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, and this was an outcome which it could not  properly
    come to.  In  elaboration  of  this  ground  it  was  argued  that  the
    applicant did not have a valid CAS at the date of  the  application  or
    decision.  The CAS in existence now, having  been  issued  sometime  in
    January 2014 post-dated that of  the  decision  of  31  December  2013.
    Accordingly it was argued that the only outcome on  the  findings  made
    was that the decision was otherwise not in accordance with the law.

10.  Permission to appeal was refused on the first  ground  and  granted  on
    the second ground.

At the hearing before this Tribunal

11.  At the outset of the hearing Mr Clarke on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State made an oral motion seeking leave to amend the grounds of  appeal
    by seeking to add a further ground of appeal to this effect:  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had  failed  to  take  into  account  all  material
    matters in that it had failed to take account of the  answer  given  by
    the applicant to question F2 in the Tier 4 (General)  application  form
    which was in the following terms:

    "Please explain how you lost your passport:


    Have been retained by the Home Office and given  60  days  to  reapply.
Please see attached."

12.  This motion was opposed on behalf of the applicant on  the  basis  that
it came too late.

13.  We refused the motion.  We were clearly of the view  that  this  motion
    came too late.  The applicant's  representative  had  had  no  previous
    intimation of this motion.  He first became aware of it on the  morning
    of the hearing before us.   There  were  clearly  difficulties  in  his
    seeking to answer this point where he had been given no notice that  it
    was to be raised.  Moreover,  we  were  unable  to  identify  any  good
    reasons why this ground of appeal had not been  raised  at  an  earlier
    stage.  In particular we could not see why, when leave  to  appeal  was
    sought, this matter had not been raised.  Given the foregoing we  could
    see no basis upon which we could properly grant Mr Clarke's motion.

14.  With respect to the second  ground  of  appeal  the  applicant's  legal
    representative accepted that the applicant did not have a valid CAS  as
    at the date of the decision.  Beyond that he accepted that it  followed
    that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in allowing  the  appeal.
    It was his position that given the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the appropriate course  would  have  been  to  find  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and
    thereafter  to  remit  to  the   Secretary   of   State   for   further
    consideration.

15.  We agree that the second ground of appeal is well-founded.

Decision

16.  For the foregoing reasons we allow the appeal and remit the  matter  to
    the Secretary of State for further consideration.

17.  We make no anonymity direction.






Signed                                  Date



Lord Bannantyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
