
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04021/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 July 2016                      |On 06 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS ALFIYA VEJLANI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit of Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal  Wyman  allowing  an  appeal  by  Ms  Alfiya
    Vejlani (hereinafter referred to as "the applicant").

 2) The applicant was born on 22  September  1980  and  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  She appeals against a decision of 12  January  2015  by  the
    Secretary of State refusing her leave to remain.  The refusal was under
    paragraph 322(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  basis  that  the
    applicant was seeking a variation of leave to enter  or  remain  for  a
    purpose not covered by the Rules.

 3) The applicant's immigration history is set out in the decision  of  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  The applicant entered the  UK  as  a
    student in April 2011 with leave until 30 October 2014.  On 29  October
    2014 she made an application for leave outside the  Immigration  Rules,
    which has led to the present appeal.  She made her application  outside
    the Rules because although she wanted to continue her studies  she  did
    not have a Certificate of Acceptance of Studies (CAS).

 4) In response to the application the Secretary of State  noted  that  the
    applicant's leave to enter had previously been curtailed and expired on
    15 June 2013.  The applicant stated that she never received a letter of
    curtailment, which would have given her 60 days to obtain another  CAS.
    At the time she made her application on 29  October  2014  she  thought
    that her leave was still valid.

 5) Following the issuing of a pre-action protocol letter the Secretary  of
    State acknowledged that service  of  the  curtailment  letter  was  not
    effective as there was no proof of delivery.   The  application  of  29
    October 2014 was therefore in time and attracted  a  right  of  appeal.
    This right  of  appeal  was,  according  to  the  Secretary  of  State,
    restricted by section 88 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 because the refusal decision was taken on  the  grounds  that  the
    applicant was seeking to remain in the UK for a purpose other than  one
    for which entry or remaining  was  permitted  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  The grounds of appeal were limited to either racial
    discrimination, human rights or asylum.

 6) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the applicant  never
    knew that her leave to enter had been curtailed.  She had continued  to
    study and obtained further qualifications on 7 August  2014.   Had  the
    applicant received the letter  of  curtailment,  she  would  have  been
    allowed 60 days to obtain a new CAS.  Because she did not  receive  the
    curtailment letter, she did not  have  the  opportunity  of  trying  to
    obtain a new CAS.  She had applied for leave to remain  for  a  purpose
    other than one permitted under the Immigration Rules because  this  was
    the only step open to her.  She had no opportunity to apply for a  Tier
    4 visa because she did not have a valid CAS.

 7) In the view of the judge the correct procedure would be  for  the  Home
    Office to issue the applicant with  a  60  day  letter  to  enable  the
    applicant to apply for a new CAS, which would then enable her to make a
    Tier 4 application.  If during the 60 day period she did not  take  any
    steps to apply for a CAS then she would have no option but to return to
    Pakistan.  The judge did not allow the appeal outright but gave as  the
    decision that the Secretary of State should issue to the  applicant  "a
    60 day letter" to enable her to obtain a new CAS.

 8) The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The first ground of the application was that  the  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal had given  no  legal  basis  or  reasoning  for
    allowing the appeal but had instead given a direction to the  Secretary
    of State that leave should be granted.  It was not for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to direct the Secretary of State as  to  what  type  of  leave
    ought to be granted.  The First-tier Tribunal had only the powers given
    to it by statue.

 9) In any event, the applicant was not entitled to 60 days  leave  on  the
    common law basis of fairness, as discussed in the case of Patel  [2011]
    UKUT 211.  The original leave was due to expire in October 2014.   When
    the application was made on 29 October 2014 the applicant had  no  CAS.
    As the applicant claimed she never received the curtailment  letter  of
    April 2013 giving her only 60 days leave, how was she prejudiced?   Her
    leave continued to run until its original expiry  date  of  30  October
    2014.  At the end of this time she still had not obtained a  valid  CAS
    but as her leave had continued to run she was at liberty to obtain  one
    if she had wished to do so.

10) The Secretary of State further observed that the  leave  was  curtailed
    not because the college's licence had  been  revoked  but  because  the
    applicant agreed with the college to leave and  stop  the  sponsorship.
    As the applicant left the college,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    obliged to give  the  applicant  60  days  to  seek  a  new  CAS.   The
    responsibility for the cessation of studies was not on the Secretary of
    State.  Reference was made to the case of EK (Ivory Coast) [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1517.

11) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge had erred in law by allowing  the  appeal  on  a  ground  not
    contained within section 84 of the 2002 Act, either  in  its  unamended
    form or following amendment by the Immigration Act 2015.  It  was  also
    arguable that the applicant was not entitled to 60 days' leave  as  her
    original leave was curtailed not because the college's licence had been
    revoked but because the applicant had agreed to stop studying  at  that
    college.

12) No rule 24 notice was lodged on behalf of the applicant but a  skeleton
    argument was lodged by Mr Muquit prior to the hearing.

Submissions

13) At the hearing, Mr Avery, on behalf of the Secretary of State, began by
    acknowledging that the curtailment was not effective because the notice
    of curtailment was not effectively served.  It was, however,  difficult
    to say what the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  decided.   The  judge
    had no power to make the direction which  was  purportedly  made.   The
    judge had not effectively resolved  the  appeal.   As  the  applicant's
    leave was not curtailed, she did not fall within the  policy  of  being
    granted 60 days to find a new CAS.  The common law duty of fairness  on
    which this was based did not apply.  There was no basis in law for  the
    judge's decision.

14) For the applicant, Mr Muquit, relied on his written  submissions.   The
    judge had jurisdiction under the statutory provisions in force prior to
    the Immigration Act 2014 on the basis that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The  facts  were  as
    accepted by the judge.  The judge  may  have  made  a  mistake  by  not
    specifying that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

15) Mr Muquit  further  submitted  that  it  had  been  accepted  that  the
    applicant did not receive the curtailment  decision.   Her  application
    for leave was therefore made in time.  Mr Muquit acknowledged that  the
    applicant was unable to satisfy the terms of the  Rules  for  making  a
    Tier 4 application as she did not have a CAS but she nevertheless  made
    her application for a purpose which was recognised by the Rules,  which
    was to continue her studies.  The application had been refused  because
    it was not for a purpose covered by the Rules but this  was  a  mistake
    made by the Secretary of State and rendered the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision not in accordance with  the  law.   The  application  remained
    before the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a  correct  decision.   The
    applicant had applied for further leave to remain in order to seek time
    to obtain a CAS.  The applicant had made efforts to obtain a CAS.   The
    Secretary of State refused further leave and exercised no discretion in
    favour of the applicant because she  had  no  CAS,  but  the  applicant
    wanted a period in which to obtain a CAS.  She was a bona fide student.
     Her original college had closed and without  leave  for  60  days  she
    could not obtain a further college place.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    decision was based on incorrect facts, having assumed that  curtailment
    was effective and the application was made for a  purpose  outside  the
    Rules.  A decision had still to be made in accordance with  the  Rules.
    The Secretary of State had still to make a proper decision.

16) In response Mr Avery pointed out that the judge did not  say  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the  law.   To
    this extent the judge did not  deal  with  the  appeal  properly.   The
    application had been doomed to fail because there was no  provision  in
    the Immigration Rules to extend a person's stay in order  to  obtain  a
    CAS.  There was therefore no basis to remain under  the  Rules  and  no
    basis on which the  judge  could  have  allowed  the  appeal.   If  the
    applicant had a case exceptionally outside the Rules then she could re-
    apply.  On the present application, however, the judge could  not  find
    in her favour.

Discussion

17) In  his  written  submissions  Mr  Muquit  sought  to  argue  that  the
    application of 29 October 2014 was made for the purpose  of  continuing
    the  applicant's  studies,  which  was  a  purpose  recognised  by  the
    Immigration Rules, and that the applicant had a right of  appeal  under
    the provisions in force prior to the Immigration Act 2014.   Mr  Muquit
    pointed  out  that  the  Immigration  Act  2014   (Commencement   No.3,
    Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/2771) took away
    the right of appeal in respect of applications for leave as  a  Tier  4
    Migrant made on or after  20  October  2014.   Mr  Muquit  nevertheless
    submitted that the  applicant  was  not  caught  by  this  commencement
    provision.

18) I am unable to accept Mr Muquit's argument on this point.   Either  the
    applicant was making an application on 29 October 2014 to continue  her
    studies under the Rules, which would have been as a Tier 4 Migrant  and
    therefore  she  would  have  had  no  right  of  appeal  in  terms   of
    Commencement Order No.3, or  she  was  not  applying  to  continue  her
    studies and therefore she was applying for a purpose not covered by the
    Rules.  This would mean that her right of appeal was not taken away  by
    the Commencement Order.  According to the Secretary of State  it  would
    also mean that her right of appeal was restricted by section 88 of  the
    2002 Act but this provision was itself repealed  with  effect  from  20
    October 2014 and therefore no longer had any application (2014 Act, Sch
    9, Pt 4, para 37 and Commencement Order No. 3, article 2(e)).

19) The judge did not state explicitly that the appeal was allowed on human
    rights grounds; neither did the judge did allow the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.   The  judge  merely  sought  to  make  a  direction
    requiring the Secretary of State to give the  applicant  leave  for  60
    days to obtain a new CAS.  The basis in law for the judge's decision is
    obscure to say the least.

20) At the hearing before me Mr Muquit sought to  argue  that  the  judge's
    decision was effectively that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    was not in accordance with the law but this is not expressly stated  by
    the judge and there is  no  reasoning  sufficient  to  support  such  a
    decision.

21) As Mr Avery submitted, the Secretary of State's policy,  in  accordance
    with the principle of common law fairness, as discussed in the decision
    in Patel, requires the Secretary of State only to give a period  of  60
    days to seek a new CAS only when the licence of the sponsoring  college
    has been revoked.  This policy did not apply in the present case, where
    the applicant  left  the  sponsoring  college  voluntarily  and  where,
    although her leave might have  been  curtailed,  it  was  not  in  fact
    curtailed  because  her  service  was  not  effective.   The  applicant
    therefore had the full period of her original leave in which to  obtain
    a new CAS and notify the Secretary of State of the change  of  college.
    For some reason when the applicant's leave was due to  expire  she  did
    not have a  CAS  and  therefore  she  was  unable  to  make  a  Tier  4
    application as a student and she could not make an application for  any
    other purpose recognised by the  Immigration  Rules.   Her  appeal  was
    therefore bound to fail.

22) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by  not  setting  out
    adequate reasons for allowing or  dismissing  the  appeal  and  by  not
    giving a decision as to whether the appeal was  allowed  or  dismissed.
    The judge further erred by seeking to make a direction which the  judge
    had no jurisdiction to make without some  proper  justification,  which
    was entirely lacking from the decision.

23) On the facts of this appeal, there is only one decision which the judge
    could have made, which was to dismiss the appeal.  As Mr Avery  pointed
    out, if the applicant had some compelling reason to remain outside  the
    Rules, then she could make a further application on that basis.   There
    is nothing in the grounds of appeal either to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    or in the submissions before the Upper Tribunal to show that there  are
    such compelling circumstances.

Conclusions

24) The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

25) The decision is set aside.

26) The decision in the appeal is re-made by dismissing the appeal.



Anonymity

27) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   I  have
    not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason  of  substance
    for doing so.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
