
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/04210/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3rd May 2016                           |  On 6th June 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |FAIZUDDIN SYED                                    |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|           |                                                  |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|       |THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT         |           |
|       |                                                       |Respondent |

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chowdhury of PGA Solicitors.
For the  Respondent:     Ms  J  Isherwood,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




Introduction and background facts:


 1. The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Boardman who, following a  hearing  on
    17 August 2015, dismissed his appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  8
    September 2015 against a decision of the respondent of 14 January  2015
    by which the respondent refused his application of 3 January  2014  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) student.

 2. Prior to his application of 3 January  2014,  the  appellant  had  been
    granted leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant until 10  January  2014.
    Since his application was made in time, his leave  was  extended  under
    s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971 when he made his application.

 3. With his application of 3  January  2014,  the  appellant  submitted  a
    "confirmation of acceptance for studies" ("CAS") issued by London  West
    Valley College ("LWVC") with reference number E4G7XN6D14W0J2.

 4. In the respondent's decision of 14 January 2015, it is stated that  the
    college had confirmed in writing that it had  withdrawn  the  offer  of
    sponsorship and were no  longer  willing  to  sponsor  the  appellant's
    studies. The precise wording in the decision letter was as follows:

            "... Your sponsor has confirmed in writing to  UKV&I  that  they
             have withdrawn the offer  of  sponsorship  and  are  no  longer
             willing to sponsor your studies....

 5. The respondent therefore considered that the appellant did not  have  a
    valid CAS and therefore did not meet the requirements of para 116(c) of
    Appendix A of the Statement of Changes in the Immigration Rules HC  395
    (as amended) (hereafter referred to collectively  as  the  "Rules"  and
    individually  as  a  "Rule").  The  respondent  therefore  awarded  the
    appellant no points in respect of his CAS. Given that it was  necessary
    for him to be awarded 30 points for a  CAS,  the  respondent  concluded
    that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  para  245ZX(c)  of
    the Rules.

The judge's decision

 6. Before the judge, it was accepted on behalf of the respondent that,  if
    the licence of LWVC  had  been  revoked,  the  respondent  should  have
    granted the appellant 60 days' leave in order to  enable  him  to  find
    another sponsor pursuant to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Patel
    (revocation of sponsor licence -  fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT  00211
    (IAC). It was accepted  on  the  respondent's  behalf  that,  in  these
    circumstances, the appellant's appeal should be allowed to the  limited
    extent that the respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    law. If, on the other hand, the judge decided that LWVC  had  withdrawn
    the CAS, it was submitted on the respondent's  behalf  that  no  60-day
    letter was appropriate because the college could have withdrawn the CAS
    for a number of reasons.

 7. Accordingly, the factual dispute between the parties before  the  judge
    was whether the appellant's CAS was cancelled or withdrawn  only  as  a
    result of LWVC having  had  its  licence  revoked  or  whether  it  was
    withdrawn for other reasons.

 8. The evidence before the judge may be summarised as follows:

    i).     There was no evidence from the respondent  as  to  whether  the
        confirmation said in the decision letter to be  "in  writing"  from
        LWVC comprised of a letter or document or whether it  consisted  of
        an entry in the database that was  then  checked  by  the  decision
        maker before making a decision.

    ii).    The judge had evidence from the appellant, both oral and  in  a
        witness statement, that his CAS was cancelled only  because  LWVC's
        licence was revoked and there were no other  reasons.  He  did  not
        produce supporting evidence from LWVC.

    iii).   The appellant said that  he  started  his  course  at  LWVC  in
        November 2013. He attended classes at the college but a month after
        he started his classes, the respondent suspended the licence of the
        college. The college then said that they were dealing with problems
        with their licence and would let him know  when  the  problems  had
        been resolved. He phoned them but they told him to wait  for  their
        call. In May 2014, he went to the college and discovered  that  the
        college's licence had been revoked. He had heard nothing from  them
        in the meantime. He had paid fees to the college. When he found out
        in May 2014 that the licence of the college had  been  revoked,  he
        asked the college for a letter to help him find another college. He
        also asked for his fees back. He did not do anything else  to  find
        another sponsor because he was waiting to  receive  his  fees  back
        from the college.

    iv).    When the licence of the college was revoked, the  college  told
        the appellant that the respondent would send him a 60-day letter to
        enable him to find another sponsor. He was  waiting  for  a  letter
        from  the  respondent  but  instead  the  respondent  refused   his
        application.

    v).     The appellant gave evidence that the campus of the college  was
        closed after June 2014. When he went to the campus, it  was  locked
        most of the time. On some occasions, the receptionist told him that
        "there was not any concerned person to answer my query".

    vi).    Since coming to the United Kingdom, he has twice been a  victim
        of the respondent revoking the licences of  his  sponsors.  He  has
        lost a substantial amount of money.

 9. The judge decided that it was for the appellant to produce evidence  to
    show that his CAS was cancelled due to the revocation of the licence of
    LWVC. He said that the appellant had been on notice  since  receipt  of
    the refusal letter that the respondent's case was that the CAS had been
    withdrawn and had not produced evidence to support  his  case.  On  the
    other hand, according to the refusal letter, the  appellant's  CAS  had
    been withdrawn by LWVC. On this basis, he found that the appellant  did
    not have a CAS and therefore that he did not meet the  requirements  of
    the Rules.

The grounds and the grant of permission

10. In essence, the grounds contend that the judge had failed to take  into
    account "the principle of fairness". The respondent had contended  that
    the appellant's CAS was withdrawn but failed to state when the CAS  was
    checked and failed to produce evidence that the CAS had been withdrawn.



11. In granting permission, Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker
    observed that, whilst the refusal letter refers to the  college  having
    confirmed in writing that the appellant's CAS had been withdrawn, there
    appeared to be no such letter  on  file  nor  was  there   anything  to
    suggest that the letter had been served on the appellant. Judge  Zucker
    observed that, whilst the  legal  burden  was  on  the  appellant,  the
    respondent arguably had an evidential burden  to  produce  the  letter,
    "the better to enable the appellant to present his appeal" and that, in
    the circumstances, it was arguable that there was unfairness.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal prior to 3 May 2016

12. This appeal was first listed for hearing on 29 March 2016 before Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Symes. The respondent's representative,  with  the
    support of the appellant,  requested  an  adjournment  to  provide  the
    respondent with a further opportunity to  investigate  the  true  basis
    upon which the appellant's CAS was found  to  be  flawed.  Judge  Symes
    adjourned the hearing, and directed the respondent to  file  and  serve
    any further evidence in her possession relevant to the circumstances in
    which the appellant's CAS was found to be inadequate by  the  decision-
    maker.

The hearing on 3 May 2016

13. Ms Isherwood informed me that,  despite  her  best  efforts  to  obtain
    evidence to comply with the directions issued by Judge Symes, she could
    not locate any such evidence. She informed me that it is  not  possible
    for the respondent to comply with the directions.  There  was  no  such
    evidence available now, even if it had been available at  the  date  of
    the decision.

14. Ms Isherwood submitted that the judge  was  entitled  to  find  on  the
    evidence that the appellant  had  not  established  that  his  CAS  was
    cancelled because the college had lost its licence.

15. I then announced my decision  that  I  was  satisfied  that  the  Judge
    Boardman had materially erred in law and that his  decision  should  be
    set aside. I therefore set his decision aside. My reasons are given  at
    para 24 below.

16. In relation to the re-making of the decision on the appellant's appeal,
    Mr Chowdhury informed me that the appellant did not wish to  give  oral
    evidence.

17. I therefore proceeded to hear submissions  from  Mr  Chowdhury  and  Ms
    Isherwood.

18. Mr Chowdhury relied upon a letter from UK Visas and Immigration to LWVC
    dated 2 April 2014 in connection with its responsibility of supervising
    the licence of the college. The letter dealt with representations  made
    on behalf of LWVC in response to an invitation by the respondent to  do
    so after upon informing LWVC on 24 December 2013 that its  licence  was
    suspended.

19. Mr Chowdhury also produced an extract of the respondent's  guidance  to
    sponsor-institutions. He relied upon para 478 of the version  in  force
    as at December 2013 which stated:

            "478.      You can withdraw a CAS that you have  assigned  to  a
                  student if they have  not  yet  used  it  to  support  an
                  application for a visa or an extension of stay. You  must
                  do this using the SMS."

20. Mr Chowdhury submitted that the terms of the applicable guidance as  at
    the date of the decision made it clear that a college may only withdraw
    a CAS letter that has been assigned to a student if the student has not
    used the CAS letter  to  support  an  application  for  a  visa  or  an
    extension of a stay. He submitted that it follows that LWVC  could  not
    have withdrawn the appellant's CAS, as he had used  it  to  support  an
    application for an extension of his stay.

21. Ms Isherwood submitted that the appellant had had ample opportunity  to
    produce evidence that his CAS was withdrawn only because LWVC's licence
    was revoked. He had had ample opportunity between May 2014 when, on his
    evidence, the licence of the college was revoked, and 14  January  2015
    when the  respondent's  decision  was  made,  to  obtain  another  CAS.
    However, she also accepted that,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's leave was extended under s.3C of the Immigration Act  1971,
    he could not have obtained another CAS from another college in reliance
    upon the fact that his leave had been extended under s.3C and  that  he
    needed to have a "60-day  letter"  in  order  to  obtain  another  CAS.
    Nevertheless, she asked me to dismiss the appeal on the basis  that  he
    could have written to the respondent to request a "60-day  letter"  but
    failed to do so.

22. Although I had given both Mr Chowdhury and Ms Isherwood copies  of  the
    judgments of the Court of Appeal in EK (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA
    Civ 1517 and R (Raza) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 36 at the commencement  of
    the hearing before me, neither party addressed me on the judgments.

23. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

24. The following  are  my  reasons  for  concluding  that  Judge  Boardman
    materially erred in law:

    i)      I am grateful to Ms Isherwood who had obviously tried very hard
        to obtain evidence to comply with the directions of Judge Symes. It
        may well be that, as at the date on which she attempted  to  obtain
        the evidence, it was no longer in  existence.  Nonetheless,  it  is
        clear that the decision maker had some evidence "in  writing".  The
        decision letter did not state that it had come to  light  that  the
        CAS had been withdrawn when the relevant database was checked.

    ii)     Since the decision maker had  evidence  "in  writing",  it  was
        unfair for the judge to proceed to  determine  the  appeal  without
        making some attempt to ensure that the written  evidence  that  was
        before the decision maker was served on the appellant to enable him
        to present his appeal. In  the  particular  circumstances  of  this
        case, it was unfair not to do so, given that: (a) the  respondent's
        assertion as to the contents of the  written  evidence  before  the
        decision maker did not, of itself,  amount  to  evidence;  and  (b)
        nevertheless,  and  notwithstanding  that  the  statement  in   the
        decision letter that the withdrawal of the CAS had  been  confirmed
        in writing did not amount to evidence, it was regarded by the judge
        as determinative of the appeal.

25. I therefore proceed to re-make the decision on the appellant's appeal.

26. In my judgement, Mr Chowdhury's reliance upon the letter from UK  Visas
    and Immigration to LWVC dated 2 April 2014  was  misconceived.  In  the
    first place, this risked opening up satellite issues  relating  to  the
    procedures  in  place  for  the  supervision  of  sponsor-institutions.
    Secondly, and in any event, I could not see  anything  in  this  letter
    which is relevant to the appellant's appeal.

27. In relation to  Mr  Chowdhury's  reliance  upon  the  extracts  of  the
    guidance to sponsors, I am not prepared to accept that the extracts  of
    the version of the guidance in  place  at  the  date  of  the  decision
    suffices to demonstrate that LWVC did not withdraw the appellant's  CAS
    for reasons unconnected with the revocation  of  his  licence.  In  any
    event, for the reasons given below, even if it is  the  case  that  the
    appellant's CAS was withdrawn only because LWVC's licence was  revoked,
    this makes no difference to the outcome, for the reasons given at paras
    38-43 below.

28. It is now known that the written evidence that the appellant's CAS  was
    withdrawn by LWVC either does not exist any  longer  or  it  cannot  be
    located. However, this does not  make  a  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal for reasons which I will now give.

29. Essentially, the appellant's case is that: (i) his CAS was withdrawn by
    LWVC only because its licence was revoked and for no other reason; (ii)
    accordingly, the 'principle' in Patel (revocation of sponsor licence  -
    fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC) (Blake J and Mr Batiste,  Judge
    of the Upper Tribunal)  applies  by  analogy;  (iii)  accordingly,  the
    respondent's failure to grant him 60 days' leave in order to enable him
    to vary his application by finding another sponsor was in breach of the
    general public  law  duty  of  fairness;  and  (iv)  her  decision  was
    therefore not in accordance with the law, a ground of appeal  that  was
    included in his Notice of appeal.

30. Paras (2), (3) and (6) of the head note of Patel, read as follows:


          "(2)    Where a sponsor licence has been revoked by the  Secretary
             of state during an application for variation of leave and  the
             applicant is both unaware of the revocation and not  party  to
             any reason why the licence has been revoked, the Secretary  of
             State should afford an applicant a reasonable  opportunity  to
             vary the application by identifying a new sponsor  before  the
             application is determined.


          (3)     It would  be  unfair  to  refuse  an  application  without
             opportunity being given to vary it under  s.3C(5)  Immigration
             Act 1971.


          (6)     By analogy with the present UKBA policy on curtailment of
             leave where a sponsor licence is revoked a 60 day period to
             amend the application would provide such a fair opportunity."

31. Paras 22-26 of the judgment in Patel, which are also relevant, read:


         "22.    Where the applicant is both innocent of any practice  that
             led to loss of the sponsorship status and ignorant of the fact
             of such loss of  status,  it  seems  to  us  that  common  law
             fairness and the principle of treating applicants equally mean
             that each should have  an  equal  opportunity  to  vary  their
             application by affording them a reasonable time with which  to
             find a substitute college on which to base  their  application
             for an extension of stay to obtain the relevant qualification.
             In the curtailment cases, express Home  Office  policy  is  to
             afford sixty days for such application to be made.


         23.     Although we accept  that  there  is  no  such  policy  for
             refusal cases, fairness requires that such cases be treated in
             broadly the same way. The applicant must  be  given  an  equal
             opportunity before refusal of application to amend it  in  the
             way we have described. This was clearly not done in this case.
             The Home Office knew that it  had  suspended  the  college  in
             January 2010 but no one else did. The applicant could not have
             known that subsequently the college's status  as  an  approved
             sponsor was revoked before his application for an extension of
             stay was decided.


         24.     It is obviously unfair  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
             revoke the college's status after  the  application  has  been
             made when it was an approved sponsor and  not  to  inform  the
             applicant of such revocation and not afford him an opportunity
             to vary the application.


         25.     None of this applies where the applicant has  not  been  a
             bona fide student at the college where he is seeking to extend
             his stay, or where he has participated in the  practices  that
             may have led the college to lose its  sponsorship  status,  or
             where he has had actual knowledge of the  cessation  that  the
             termination of the college's status as a sponsor either before
             the application for an extension of stay was made  or  shortly
             thereafter and when he had adequate opportunity to  amend  the
             application by seeking to substitute an approved  college  for
             an unapproved one."

32. Although I handed to the parties copies of the judgments of  the  Court
    of Appeal in EK (Ivory Coast) and R (Raza), neither Mr Chowdhury nor Ms
    Isherwood addressed me on the judgments.

33. In R (Raza), the Court of Appeal considered a challenge by on behalf of
    the Secretary of State to the correctness of the guidance of the  Upper
    Tribunal in Patel. I draw from paras 28-38, in particular paras  37-38,
    of R (Raza) that Patel remains good law; it has not been  overruled  by
    the judgment in EK (Ivory Coast).

34. However, although I have considerable sympathy for the appellant, Patel
    cannot assist him. Even if he is correct in stating that  his  CAS  was
    only withdrawn because LWVC's licence had been withdrawn  and  even  if
    Patel can be extended to include a person whose CAS has been  withdrawn
    as opposed to a person whose sponsor has had its  licence  revoked  (an
    issue I do not need to decide), it is plain that he knew in May 2014  -
    over 7 months before the respondent's decision in January 2015  -  that
    the LWVC's licence  had  been  withdrawn.  He  therefore  cannot  bring
    himself within para 22 and head note (2) of Patel.

35. Although I acknowledge that Ms Isherwood accepted before  me  that  the
    appellant could not have obtained a CAS without a  "60-day"  letter,  I
    have a concern as to whether this concession was correctly made,  given
    that para 3 of the judgment in R (Raza) shows that the claimant in that
    case was able to obtain a CAS at a time when he had no leave at all.

36. Even if I am  wrong  and  the  concession  made  by  Ms  Isherwood  was
    correctly made, it is a fact-specific issue  whether  the  respondent's
    failure to grant the appellant leave for 60 days was in breach  of  the
    general public law duty to act fairly. It is plain from the appellant's
    own evidence that he did nothing, from May 2014 onwards, when he  first
    knew that LWVC's licence was revoked. He admitted he had done  nothing.
    He did not make any attempt to obtain a CAS from another  sponsor.   If
    he had done so and if he had encountered difficulties  in  obtaining  a
    CAS without a letter from the respondent granting him leave,  he  could
    have written to the respondent to request that he be granted leave  for
    60 days.  For these reasons, Patel cannot assist the appellant.

37. However, there is another alternative reason why this  appeal  must  be
    dismissed, which I will now explain.

38. In EK (Ivory Coast), Sales LJ stressed  that  the  Points-Based  System
    (PBS) is intended to simplify the procedure for applying for  leave  to
    remain or remain in the United Kingdom for certain classes of  case  to
    enable the Secretary of State to process high volumes  of  applications
    in a  fair  and  reasonably  expeditious  manner,  according  to  clear
    objective criteria (para  28).  At  para  29,  Sales  LJ  endorsed  the
    observation of Sullivan LJ at para 45 of the judgment in  Alam  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWCA Civ 960  that:  "the  price  of  securing  consistency  and
    predictability is a lack of flexibility that may well result in  "hard"
    decisions in individual cases, but that  is  not  a  justification  for
    imposing  an  obligation  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  conduct  a
    preliminary  check  of  all  applications  to  see  whether  they   are
    accompanied by all of the specified documents, ..."

39. At para 31 of EK (Ivory Coast), Sales LJ said:


          "31.    This context informs the way in which the  general  public
             law duty of fairness operates in relation to the PBS. The duty
             supplements the PBS regime, but ought not  to  be  applied  in
             such a manner as to undermine its intended mode  of  operation
             in a substantial way. Application  of  the  duty  of  fairness
             should not result  in  the  public  benefits  associated  with
             having such a clear and predictable scheme operating according
             to objective criteria being placed in serious jeopardy."

40. In EK (Ivory Coast), the appellant's CAS was withdrawn by  her  college
    as a result of an administrative error.  She produced evidence to  that
    effect. It was her case that, pursuant to the general public  law  duty
    of fairness, the Secretary of State should have given her notice of the
    withdrawal of the CAS letter and postponed making any decision  on  her
    application in order to allow her an opportunity to correct  any  error
    which might have been made by the college or to  find  another  college
    which would issue her with a CAS letter.

41. At para 32, Sales LJ said:


         "32.    In my judgment, acceptance of the  Appellant's  submission
             that the general duty of fairness required  the  Secretary  of
             State to postpone making a  decision  on  her  application  in
             order to raise with her the cancellation  of  her  CAS  letter
             would  undermine  the  benefits  associated  with  PBS  in   a
             significant and inappropriate way. It may often  be  the  case
             that a CAS letter  is  withdrawn  between  the  filing  of  an
             application with the Secretary of State and the  making  of  a
             decision on that  application  for  reasons  to  do  with  the
             student (such as failing to attend the course  or  failing  to
             pay the tuition fees), and in relation to which it  would  not
             be appropriate to grant leave to enter or remain. There is  no
             way  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State  can  tell   whether
             withdrawal of a CAS letter reflects that  type  of  underlying
             situation or a situation in which  some  administrative  error
             has occurred on the part of the sponsoring  college  in  which
             the applicant is in no way implicated. It would be  a  serious
             intrusion upon the  intended  straightforward  and  relatively
             automatic operation of decision-making  by  the  Secretary  of
             State under the PBS if in every case of withdrawal  of  a  CAS
             letter she had to make inquiries and delay making a decision."

42. Although the appellant has attempted to bring himself within the  scope
    of Patel by stating that his CAS  was  withdrawn  only  because  LWVC's
    licence was revoked and for no other reason, his circumstances  are  in
    fact analogous to the circumstances  of  the  applicant  in  EK  (Ivory
    Coast). Acceptance of his submission that the general public  law  duty
    of fairness required the respondent to grant him a period of  60  days'
    leave would in fact have involved the respondent having to  investigate
    whether his CAS was withdrawn only because the licence of  the  college
    had been revoked or for other reasons. In effect,  she  would  have  to
    make enquiries in every case of withdrawal of a CAS  letter  and  delay
    making a decision.

43. I am satisfied that, in the words of Sales LJ,  this  "would  undermine
    the benefits associated with the PBS in a significant and inappropriate
    way" and "be a serious intrusion upon the intended straightforward  and
    relatively automatic operation of decision-making under the PBS".

44. Accordingly, I have concluded that  the  respondent's  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law. The  appellant  cannot  bring  himself  within
    Patel. In the alternative, the respondent did not act in breach of  the
    general public law duty to act fairly, pursuant to EK (Ivory Coast).

      Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it fell to be set aside. I set it aside.  I
    re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


[pic]



Signed                                             Date: 16 May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
