
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/04499/2015
      IA/04483/2015
      IA/04508/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Birmingham                               Decision Promulgated
On: 6th April 2018                                       On: 17th April
2018
|                            |                  |                           |
|                            |                  |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                    AMMO
                                    AFJO
                                    OBFO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:          Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are all nationals of Nigeria.   They are respectively  a
    father and his two minor children who  seek  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds.




    Anonymity Order


 2. There is no reason why the identity of the adult  Appellant  should  be
    protected. The case does however turn on the  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom of the two minor Appellants. I have had regard to  Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013:  Anonymity  Orders.  I  am  concerned  that
    identification of the adult Appellant could lead to  identification  of
    children involved and I therefore consider it appropriate  to  make  an
    order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellants  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



       Introduction


 3. This is now a matter with some considerable  history,  the  preliminary
    hearing in the present appeals having  been  heard  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as long ago as the 29th April 2015. The appeals were adjourned
    on several occasions before being dismissed, in a  determination  dated
    12th July 2016, by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J.W.H Law).


 4. The Appellants, whose cases were at that time linked to the  appeal  of
    their wife/mother EEIO (IA044882015), appealed to the Upper Tribunal.


 5. In a written decision dated the 6th July 2017, attached at Appendix  A,
    I found that at least one ground of appeal had been made out  and  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in its approach to  s117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. To that extent I set  the
    decision aside and indicated my intention to re-make the  decisions  in
    the linked appeals myself. I then made the following directions:

         "I note the unchallenged finding of fact by the First-tier Tribunal
         that both adults have lived in this country since 1997.  The  First
         Appellant gives his precise date of arrival as 10th  May  1997.  It
         appears to me that absent any 'suitability' issues he  prima  facie
         now qualifies for leave to remain  under  the  terms  of  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iii) of the rules:


           "(iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at  least  20  years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment);"


         I direct that the  Respondent  now  give  urgent  consideration  to
         whether AMMO should now be given leave to remain pursuant  to  this
         provision, taking into account the terms of paragraph 276AO of  the
         Rules:


           276AO. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the requirement
           to make a valid application will not apply when the Article 8
           claim is raised:


           (i) as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further
           submission in person after an asylum claim has been refused;


           (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention. A migrant in
           immigration detention or their representative must submit any
           application or claim raising Article 8 to a prison officer, a
           prisoner custody officer, a detainee custody officer or a member
           of Home Office staff at the migrant's place of detention; or


           (iii) in an appeal (subject to the consent of the Secretary of
           State where applicable).


         The Respondent is to advise the Tribunal in writing no  later  than
         4pm on the 4th August 2017 as to whether leave to remain is  to  be
         granted to AMMO on  the  basis  of  the  long  residence  provision
         currently in the rules at paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).


         The Appellants will have until 4pm  on  the  11th  August  2017  to
         advise whether they wish to pursue this appeal.


         Liberty to apply.


         Subject to the responses to my directions the matter  will  be  set
         down for rehearing in Birmingham on the  first  available  date  in
         September 2017".

 6. Regrettably that timetable was unduly optimistic on my part, since  for
    reasons unknown the tribunal administration did not send my decision to
    the parties until the 15th August 2017 and the appeal was not re-listed
    until the 7th March 2018.


 7. The Secretary of State's response to my directions was set  out  in  an
    email from SPO Mr Mills on the 13th September  2017.  The  contents  of
    that email can be summarised thus:

   i) The Respondent does not accept that either  of  the  adult  Appellants
      should  now  be  given  leave  to  remain  in   light   of   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iii);






  ii) The rule requires the applicant to have accrued 20 years residence  at
      the date of application. Notwithstanding what 276AO might  suggest  to
      the contrary, this requirement of the rule must be complied  with.  If
      the adult Appellants in this case wish  to  avail  themselves  of  the
      'long residence' provision in 276ADE(1)(iii) they need to  make  fresh
      applications;





 iii) In any case AMMO may  not  be  granted  leave  to  remain  under  that
      provision because he  has  two  criminal  convictions  such  that  the
      'suitability'  requirements  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  would  be
      engaged.






                 Sub-section (i) requires that the applicant "does not  fall
                 for refusal under any of the grounds in section  S-LTR  1.2
                 to S-LTR 2.3 and S-LTR 3.1".






                 S-LTR 1.6 states that an application will be refused where:






                   "The  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
                   conducive to  the  public  good  because  their  conduct
                   (including convictions which  do  not  fall  within  the
                   paragraphs S-LTR 1.3 to 1.5) character of  associations,
                   or other reasons, make it undesirable to allow  them  to
                   remain in the UK"






                 AMMO was convicted on the 9th  April  2010  of  an  offence
                 under the Fraud Act 2006  and  received  a  sentence  of  6
                 months in prison. On the 27th March 2012 he  was  convicted
                 of an offence under the Identity  Documents  Act  2010  and
                 received a  further  custodial  sentence  of  6  months  in
                 prison.






  iv) Mr Mills was of the view that these convictions, coupled  with  AMMO's
      "very  poor  immigration  history",  would  mean  that   leave   under
      276ADE(1)(iii) may well be refused.

 8. It was not possible to proceed with the hearing on the 7th  March  2018
    because until the hearing started, Mr Howard had been quite unaware  of
    the position articulated in Mr Mills email. Accordingly he needed  time
    to take instructions and respond to the matters raised.  His  right  to
    do so was particularly  acute  given  that  the  new  submissions  were
    expressly contrary to the Respondent's position in her  refusal  letter
    of the 13th January 2015 where it was accepted in respect of  all  four
    applicants that the 'suitability requirements' of the Rules  were  met.
    I therefore adjourned the appeals -  again  -  and  directed  that  the
    Respondent provide further details about the convictions themselves and
    the legal foundation of her new argument.  As for  the  appeal  of  Mrs
    EEIO, I severed it from the present proceedings and  indicated  that  a
    determination would be promulgated in due course, allowing  her  appeal
    on human rights grounds. On the unchallenged findings of fact  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal this woman has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 1997, and since it is agreed that  in  her  case  no  suitability
    requirements arise, I was satisfied, in  light  of  the  provisions  of
    276ADE(1)(iii), that the Secretary of State could not show her  removal
    to be proportionate.


 9. The hearing today is  therefore  to  finally  resolve  the  outstanding
    appeals of AMMO and his children. The following facts are agreed:


   i) AMMO has lived in the United Kingdom since May 1997 and so has accrued
      20 years and 11 months continuous residence.


  ii) On the 7th January 2013 AMMO was convicted of  two  criminal  offences
      arising from the same set of  circumstances.  He  was  caught  working
      illegally, and  had  used  someone  else's  passport  to  obtain  that
      employment.  He  was  convicted  of  one  count  of  making  a   false
      representation to make gain for self (working illegally) for which  he
      received a sentence of 6 months imprisonment. He was also convicted of
      one count of possessing a false identity documents  (using  the  false
      passport to gain employment) and for this he received a sentence of  a
      further 6 months in prison, to be served  concurrently.  He  served  a
      total of three months in prison before being released on licence.


 iii) Master OBFO was born in this country in November 2011. He has  accrued
      a period of continuous residence of 6 years and 5 months.


  iv) Miss AFJO was born in this country in October 2008. She has accrued  a
      period of continuous residence of 9 years and 6 months.


   v) EEIO, mother or the two  minors  and  wife  of  AMMO,  is  a  Nigerian
      national is without leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.  She  has  however
      succeeded in her appeal.


  vi) Neither child has  ever  been  to  Nigeria.  Both  are  in  full  time
      education in the UK.


    Discussion and Findings


10. The relevant parts of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules are as follows:
         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:
   i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR
      1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and


  ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
      private life in the UK; an


 iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years (discounting
      any period of imprisonment)


              ....
11. AMMO last made an application for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds in February 2012 when by any reckoning, he had not  accrued  20
    years continuous residence. Mr Mills points  to  that  prerequisite  to
    submit that this would preclude the Tribunal from allowing  the  appeal
    with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).


12. As I indicated in my earlier directions, I do  not  agree.   Under  the
    terms of paragraph 276AO it appears to  me  that  it  is  open  to  the
    Tribunal, on appeal, to dispense with the  requirement  that  a  formal
    application is made:
         276AO. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the requirement to
         make a valid application will not apply when the Article 8 claim is
         raised:
         (i) as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further submission
         in person after an asylum claim has been refused;
         (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention. A migrant in
         immigration detention or their representative must submit any
         application or claim raising Article 8 to a prison officer, a
         prisoner custody officer, a detainee custody officer or a member of
         Home Office staff at the migrant's place of detention; or
         (iii) in an appeal (subject to the consent of the Secretary of
         State where applicable).
13. Mr Mills argued forcefully that this provision did  not  apply  to  the
    temporal requirement in the opening  section  of  paragraph  276ADE(1);
    rather it only had the effect of removing the formal requirement at sub-
    paragraph (ii). What the point of that might  be  it  is  difficult  to
    discern.  It would mean that 276AO expressly removes the requirement to
    make an application in the  context  of  276ADE(1)(ii)  but  implicitly
    preserves that requirement in respect  of  the  Rule  overall.   If  an
    Article 8 claim such as this is only being 'raised' in the  context  of
    an appeal it would ordinarily be the case that it could not  have  been
    'raised' in the earlier application. If  Mr  Mills  is  correct  it  is
    difficult to see in  what  circumstances  rule  276AO  might  have  any
    utility at all.


14. It seems to me that a more  straightforward  way  of  interpreting  the
    provision is that where on appeal the case  has  developed  so  that  a
    prima facie Article 8 claim is now made out,    that is a  matter  that
    can be taken into consideration.  That is  consistent  with  the  'one-
    stop' approach to the appellate system.  It is also consistent with the
    wording in the amended version of s85 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002:


           Section 85


         (1)      An appeal under section 82(1) against the  decision  shall
             be treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).


         (2)      If an appellant under  section  82(1)  makes  a  statement
             under section 120, the  Tribunal  shall  consider  any  matter
             raised in a statement which constitutes a ground of appeal  of
             a kind listed in section 84 the decision appealed against.


         (3)      Subsection (2) applies to a statement made  under  section
             120 whether the statement was made before or after the  appeal
             was commenced.


         (4)      On an appeal under section 82(1) against  a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks  relevant  to
             the substance of the  decision,  including  a  matter  arising
             after the date of decision.


         (5)      But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the
             Secretary of Status has given the Tribunal consent to do so.


         (6)      A matter is a "new matter" if -


         (a)      it constitutes a ground of appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in
             section 84, and
         (b)      the Secretary of State has not previously  considered  the
             matter in the context of -


             (i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or
             (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120.

15. If the words in parenthesis at paragraph  276AO(iii)  "subject  to  the
    consent of the  Secretary  of  State  where  applicable"  are  read  in
    conjunction with section 85(5) the scheme becomes clear.  The  Tribunal
    is able to approach human rights appeals in a  holistic  and  pragmatic
    fashion, saving the need for the multiple applications,  considerations
    and possible appeals that the  'one-stop'  procedure  was  designed  to
    avoid,  whilst  the  Secretary  of  State   is   protected   from   the
    unanticipated appellate ambush.


16. The question therefore arises: is this  a  new  matter  such  that  the
    consent of the  Secretary  of  State  is  required  before  it  can  be
    considered? In Mahmud (s85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters') [2017]  UKUT  488
    (IAC) the Tribunal gave guidance on what might  be  considered  a  'new
    matter' under the statute, and found itself broadly in  agreement  with
    the Respondent's stated policy position:

          1. Whether something is or is not a  'new  matter'  goes  to  the
             jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and  the
             First-tier Tribunal must therefore determine  for  itself  the
             issue.

          2. A 'new matter' is a  matter  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal.  A matter is the  factual
             substance of a claim.  A ground of appeal is the  legal  basis
             on which the facts in any given matter could form the basis of
             a challenge to the decision under appeal.

          3. In practice, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not
             previously been considered by the Secretary of  State  in  the
             context of the decision in section 82(1) or a  statement  made
             by the appellant under section 120.  This requires the  matter
             to be factually distinct from that  previously  raised  by  an
             appellant, as opposed to further  or  better  evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment  will   always   be   fact
             sensitive.


17. Mr Mills very realistically conceded that it  would  be  difficult,  in
    these circumstances, to argue that the additional time accrued by  AMMO
    could amount to a 'new matter'. His original claim was on the basis  of
    the 'long residence' provisions; that matter has  now  been  considered
    twice by the Secretary of State; the  long  residence  was  now  a  bit
    longer; that did not amount to a new factual matrix.


18. Drawing all of this together I find that paragraph 276AO enables me  to
    consider, in the context of this appeal,  whether  AMMO  qualifies  for
    leave under 276ADE(1).


19. I am satisfied that he has met  the  'long  residence'  requirement  at
    paragraph (iii) of that provision. He has lived in this country for  20
    years and 11 months and even deducting the full length of his  sentence
    (of which he only served half), he has still accrued twenty full years.


20. The next question is whether he can meet the 'suitability' requirements
    set out in Appendix FM and imported into 276ADE(1) by operation of sub-
    paragraph (i).   The  Respondent  seeks  to  rely,  in  particular,  on
    paragraph S-LTR.1.6 which states that leave will not be granted where:


         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not fall within the paragraphs  S-LTR  1.3  to  1.5)  character  of
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to  allow  them
         to remain in the UK"


21. Mr Mills helpfully looked at the Respondent's own  policy  guidance  to
    see if it could offer any assistance on  what  kind  of  conduct  might
    engage paragraph  S-LTR.1.6.  The  Criminality  Guidance  is  concerned
    exclusively  with  criminality  that  would   trigger   the   automatic
    deportation provisions, and is silent  on  the  relevance  of  offences
    attracting sentences of  less  than  12  months.  The  document  Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0b  Family  Life  (as  a  partner  or
    parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes is not that illuminating since
    it simply reiterates the language of the rule itself. It does note that
    "it is possible for an applicant to meet the suitability  requirements,
    even where there is some criminality". Before  me  the  parties  agreed
    that it  must  be  a  fact-sensitive  enquiry.   Matters  such  as  the
    frequency and nature of the offending will be  relevant,  as  will  the
    passage of time: Ruhumuliza (Article 1F and 'undesirable') [2016]  UKUT
    00284 (IAC). The parties further  agreed  that  in  this  context,  the
    question of AMMO's 'suitability' is inextricably bound to the  question
    arising under s117B(6), namely  whether  it  is  'reasonable'  for  the
    qualifying child to leave the UK. His  convictions  have  relevance  to
    both questions.


22. The matter of parental convictions falling  short  of  the  deportation
    criteria recently arose as an issue in a case before the  President  of
    the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Justice  Lane.  In  MT  and  ET  (child's  best
    interests;  ex  tempore  pilot)  Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT  00088(IAC)  the
    President and Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley were asked to consider  the
    case of a child who had been in the UK  over  eight  years,  but  whose
    mother had overstayed, had made an asylum claim found to  be  baseless,
    and had committed an offence of fraud. Having referred  itself  to  the
    principles set out in MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the panel found:


         33. On the present state of the law, as set out in MA, we need to
         look for "powerful reasons" why a child who has been in the United
         Kingdom for over ten years should be removed, notwithstanding that
         her best interests lie in remaining.


         34. In the present case, there are no such powerful reasons. Of
         course, the public interest lies in removing a person, such as MT,
         who has abused the immigration laws of the United Kingdom. Although
         Mr Deller did not seek to rely on it, we take account of the fact
         that, as recorded in Judge Baird's decision, MT had, at some stage,
         received a community order for using a false document to obtain
         employment. But, given the strength of ET's case, MT's conduct in
         our view comes nowhere close to requiring the respondent to succeed
         and Mr Deller did not strongly urge us to so find. Mr Nicholson
         submitted that, even on the findings of Judge Martin, MT was what
         might be described as a somewhat run of the mill immigration
         offender who came to the United Kingdom on a visit visa,
         overstayed, made a claim for asylum that was found to be false and
         who has pursued various legal means of remaining in the United
         Kingdom. None of this is to be taken in any way as excusing or
         downplaying MT's unlawful behaviour. The point is that her
         immigration history is not so bad as to constitute the kind of
         "powerful" reason that would render reasonable the removal of ET to
         Nigeria.


23. This decision notwithstanding, Mr Mills urged me to consider the matter
    on its facts. The mother in MT  and  ET  received  a  community  order,
    whereas AMMO was sent to prison. I have borne  that  in  mind.  I  note
    however that the offence was in essence the same - the use of  a  false
    instrument to obtain unlawful employment. On the scant  facts  revealed
    by the determination I cannot know, but one obvious explanation for the
    inconsistent sentences may be that MT was a single mother at  the  time
    of the sentencing.


24. The burden of proof in respect of S-LTR 1.6 lies on  the  Secretary  of
    State. The offence committed by AMMO is not  one  that  can  simply  be
    overlooked. It is plainly to the detriment of society that people  seek
    to circumvent the immigration rules, and criminal law, by  using  false
    documents to procure work that they are not entitled to do. I also bear
    I mind however  that  the  convictions  arose  from  the  same  set  of
    circumstances, and that there has been no other  offending  in  a  long
    period of residence. I would not go so far as to describe this fraud as
    a "run of the mill"  offence  but  I  accept  that  where  someone  has
    overstayed for 20 years there is perhaps an implicit acceptance that in
    doing so they will  at  some  point  have  worked  illegally.    Having
    considered all of these factors, and the circumstances as  a  whole,  I
    cannot be satisfied that the convictions in 2013 render AMMO's presence
    in the UK to be undesirable or that it would be conducive to the public
    good to refuse to grant him leave.  I therefore  allow  his  appeal  on
    human rights grounds. His removal cannot be said  to  be  proportionate
    because he has demonstrated that he meets the requirements of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the Rules.


25. It follows that I need not make any findings on s117B, since  Mr  Mills
    accepted that if both parents succeed on Article 8  grounds,  it  would
    follow that both children would do so too. For the sake of completeness
    I do so briefly. The family all speak fluent English, and  whilst  this
    is a matter that will aid their integration, it is one that must remain
    neutral in my balancing exercise.  It is in the  public  interest  that
    persons who seek leave to remain are financially independent.  Although
    AMMO has apparently worked in order to support his  family,  I  do  not
    think it proper that I can take illegal employment into  account  as  a
    positive matter weighing in his favour.  This family  cannot  therefore
    be said to be financially independent and this is a  matter  that  must
    weigh against AMMO in the balancing exercise.   I  can  attach  only  a
    little weight to the private life  that  AMMO  has  accumulated  whilst
    here, since his status has always been unlawful.  All of those  matters
    must be weighed in the balance when I assess whether it is 'reasonable'
    for the qualifying child of this family to leave the UK.


26. My starting point in the assessment of the other side of the scales  is
    the presumption, inherent in the rule and policy and  confirmed  in  MA
    (Pakistan), that it will be in this child's best interests to remain in
    this country. AFJO has lived  here  since  she  was  born  and  is  now
    approaching her tenth birthday. She attends school in this country, has
    friends and other relationships outside of the immediate embrace of her
    family, for instance with teachers.    I  could  find  nothing  in  the
    evidence to displace the presumption that  it  would  be  in  her  best
    interests for this status quo to be maintained, regardless of the  fact
    that these friendships, other  relationships  and  education  could  no
    doubt in time be replicated in Nigeria. In order to find that it  would
    be reasonable for her to go to Nigeria with her parents I must identify
    strong reasons for doing so. On the evidence before  me,  and  applying
    the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan), and by  the
    President  in  MT  &  ET,  I  conclude  that  the  Respondent  has  not
    demonstrated that such reasons exist. It is manifestly unreasonable  to
    expect AFJO to leave the UK at this stage.


27. I would therefore allow the appeal of AMMO in the alternative  'outside
    of the rules' with reference to the proportionality factors set out  in
    s117B(1)-(6).  The Secretary of State for the Home Department expressly
    accepts that in those circumstances the children would also succeed  in
    their appeals on human rights grounds.


    Decision


28. The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             10th April 2018
































