
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04788/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 September 2013                       |On 10 October 2013         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             MR THILAN FERNANDO
                        (No Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr D Chirico of
           counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners
          For the Respondent: Mr K Norton a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the determination of the Upper Tribunal approved  by  both  of
      us. The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  who  was  born  on  15
      February  1977.  He  has  been  given   permission   to   appeal   the
      determination of a  panel  consisting  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Petherbridge ("the FTTJ") and non legal Member Mrs R I Emblin  JP  who
      dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision of 23  February
      2012 to make a deportation order  against  him  as  conducive  to  the
      public good by virtue of section 3 (5)  (a)  of  the  Immigration  Act
      1971.


   2. The appellant was granted leave to enter the UK  as  a  student  on  7
      October 2003 for a period expiring on  31  October  2004.  He  made  a
      further application and this leave was extended on  24  November  2004
      but subsequently curtailed so that it came to an end  on  28  February
      2005 because  there  was  insufficient  evidence  that  he  was  still
      studying.  Nothing  was  heard  from  the  appellant  until   he   was
      encountered by the police on 23 October 2008. He was  served  with  an
      administrative removal notice as an overstayer on 24 October 2008.


   3. On 26 October 2009  at  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court  the  appellant  was
      convicted of sexual assault on a female child under the age of 13.  On
      30 November 2009 he was sentenced to 36 weeks imprisonment, placed  on
      the Sex Offender Register for 10 years and disqualified  from  working
      with children. He did not appeal against conviction or  sentence.  The
      respondent says  that  deportation  was  not  pursued  following  this
      conviction because the appellant  did  not  meet  the  criteria  of  a
      foreign national who had received a custodial sentence of 12 months or
      more.


   4. On 8 August 2011 the appellant was arrested for  suspected  theft  and
      then charged with  handling  stolen  goods.  He  was  sentenced  on  1
      December 2011 at Wood Green Crown Court to 7 months  imprisonment.  He
      did not appeal against conviction or sentence.


   5. Following this conviction the respondent concluded that the  appellant
      met the criteria for deportation as in aggregate his sentences  of  36
      weeks and seven months exceeded one year.


   6. On 23 January 2012 the appellant made an application for  asylum.  The
      respondent considered that it was not practicable to consider this  at
      that stage. On 23 February 2012 and in accordance with section 3(5)(a)
      of the Immigration Act 1971  he  was  served  with  a  notice  of  the
      decision to make a deportation order. On 17 August 2012 the respondent
      sent a detailed reasons for refusal letter  running  to  11  pages  in
      which the appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection  claims  were
      considered and rejected. It was concluded that removing the  appellant
      from the UK would not be contrary to the UK's obligations.


   7. The appellant instructed solicitors  and  they  submitted  his  appeal
      dated 5 March 2012 to the First-Tier Tribunal. The appeal was  brought
      on Article 2, 3 and 8 grounds and on the basis that the  decision  was
      disproportionate given the nature of his  offending  history.  It  was
      said that the grounds might be amended. It is clear that by  the  time
      of the hearing before the panel the appellant  was  arguing  that  his
      appeal should succeed on asylum and Articles  3  and  8  human  rights
      grounds.


   8. The panel heard the  appeal  on  23  April  2013.  The  appellant  was
      represented by Mr Chirico and the respondent by Mr Norton both of whom
      appear before us.  The  appellant  attended  but  chose  not  to  give
      evidence.  The  only  oral  evidence  was  from  Detective   Constable
      Holberton, called by the respondent. The panel  had  before  them  the
      documentary  evidence  set  out  in  paragraphs  15  to  19   of   the
      determination and a skeleton argument from Mr Chirico.


   9. In the determination the FTTJ concluded that  the  appellant  had  not
      raised his subsequent claims of mental ill-health  as  explanation  or
      mitigation in his criminal trials. There was no  medical  evidence  to
      indicate that there were mental health  reasons  which  prevented  him
      from  giving  evidence.  As  a  consequence  he  had  not  taken   the
      opportunity to address the extensive credibility issues in the appeal.
      Although there were errors and inconsistencies in the evidence  of  DC
      Holberton there was no intention to mislead  and  he  had  not  cherry
      picked the evidence in assessing the appellant. Great care should have
      been taken in the preparation of his  evidence  but  nevertheless  the
      nine  incidents  referred  to  in  his  evidence  indicated  that  the
      appellant had a willingness "to act in a criminal and wanton  way  for
      his own ends with little or no heed to his responsibilities to society
      as a whole".


  10. In relation to the asylum claim the FTTJ found that if  the  appellant
      had a genuine fear of persecution in  Sri  Lanka  he  would  not  have
      waited until January 2012 to claim asylum, four days after the  letter
      indicating the intention to deport him. There had been plenty of  time
      and earlier opportunities to make the claim. He had not  produced  the
      warrant he said had been issued for his arrest and no medical evidence
      of the treatment he claimed to have received as a result  of  beatings
      by the father of his claimed boyfriend or the Sri Lankan army. It  was
      not accepted that he had left Sri Lanka using a false passport. It was
      concluded  that  the  appellant  was  of  no  adverse   interest   the
      authorities or anyone else in Sri Lanka and that on  return  he  would
      not be at risk of persecution or treatment which  would  infringe  his
      Article 3 human rights.


  11. The FTTJ agreed with the assessment that the  appellant  was  at  high
      risk of reoffending. Having regard to the presumption in paragraph 364
      of the  Immigration  Rules  that  the  public  interest  required  the
      deportation of a person who was  liable  to  deportation  and  to  the
      appellant's circumstances, which were set  out  in  detail,  the  FTTJ
      concluded that the appellant's removal would not be of  a  person  who
      was entitled to asylum or that it would infringe his human rights. The
      appeal was dismissed on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
      rights grounds.


  12. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal.  There  are
      six grounds  of  appeal  and  the  grant  of  permission,  whilst  not
      addressing all of them, does not appear to  limit  the  scope  of  the
      appeal. We accepted that all the grounds could be argued.


  13. The grounds of appeal, prepared by Mr Chirico, rely on his description
      of events which took place  at  the  hearing  before  the  panel.  The
      respondent was asked whether these facts were agreed  and  Mr  Chirico
      indicated that if they were not he would provide a witness  statement,
      give evidence if required and another counsel  would  appear  for  the
      appellant. In the event this question was not resolved until  the  day
      before the hearing and we were notified on the morning of the hearing.
      There is now a statement of common position agreed between Mr  Chirico
      and Mr Norton  accompanied  by  a  draft  witness  statement  from  Mr
      Chirico. The common  position  is  that  the  respondent  agrees  that
      submissions were made to the panel as described in  paragraphs  4  (i)
      and (ii) of the draft witness statement. The relevance of these  facts
      is not agreed and the parties emphasise aspects  of  their  respective
      positions. These were dealt with in more detail in submissions to us.


  14. We have all the documents which were before the  panel  together  with
      the additional documents  referred  to  in  the  last  paragraph.  The
      appellant was produced from  custody  and  attended  the  hearing.  He
      submitted a letter written the previous day which  was  part  apology,
      part explanation for his offending behaviour, part reiteration of  his
      case and a plea not to return him to Sri Lanka.


  15. We heard submissions from both representatives  on  the  questions  of
      whether the FTTJ erred in law and if so what action  we  should  take.
      Thereafter, whilst making  it  clear  that  we  had  not  reached  any
      conclusion as to errors of law, we invited the representatives to make
      submissions as to whether and if so how  we  should  re-determine  the
      appeal if we set aside the decision of the FTTJ  and  decided  that  a
      further hearing was not required. These submissions  are  recorded  in
      our record  of  proceedings  and  addressed  in  the  reasoning  which
      follows. We reserved our determination.


  16. Mr Chirico indicated that  the  main  grounds  of  appeal  were  those
      numbered 2 and 3 although all were relied on. The grounds  incorporate
      by reference Mr Chirico's  skeleton  argument  which  was  before  the
      panel.


  17. The first ground of appeal submits that  the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  by
      failing to determine a ground raised in the skeleton  argument  namely
      that the  respondent's  decision  of  23  February  2012  was  not  in
      accordance  with  the  law  because  it  was  taken  without  detailed
      consideration of the appellant's asylum claim. The  reasons  for  that
      decision set out in the letter of the same  date  indicated  that  the
      asylum claim had not been considered. Mr  Chirico  amplified  this  by
      arguing that either the decision of 23 February 2012 should be treated
      as a single decision which had never been withdrawn or supplemented by
      a further immigration decision or that it was  a  continuing  decision
      which could be perfected by further submissions and reasoning.  If  it
      was the second of these and the respondent was entitled to perfect her
      decision  with  later  reasoning  and  submissions  then  she   relied
      irrationally on the flawed evidence of DC Holberton. This ties in with
      the second ground of  appeal  which  addresses  the  question  of  the
      evidence of DC Holberton and how this was treated by the FTTJ.


  18. We conclude that the deportation decision of 23 February 2012 was  not
      a single decision which had never been withdrawn or supplemented by  a
      further immigration decision and that it was not treated by the  panel
      as  such.  The  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  considered   by   the
      respondent. He  was  interviewed  on  27  March  2012  and  his  claim
      addressed in detail in the reasons for refusal  letter  of  17  August
      2012. The FTTJ referred to  these  in  paragraphs  5  and  13  of  the
      determination. He recorded  Mr  Chirico's  reliance  on  his  skeleton
      argument and the submission that the decision was  not  in  accordance
      with the law in paragraph 51.  It  is  clear  from  what  is  said  in
      paragraph 57 as well as the whole tenor of the determination that  the
      FTTJ addressed all aspects of  the  appellant's  claim  including  the
      asylum claim and  all  the  reasons  for  which  he  claimed  to  fear
      persecution and serious ill-treatment in Sri Lanka.


  19. Whilst the FTTJ did not, in terms, reach a separate conclusion on  the
      submission that the respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with
      the law for the reasons advanced by Mr Chirico in his skeleton  before
      the panel, which is less detailed than the grounds before  us,  it  is
      clear from the wider conclusions that the FTTJ did not accept that the
      decision was not in accordance with the law. We find that  when  taken
      together the whole of the  respondent's  decision-making  process  was
      both appropriate and in accordance with the law. All  the  grounds  of
      appeal raised by the appellant, including  the  asylum  grounds,  have
      been fully addressed. We have not been told how  the  appellant  might
      have been disadvantaged and we find that he has not.


  20. The second ground of appeal is that "In its assessment of the evidence
      of Detective Constable Holberton, the Tribunal failed to  have  regard
      to material considerations, failed to determine  submissions  made  to
      it, failed to give adequate reasons and/or reached  conclusions  which
      were perverse."


  21. The FTTJ set out the evidence of DC Holberton in paragraphs 22  to  37
      of  the  determination.  This  includes,  in  paragraph  22,  that  DC
      Holberton asked  for  a  number  of  amendments  to  be  made  to  his
      statement. Mr Chirico's submissions in relation to this  evidence  are
      summarised in paragraph 52. In paragraph 72 to 74  the  FTTJ  assessed
      the evidence of DC Holberton and said;


         "72. Whilst there were errors and inconsistencies in DC Holberton's
         witness statement, we do not consider that these have arisen out of
         any intent whatsoever on the part of the  officer  to  mislead  the
         court. We accept that he had made the best attempt to summarise the
         findings of the extracts of the CRIS report, which  themselves  run
         to 266 pages into a fair distillation of the  summary  offences  of
         which the appellant has been convicted and sentenced and  those  of
         which he had been  the  subject  of  allegations,  which  had  been
         investigated but not pursued in the way of criminal proceedings.


         73. We do not find that DC Holberton has "cherry picked"  the  CRIS
         extracts to show the appellant in an  unfavourable  light  for  the
         purpose of his exercise in preparing the report.


         74. What we do say, however, and we accept that the joint  exercise
         of the UKBA and the Metropolitan Police (NEXUS) does need the  very
         greatest of care to be taken in providing witness statements,  such
         as that which DC Holberton has produced before the Tribunal  which,
         in his case, regrettably cannot be said to have been  exercised  by
         him with the care that we would have expected. However, this is not
         to have impugned the essence of his witness statement in  that  the
         nine separate  incidents  referred  to  in  his  statement  clearly
         illustrate the appellant as having a willingness on his part to act
         in a criminal and wanton way for his own ends  with  little  or  no
         heed to his responsibilities to society as a whole."


  22. It is important to note that Mr Chirico does not  call  into  question
      the accuracy of the reporting in the CRIS reports, as  opposed  to  DC
      Holberton's assessment of them, and that  the  appellant  admits  that
      seven of the nine incidents resulted in criminal charges to  which  he
      pleaded guilty. Whilst  the  appellant  disputes  significant  details
      about some of the admitted incidents we find it difficult to  see  why
      any unsupported evidence of an appellant  so  lacking  in  credibility
      should be preferred over what is said in the CRIS  reports,  the  pre-
      sentence  reports,  the  records  of  conviction  and  the  sentencing
      remarks.


  23. Mr Norton's submissions in relation to this ground were  that  at  the
      beginning of the hearing DC Holberton corrected a number  of  mistakes
      in his statement and during his evidence frankly accepted  that  there
      were other errors. The FTTJ was appropriately critical of his evidence
      but made a proper assessment of it in paragraphs 72 to 74 at  the  end
      of which he reached conclusions open to him on that evidence.  It  was
      clear from what he said that he had in  mind  and  was  addressing  Mr
      Chirico's submissions.


  24. Mr Chirico submits that  the  FTTJ  was  not  entitled  to  accept  DC
      Holberton's report  as  a  fair  distillation  of  the  CRIS  reports.
      However, the FTTJ did not say this. He accepted "the essence" but  not
      the detail of DC Holberton's witness statement.


  25. There are two incidents where the appellant  denies  any  culpability.
      They are the incidents numbered 3 and  8  in  DC  Holberton's  report.
      Number 3 relates to an alleged sexual assault by touching  a  17-year-
      old female and number 8 to alleged common assault on  the  appellant's
      landlord. The CRIS reports deals with these between pages 76  and  119
      and 210 and 236 respectively. It is apparent from the CRIS reports and
      what is said by the appellant that  there  were  two  incidents  where
      there were no prosecutions and the accounts of  events  given  by  the
      appellant and the other parties involved were very different.  In  his
      witness statement the appellant said  that  the  woman  who  made  the
      allegation, who was known to him, stole a mobile phone from  a  mobile
      phone repair shop where he was, ran away and he chased  her.  He  says
      that she knew that he was on the Sex Offenders Register and  made  the
      allegation to prevent her being investigated for stealing  the  phone.
      Page 109 of the CRIS report records that he said to the police that he
      chased after the young woman, grabbed her arm and then  put  his  hand
      down the back of her trousers to try and get the phone which  she  had
      put there. He admitted that his DNA could be on her  knickers  at  the
      back because he touched her bottom when taking hold of the  phone.  He
      was arrested but not  subsequently  charged  because  the  complainant
      decided to withdraw the allegation. In  relation  to  incident  8  the
      appellant admits that there was an  incident  involving  him  and  his
      landlord. Each of them accused the other of assault.  The  complainant
      landlord called the police who attended. He alleged that he  had  been
      assaulted by the appellant who  had  punched  him  in  the  face.  The
      appellant denied that he had assaulted anyone.


  26. We find that it was open to the FTTJ to come to  the  conclusion  that
      there were nine incidents.  It  is  clear  from  the  appellant's  own
      admissions as well as the CRIS reports that there were nine incidents.
      The question is not whether there  were  such  incidents  but  whether
      taken as a whole with  the  admitted  incidents,  they  justified  the
      FTTJ's conclusion that the appellant had "a willingness.....to act  in
      a criminal and wanton way for his own ends with little or no  heed  to
      his responsibilities to society as a whole." This  also  needs  to  be
      read with the FTTJ's assessment in paragraph 109  that  the  appellant
      had been a sexual predator of young girls and that as a result of  the
      factors  which  he  set  out  the  appellant  posed  a  high  risk  of
      reoffending. We can find no  indication  that  the  FTTJ  treated  the
      appellant as having committed  more  than  one  sexual  assault  or  a
      violent non-sexual assault.  Whilst  the  FTTJ  did  not  reach  these
      conclusions we have to say that on the appellant's own evidence to the
      police, putting his hand down the back of  a  young  woman's  trousers
      whether or not in an attempt to recover an allegedly stolen phone was,
      whatever the provocation, likely to have been  a  sexual  assault  for
      which he would have  been  at  risk  of  conviction  had  she  pressed
      charges.


  27.  We find that in relation to the evidence of DC Holberton the FTTJ did
      not fail to have regard to material considerations, did  not  fail  to
      determine material submissions, did  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
      conclusions  and  did  not  reach  conclusions  which  were   remotely
      perverse.


  28. The third ground of appeal is that in its assessment of  the  evidence
      of PC Pollard, the Tribunal failed to record or determine  submissions
      made to it, failed to  take  account  relevant  considerations  and/or
      acted perversely  in  treating  that  evidence  as  reliable.  In  the
      statement of common position what is set out in paragraph 4 (ii) of Mr
      Chirico's witness statement is accepted namely; "I made clear  at  the
      outset of the hearing that the contents of Mr Pollard's evidence  were
      not accepted (see para 23 of the grounds), and  made  the  submissions
      recorded at Paras 25 and 27 of the grounds (that there was a  lack  of
      details about specific data relied on by Mr Pollard in conducting  his
      risk assessment, with the effects  set  out  in  paragraph  3  of  the
      grounds; and that his assessment appeared to have been based upon  his
      view that the appellant had committed two  sexual  assaults,  and  was
      thus unreliable (see paragraph 7)."


  29. We note that the respondent did not seek an adjournment  in  order  to
      call PC Pollard to give oral evidence. On the other hand there was  no
      application for an adjournment by the  appellant  in  order  to  cross
      examine PC Pollard. We accept that the FTTJ did not in terms refer  to
      Mr Chirico's submissions in relation to  this  evidence.  However,  Mr
      Chirico's  admittedly  incomplete  recollection  of   DC   Holberton's
      evidence does  not  substantiate  the  contention  that  PC  Pollard's
      assessment was made on the incorrect assumption that the appellant had
      committed two sexual assaults. The FTTJ reached  his  conclusion  that
      the appellant was at high risk of reoffending not only on the basis of
      PC Pollard's statement but also the  CRIS  report  (described  as  the
      context of DC  Holberton's  statement)  and  the  pre-sentence  report
      prepared by the Probation Officer which set out appellant's  revealing
      statements to the Probation Officer. PC Pollard's  statement  contains
      information as to the basis on which the report was  prepared  and  it
      was open  to  the  FTTJ  to  conclude  that  this  gave  a  sufficient
      indication that he was appropriately  qualified.  Whilst  the  grounds
      argue that there was no indication that the report  or  the  date  was
      changed to reflect changing circumstances the last  paragraph  of  the
      report states that the assessments were made  on  25  August  2010,  2
      September 2011 and 13 December 2012.


  30. We find that in relation to the evidence of PC Pollard  the  FTTJ  did
      not fail to have regard to material considerations, did  not  fail  to
      determine material submissions, did  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
      conclusions  and  did  not  reach  conclusions  which  were   remotely
      perverse.


  31. The fourth ground of appeal submits that the FTTJ failed  to  consider
      explanatory evidence and/or submissions advanced  on  the  appellant's
      behalf in relation to the significance of his  ability  to  leave  Sri
      Lanka in 2003 and evidence that his mental health was corroborative of
      his account of events.


  32. The FTTJ found that the appellant had not, as  he  claimed,  left  Sri
      Lanka using a false passport. He left using  his  own  passport  which
      indicated that at the time of departure he was of no  concern  to  the
      authorities in Sri Lanka. The grounds argue that the  FTTJ  failed  to
      take into account the submission that the  appellant  left  Sri  Lanka
      during the early years of the ceasefire when the conflict between  the
      authorities and the LTTE were at their lowest ebb and that if  he  was
      safe in 2003 he could not be presumed  to  be  safe  now  because  the
      situation had worsened.


  33. We find that it was open to the FTTJ to come to  the  conclusion  that
      the fact that the appellant was able to leave Sri Lanka using his  own
      passport was one of the factors indicating that he was not of  adverse
      interest to the authorities at that time. This was  only  one  of  the
      compelling reasons  which  the  FTTJ  gave  for  concluding  that  the
      appellant was not a credible witness, that his account  of  events  in
      Sri Lanka was not to be  believed  and  that  he  was  of  no  adverse
      interest to the authorities. If these findings were open to  the  FTTJ
      and we find that they were, then the question of whether the  position
      for genuine and credible asylum seekers had  deteriorated  since  2003
      was not material.


  34. The fourth ground also contains the submission that the  panel  failed
      to consider submissions in relation to the  evidence  of  Prof  Katona
      that "the  appellant's  presentation  and  present  mental  health  is
      corroborative of his account of past torture". The  FTTJ  referred  to
      Prof Katona's report in paragraph 18 and Mr Chirico's  submissions  in
      relation  to  this  report  contained  in  his  skeleton  argument  at
      paragraph 51. There is an assessment of the medical evidence from Prof
      Katona and Dr Duffield between paragraphs 58 and 66. Prof Katona  said
      that  "my  impression  however  is   that   Mr   Fernando's   clinical
      presentation is in keeping with the experience of severe  trauma  that
      he describes" and "is in my opinion  in  keeping  with  the  traumatic
      experiences he has suffered in Sri Lanka". Prof Katona  considers  the
      possibility that other factors could have caused the appellant's  PTSD
      but expresses the opinion that  whilst  they  may  have  worsened  the
      symptoms they cannot explain his core  PTSD  symptoms.  We  find  that
      there is a summary of Prof Katona's evidence  in  paragraph  60  which
      properly  addresses  Mr  Chirico's  submissions.  Clearly   the   FTTJ
      preferred the evidence of Dr Duffield and  in  our  judgement  he  was
      entitled to do so.


  35. Ground five submits that the FTTJ erred in  law  by  failing  to  give
      adequate reasons and consequently failed to have  regard  to  material
      evidence and considerations in relation to the expert evidence  of  Dr
      Chris Smith and the evidence that  the  appellant  is  gay.  The  FTTJ
      addressed Mr Chirico's submissions in relation  to  Dr  Chris  Smith's
      report in paragraph 97 in which he said; "with no  disrespect  to  the
      report of Dr Chris Smith of the 19 April 2013, this  is  nothing  more
      than a personalised view of the current situation  in  Sri  Lanka.  It
      does not in any way engage with the view of the respondent with regard
      to why the appellant could not be returned to Sri Lanka".


  36. In paragraph 19 of his report Dr Chris Smith says; "First of all, I am
      aware that Mr Fernando's overall  credibility  is  a  matter  for  the
      court, not for me. What I can  legitimately  say  is  nothing  in  his
      account of events in Sri  Lanka  is  reasonably  unlikely  to  me,  or
      inconsistent with objective evidence on which I  am  aware,  including
      information and  sources  not  cited  here.  The  information  I  have
      obtained from the appellant's bundle is broadly consistent with events
      that took place in Sri Lanka." The FTTJ found that the  appellant  was
      not a credible witness and did not believe his account  of  events  in
      Sri Lanka, giving compelling reasons for this conclusion most of which
      are not challenged by the appellant. In the light of this we find that
      the FTTJ gave sufficient and proper consideration to Dr Chris  Smith's
      report.


  37. The second limb of ground five argues that the FTTJ erred  in  law  by
      failing to give any reasons for the conclusion that the  appellant  is
      not homosexual. We find that the FTTJ's conclusion  in  paragraph  102
      that the appellant is not homosexual needs to be read  in  conjunction
      with the determination as a whole and in particular his case which  is
      set out in paragraphs 81 and 82 which include the  claims  as  to  his
      homosexuality and  homosexual  relationships  followed  by  the  clear
      conclusion that he is not a credible witness and that his  account  of
      events is not be  believed  in  paragraph  90.  These  are  sufficient
      reasons for the conclusion.


  38. The sixth ground of appeal submits that  the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  by
      misdirecting himself as to the law on discretion and  sexual  identity
      by applying a test of whether the appellant would be safe  if  he  was
      "discreet". The grounds do not fully or  correctly  reflect  what  the
      FTTJ set out in paragraphs 98 to 102.  In  his  asylum  interview  the
      appellant did not claim that he would or would wish to openly  lead  a
      homosexual life in Sri Lanka or promote himself as a homosexual openly
      in society. However, even if we had come to the  conclusion  that  the
      FTTJ erred in law in this regard, it would not be a material error  or
      an error which should result in the decision being set  aside  because
      of the conclusion, open to him, that the appellant is not homosexual.

  39. The determination of the FTTJ is detailed, careful and  comprehensive.
      We add that even if we had reached the conclusion that  the  FTTJ  had
      erred in law in relation to  grounds  three  and  four  and  that  the
      evidence of DC Holberton and PC Pollard should have been  excluded  we
      would have come to the conclusion that the totality of  the  remaining
      evidence about the appellant and his criminality would have led to his
      appeal being dismissed. The determination  of  the  FTTJ  sets  out  a
      number of factors which are relevant to his final conclusion but  have
      not been directly relevant to the questions we have needed to address.
       They include the other offences admitted by the  appellant  three  of
      which relate to the possession of cannabis and two relating to failure
      to comply with notification requirements.  The  appellant's  statement
      to the Probation Officer set out in the pre-sentence report  that  the
      sexual assault on the nine-year-old girl for which  he  was  convicted
      was for his own  sexual  gratification,  was  uncontrollable  and  was
      triggered by the sight of the victim's bare legs and his attraction to
      young girls makes disturbing reading. In the context of  his  attitude
      to underage girls the appellant claimed to  have  had  a  relationship
      with a 14-year-old girl although  he  later  said  that  she  was  16.
      Subsequently, he said that this was an exaggeration.   He  claimed  to
      have had a relationship with a woman who had given birth to his  child
      but was unable to give her name or contact  details.   Later  he  said
      that this was untrue and he had made it up  because  another  prisoner
      suggested that it would get him a more lenient sentence.  The  offence
      for which he was convicted at Wood Green Crown Court took place during
      the riots  in  August  2011.   The  sentencing  judge  said  that  the
      appellant was very close to the sports shop from which the items  were
      taken and that his deliberate act was "as close to burglary as  it  is
      possible to get" and "a  very  deliberate,  very  mean-spirited,  very
      opportunistic crime."  The  appellant  should  have  left  the  UK  in
      February 2005 but remained as an overstayer.  He has no family life in
      this country and a very limited private life.  The evidence  from  the
      two police officers could be  excised  without  disturbing  the  clear
      overall outcome that the public interest in removing the appellant was
      not displaced by any significant factors in his favour.


  40. We have not been asked to anonymise  this  determination  and  see  no
      reason to do so of our own motion.

  41. We find that the FTTJ did not err in law and  alternatively  that  any
      error of law was not material or such that the decision should be  set
      aside. We uphold the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 18 September
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

