
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04592/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9 May 2014                              |On 2 October 2014          |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                   MR O D
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr A Mackenzie of
           counsel instructed by Sutovic and Hartigan
          For the Respondent: Miss Busch of counsel instructed by Treasury
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Liberia who was born on 10 June 1985. He
      appealed against the respondent's decision  of  17  February  2012  to
      refuse to revoke a deportation order made against him.


      Immigration and appeal history


   2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 26 August 2003 and claimed  asylum.
      The claim was refused on 10 October 2003 and his appeal  against  that
      decision was dismissed on 8 January 2004.  Permission  to  appeal  was
      refused on 26 February 2004 and on 13 October 2004 he was recorded  as
      an absconder.


   3. The appellant next came to  the  attention  of  the  respondent  on  7
      October 2008 when he was convicted of possession of a  false  identity
      document and making false representations. On 5 December 2008  he  was
      sentenced to 8 months imprisonment and the judge made a recommendation
      that he be deported.


   4. On 30 January 2009 the appellant was served with a notice of  decision
      to make a deportation order. He appealed, claiming that he had been  a
      boy soldier and was tortured in Liberia.  He  was  interviewed,  after
      which the respondent made a fresh deportation order under  s  5(1)  of
      the Immigration Act 1971. The appellant appealed and  his  appeal  was
      dismissed on 22 April 2009.


   5. On 22 July 2009 the appellant made  a  fresh  application  for  asylum
      which was refused on 30 October 2009. A deportation order  was  signed
      on 1 July 2010 and he submitted further representations on 7  December
      2010 and 19 October 2011. The refusal letter states that  he  made  an
      asylum claim on 14 April 2011 which was treated as an  application  to
      revoke the deportation order made in 2010.


      The appeal hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal


   6. It is the respondent's decision of  17  February  2012  to  refuse  to
      revoke this deportation order which has  led  to  the  present  appeal
      proceedings.


   7. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal was  heard
      on 24 May 2012 by a panel consisting of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  DJ
      Baker and non-legal member Mr AF Sheward ("the panel"). Then and since
      the appellant has been represented by Mr Mackenzie. The appellant  did
      not give evidence. The panel heard evidence from two  friends  of  the
      appellant and a  consultant  psychiatrist,  Professor  Katona.  At  an
      earlier hearing it was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  from
      Liberia. However, by the time of the  hearing  before  the  panel  the
      respondent accepted that he was a Liberian from Liberia.  In  previous
      appeals the appellant's evidence as to what had  happened  to  him  in
      Liberia had, on the whole, not been believed. The panel observed  that
      they had much more evidence including psychiatric evidence. The  panel
      accepted that the appellant suffered from complex  PTSD,  had  been  a
      child  soldier  in  Liberia  and  had  witnessed  and  taken  part  in
      atrocities. Members of his family had been killed and his house burned
      down before he was taken  by  the  rebels.  The  scars  he  bore  were
      consistent with his claims to have been tortured. He had suffered ill-
      treatment at the hands of the rebels. We will need to  return  to  the
      panel's findings in more detail.


   8. Mr Mackenzie has not sought to argue that the appellant would still be
      at risk at the hands of the rebels or the authorities or that he would
      not be able to rely on a sufficiency of protection.  It  was  accepted
      that he might face discrimination as a result of his mental health but
      he would not face a real risk  of  persecution  for  that  reason.  In
      relation to the Article 3 grounds  the  panel  concluded  that  whilst
      there was a risk that an adverse decision  would  lead  to  a  suicide
      attempt neither this nor the situation he  would  face  on  return  in
      relation to his mental  ill-health  would  reach  the  high  threshold
      required by Article 3.


   9. The panel went on to consider the Article 8 private  and  family  life
      grounds. The appellant did not have a history of offending and was  at
      low risk of reoffending.  He  was  suffering  from  a  serious  mental
      illness and would not have the support of either family or friends  in
      Liberia. The disruption of his treatment and relationships  caused  by
      removal would increase the risk of suicide.  Balancing  these  factors
      against the public interest, the panel concluded that it  would  be  a
      disproportionate interference with the appellant's  right  to  respect
      for his private and family life to remove him. The appeal was  allowed
      on Article 8 human rights grounds only and by implication dismissed on
      asylum and Article 3 grounds.


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


  10. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      arguing that the panel erred in law by failing to allow the appeal  on
      asylum and/or Article 3 human rights grounds. Permission  was  granted
      by a judge in the First-Tier Tribunal. The appeal came  before  Deputy
      Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington ("the DUTJ") on  4  January  2013.  She
      found that the panel had erred in law. There was a lack  of  reasoning
      and no specific finding as to whether the appellant was a member of  a
      particular social group. The assessment of persecution had  not  fully
      taken into account all the  evidence  including  the  evidence  of  Dr
      Harris, a psychiatrist  practising  in  Liberia,  relating  to  social
      ostracism, destitution and  harmful  treatment.  There  had  not  been
      sufficient consideration of whether the  particular  circumstances  of
      this  appeal  made  it  either  an   exceptionally   compelling   case
      contemplated in N v UK (2008) 47 EHRR 39 or whether the  circumstances
      were such that a different test  might  need  to  be  applied.  Having
      concluded that the panel had erred in  law  the  DUTJ  set  aside  the
      decision.


  11. Since then there have been a number  of  hearings.  Following  a  case
      management hearing on 23 October 2013 directions were given  that  the
      scope of the appeal should be that set that out in paragraph 4 of  the
      appellant's Statement of Case dated 13 October 2013 and paragraph 2 of
      the respondent's Statement of Case dated 22 August 2013.  The  panel's
      findings of facts set out in the following paragraphs were  preserved;
      97 to 106; 114 (first four sentences; NB the FTT's findings as to risk
      are findings regarding  the  position  as  at  the  date  of  the  FTT
      hearing); 115 to 120. There were also directions as to expert reports,
      further documentary evidence, skeleton arguments and authorities. Some
      of these have been modified at subsequent directions hearings, largely
      as to timing.


  12. It is important to note that the directions given on 23  October  2013
      included the  following;  "The  decision  of  the  FTT  to  allow  the
      appellant's appeal by reference to Article 8 of the ECHR has not  been
      challenged by the respondent and cannot be challenged by  her  in  the
      forthcoming  appeal  hearing."  The  respondent  has  not  sought   to
      challenge this. We have been told and both representatives accept that
      the respondent has granted the appellant leave to remain in the UK for
      a period expiring in March 2015. We have not been shown  the  document
      granting this leave or told why it was granted although it  is  likely
      to have been as a result of the success of his appeal before the panel
      on Article 8 human rights grounds.


      The hearing before us


  13.  The  appellant  did  not  attend   the   hearing   before   us.   His
      representatives had indicated that  two  witnesses  would  be  called,
      Professor Katona, who was present, and Dr Harris who would  be  giving
      evidence by video link  from  Monrovia  in  Liberia.  The  video  link
      arrangements had been set up but did not  work  well  enough  for  his
      evidence to be taken in this way. In the  circumstances  both  counsel
      agreed that his reports should stand as  evidence  in  chief,  written
      questions would be submitted  to  him  by  way  of  cross  examination
      followed by  further  written  questions  by  way  of  re-examination.
      Thereafter each side would make further written submissions.  We  gave
      detailed directions as to how these steps should be taken.


  14. We heard oral evidence from Professor  Katona  who  gave  evidence  in
      chief, was cross examined and re-examined. His evidence is set out  in
      our record of proceedings.


  15. Since the hearing and with some extensions of time  we  have  received
      the written questions submitted by the respondent to Dr Harris and his
      replies, in effect cross examination and then  the  written  questions
      submitted by the appellant to Dr Harris and his replies, in effect re-
      examination. These were followed  by  the  respondent's  supplementary
      closing submissions and then  the  appellant's  supplementary  closing
      submissions.


      Respondent's Submissions

  16. Miss Busch relied on her skeleton argument. In relation to the Article
      3 grounds she relied on N v UK (2008) 47 EHRR 39  and  submitted  that
      the appellant's circumstances came nowhere near this threshold. Whilst
      the case law recognised that there might  be  other  very  exceptional
      categories  there  was  no  authority  for  any  suggestion  that  the
      threshold had been lowered. We were bound by the  authorities  and  it
      was not open to us to lower this.


  17. It  was  argued  that  the  closest  the  jurisprudence  had  come  to
      recognising the  possible  existence  of  another  category  or  other
      circumstances was in GS and EO (Article 3 - health cases) India [2012]
      UKUT 00397 (IAC). The appellant was not  entitled  to  any  particular
      level of treatment in the receiving State and he  would  not  approach
      the level of deathbed destitution.


  18. Miss Busch placed considerable reliance on AJ Liberia v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1736. Whilst this appeal
      had been allowed it was only to the extent of being  remitted  to  the
      Tribunal for further  consideration.  The  law  was  set  out  between
      paragraphs 11 and 19. No suicide  risk  case  had  succeeded.  Suicide
      cases should be approached in the same way as ill health cases (MSS  v
      Belgium and Greece (2011) 53 EHRR 2, Sufi and Elmi v UK (2012) 54 EHRR
      9 and SHH v UK (App No 60367/10)). The reasoning in paragraphs  88  to
      95 of SHH was pivotal. In the appeal before us the appellant  was  not
      dying or at risk of dying either as a result of his mental  ill-health
      or by suicide. Professor Katona had accepted that his conclusion  that
      the appellant was at risk of suicide was, in his own words,  based  on
      no more than  "informed  speculation".  There  had  been  no  previous
      attempts to commit suicide. There was no evidence that the appellant's
      condition had deteriorated as a result of any  previous  decisions  by
      the respondent. He had never been hospitalised  and  he  was  able  to
      work. He was able to function in a normal environment. Over  time  his
      depression had improved significantly. He was better now than  he  was
      before treatment.


  19. Miss Busch pointed out that the country report suggested that  44%  of
      the  population  of  Liberia  suffered  from  PTSD.  The   information
      submitted by the appellant at pages  1  to  14  of  his  supplementary
      bundle related to other individuals showed an improving situation  for
      the  treatment  of  mental  ill-health  in  Liberia   and   that   the
      antidepressant drug the appellant was taking (Mirtazapine) was  likely
      to be available. She accepted that the position had to  be  considered
      on the basis of a hypothetical return to Liberia at the  date  of  the
      hearing.


  20. In relation to the Refugee Convention and Qualification Directive Miss
      Busch also relied on her skeleton. The appellant's  mental  ill-health
      was not an immutable characteristic; it was changing  with  treatment.
      It was not possible to identify people who  were  mentally  ill  as  a
      particular  social  group  because  of  the  wide  range  of  possible
      conditions. She submitted that the evidence did not show that he would
      be persecuted because of his mental ill-health. Such evidence as there
      was related to stigmatisation and indicated that the authorities  were
      taking steps to address this. There was no evidence that the appellant
      would be persecuted.


  21. In her reply to Mr Mackenzie's submissions Miss Busch submitted that Y
      was fact sensitive and an extreme case. We were asked to look  at  the
      appellant's statements as well as Professor Katona's reports.  In  his
      statements the  appellant  said  nothing  about  suicide  or  suicidal
      ideation. In all the cases to which we had been referred the claimants
      were either dying or would inevitably die if returned.  There  was  no
      clear evidence of the risk of suicide if the appellant  was  returned.
      If 44% of the population of Liberia was suffering  from  PTSD  then  a
      decision in the appellant's favour would risk drawing to this  country
      large numbers of people wishing to obtain the benefit  of  psychiatric
      treatment which would result in an enormous commitment  of  resources.
      There was nothing exceptional about the appellant's circumstances  and
      "mentally ill people" was too  wide  a  category  for  the  particular
      social group to be defined with  any  accuracy.  There  was  no  clear
      evidence that mentally ill people in Liberia were persecuted  or  that
      the appellant would stand out as a mentally ill person.


  22. The respondent's supplementary closing submissions  emphasise  aspects
      of Dr Harris' replies to written questions,  in  particular  that  the
      appellant would not come within the category of persons liable to roam
      the streets  in  deplorable  conditions  who  would  be  subjected  to
      ridicule and/or ostracism. It is emphasised that the evidence did  not
      support the conclusion that the appellant's circumstances reached  the
      high threshold set out in N v SSHD or any other threshold which  would
      satisfy Article 3. It would not be appropriate to make  a  comparative
      assessment of medical facilities in Liberia with  those  available  in
      the UK. In the alternative, even if  the  appellant's  claim  were  to
      succeed on Article 3 grounds by reason of  his  mental  health  and/or
      risk of  suicide  then  he  would  not  be  entitled  to  a  grant  of
      humanitarian protection in the light of MP (Sri  Lanka)  and  NT  (Sri
      Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829.


      Appellant's submissions


  23. Mr Mackenzie relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and  said  that  the
      appellant  was  not  claiming  Article  3  human   rights   protection
      independently of his claim  for  humanitarian  protection;  they  were
      conjoined. It was not his primary argument that this appeal  disclosed
      a new risk category falling within N v SSHD but that  it  fell  within
      existing principles. We  were  not  being  asked  to  identify  a  new
      exceptional category. The appellant's submission was that cases  based
      on mental ill-health had succeeded in the UK; he relied on  Y  &  Anor
      (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2009]  EWCA
      Civ 362.


  24. There was no reason why we should come to any different conclusion  as
      to the appellant's state of health from that reached by the panel.  We
      needed to determine his state of health now and how it would be if  he
      was returned. Professor Katona's evidence was clear that  there  would
      be a significant increase in risk if he was returned. That risk  would
      be of inhuman and degrading treatment. J v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629
      established that the test required a high threshold of harm but not of
      risk. This appellant's situation was akin to that of the appellants in
      Y. We  were  asked  to  follow  what  he  argued  was  the  clear  and
      authoritative test in GS and EO in paragraph 85  and,  in  particular,
      85(5)(a).  This  appellant's  case  did  show  that  he  would  be  in
      "exceptional circumstances". The key  elements  were  the  absence  of
      medical/psychiatric treatment, family or anyone else to care for  him,
      homelessness and destitution.  AJ  Liberia  assisted  him  because  it
      showed that an individual going back to Liberia could succeed.


  25. Mr Mackenzie  submitted  that  Y  showed  that  the  question  of  the
      availability  of  appropriate  treatment  was  a   practical   not   a
      theoretical test. The cases before us showed that those claimants  who
      failed did have access to medical treatment and/or family support.  It
      was  accepted  that  the  appropriate  threshold  was  the  high   one
      applicable to "foreign" cases. The evidence was that  drugs  on  their
      own would not help him. 44% of the population of Liberia  was  thought
      to be suffering from PTSD  and  40%  of  those  had  major  depressive
      illnesses. The almost total lack of facilities needed to be looked  at
      in this context. The evidence of Dr Harris was that he  was  the  only
      qualified psychiatrist in Liberia.


  26. In relation to persecution and particular social group,  Mr  Mackenzie
      submitted that the appellant would be at risk from the  population  at
      large because of his mental health difficulties.  It  was  not  argued
      that he would be at risk from the government or the  authorities.  The
      Convention reason was his membership  of  a  particular  social  group
      namely "mentally ill people". This group had immutable characteristics
      and a distinct identity within society. Only one of these  was  needed
      but he had both. In response to our question,  Mr  Mackenzie  accepted
      that he was not aware  of  any  authority  for  the  proposition  that
      "mentally ill people" belonged to a particular social group. He relied
      on LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008]  UKAIT  00005
      for the proposition that "immutable"  and  "immutable  characteristic"
      meant unchangeable not for all time but at any given moment.


  27. We were asked to concentrate on what would happen to the appellant and
      the state of his health if he was returned to  Liberia.  In  assessing
      the  risk  of  suicide  Professor  Katona  was  not  making  wild   or
      impermissible   speculation   but,   as   he   described,    "Informed
      speculation".


  28. The appellant's supplementary closing submissions emphasise  that  the
      correct test in relation to the availability of treatment  in  Liberia
      was whether such treatment was now adequate and effective not  whether
      it had improved and was less inadequate or less  ineffective  than  it
      was at some earlier date. It is  argued  that  the  appellant  remains
      entitled to humanitarian protection notwithstanding the decision in MP
      and NT because the risk of inhuman and degrading  treatment  does  not
      arise solely from his medical condition but  also  from  the  risk  of
      destitution arising from the dire humanitarian conditions in  Liberia.
      Furthermore, the respondent's own policy  on  humanitarian  protection
      indicates that those at risk of ill treatment contrary to Article 3 on
      grounds of destitution or "dire humanitarian conditions" are  entitled
      to humanitarian protection


  29. Following oral submissions we reserved our determination  which  would
      be promulgated after the conclusion of Dr Harris' written evidence and
      the receipt of further submissions from both counsel.








      Findings of fact preserved


  30. The panel's findings of facts contained in the following paragraphs
      were preserved; 97 to 106; 114 (first four sentences; NB the FTT's
      findings as to risk are findings regarding the position as at the date
      of the FTT hearing); 115 to 120. These were;

           97.    We have taken account of the determinations  referred  to
           above.  We have also taken account of the guidance in Devaseelan
           and other cases referred to by Mr. Mackenzie.  A finding of fact
           was made in April 2009 that the Appellant had not been  tortured
           in Liberia.  This was mainly because  he  had  not  referred  to
           torture in his earlier appeal and  we  can  understand  why  the
           finding was made and  why  the  Respondent  continues  to  doubt
           credibility.  That is our starting  point  with  regard  to  his
           account of events in Liberia.


           98.    It is clear that there was very  little  evidence  before
           the Adjudicator in 2003 and neither party  was  represented  and
           once again, it is  not  surprising  that  a  different  view  of
           credibility was taken by the Panel in 2009.   The  only  medical
           evidence of PTSD was from a  GP  and  for  reasons  referred  to
           above, that was rejected and the Panel were found  not  to  have
           made an error of law in rejecting that evidence with  regard  to
           scarring.  We note that there was limited evidence available  at
           the 2009 hearing despite the fact that the  Appellant  was  then
           represented.


           99.    We had the benefit of having a lot more  evidence  before
           us and in particular the detailed written and oral  evidence  of
           Professor Katona.  He gave detailed oral evidence and was cross-
           examined at length.  The Respondent did not  produce  an  expert
           witness.  Ms Pos cross-examined Professor Katona on his  methods
           and possible alternative causes of his symptoms and we  did  not
           find that his evidence was undermined.  Profesor [sic] Katona is
           clearly an expert in the field of psychology  and  competent  to
           make a diagnosis of PTSD.  We note that his  evidence  has  been
           accepted in other Tribunal hearings as expert evidence.  We find
           as a fact that the Appellant was suffering from a  complex  form
           of PTSD which in the opinion of Professor Katona would  only  be
           caused by some kind of repetitive inter-personal cruelty of  the
           kind related to him by the Appellant who now claimed he had been
           a child soldier.  Whilst  it  is  not  his  role  to  decide  on
           credibility, we do attach considerable weight to his  assessment
           of clinical plausibility.


           100.   We take the view that it is highly unlikely that it would
           be possible for the Appellant to feign  mental  illness  of  the
           severity diagnosed over the period since 2009 and to  fool  both
           Professor Katona and Sally Solfe as well as the GP who initially
           diagnosed his problem.  We find as a fact that he  suffers  from
           complex PTSD.


           101.   The cause of his illness  is  less  straightforward.   We
           have  considered  the  possibility  that  it  was  the   general
           experience of living in war-torn Liberia, being  separated  from
           his family or the death of his family, his experience  of  being
           convicted and sentenced for a criminal offence and his period of
           detention which caused the PTSD.  However, we have no reason  to
           doubt the expert opinion  of  Professor  Katona  that  even  the
           cumulative effect of these events would not cause  the  kind  of
           PTSD suffered by the Appellant.


           102.   We have been given an explanation for the  delay  in  his
           disclosure  of  experiences  as  a  child  soldier.    We   have
           considered the submissions made by Ms Pos.  It is the opinion of
           both Professor Katona and Sally Wolfe that  it  is  unsurprising
           that someone would fail to disclose for some time and that  they
           could function at a superficial  level  by  not  disclosing  and
           reliving events.  This would have been a defence mechanism.   We
           reminded ourselves that at the initial appeal the Appellant  was
           not represented.  We accept that on the face of it he  has  been
           inconsistent in his accounts but  taking  the  evidence  in  the
           round including the expert medical evidence of his mental  state
           we find as a fact that he was a child soldier in Liberia.  As  a
           child soldier he witnessed many atrocities  and  was  forced  to
           take part in atrocities against others.  We rely on the accounts
           given to Professor Katona and Sally Wolfe.  We have  also  taken
           into account the statement he made in  March  2009  although  we
           accept that his account was not believed by  the  Tribunal.   We
           have taken into account the report of Dr Arnold on the  question
           of scarring and note that  there  was  a  level  of  consistency
           between his conclusions and the conclusions of the report of  Dr
           Cooper, referred to above.


           103.   We believe the  considerable  amount  of  fresh  evidence
           before  us  justifies   departure   from   their   findings   on
           credibility.  We also had a second report on  scarring  from  Dr
           Arnold which post-dated the  previous  decision.   At  the  very
           least, the scars were found  to  be  consistent  with  the  ill-
           treatment alleged by the Appellant.  In his  overall  evaluation
           of the clinical evidence he felt it would be most unusual for  a
           single individual to display the  number,  type  and  extent  of
           scarring for reasons other than torture or organised violence.


           104.   We find as a fact that  the  Appellant's  family  members
           were killed and his house burnt down before he was taken by  the
           rebels.  He described in his statement that he was  arrested  by
           the peacekeeping force who saw his injuries and the state he was
           in and after a week he was put on a military truck and taken  to
           Sierra Leone.  He hid in a truck with peacekeeping soldiers  and
           got on a flight to the UK.


           105.   We find that he suffered ill-treatment at  the  hands  of
           the rebels in Liberia before he came to the UK in  August  2003.
           By the time of arrival here he would have been 18 years old  but
           we accept that he would have been a minor when he was forced  to
           become a solider.


           106.    The   country   situation   in   Liberia   has   changed
           significantly since that time.  Mr. Mackenzie did  not  seek  to
           argue that he would still be at risk  from  the  rebels  or  the
           government or that he would not be able to  rely  on  sufficient
           protection.  We accept that he may have a  subjective  fear  but
           find it is not well-founded.

           114.   We find as a fact that there is at least a risk  that  an
           adverse decision would lead to a suicide attempt although  there
           has been  no  history  of  self-harm.   Whilst  in  the  UK  the
           Appellant has access to professional mental health  support  and
           we have no reason  to  doubt  that  the  Respondent  would  make
           suitable arrangements for his protection on the  return  journey
           in accordance with her policy.  We  accept  Ms  Wolfe's  opinion
           that returning him to the place where  he  suffered  the  trauma
           would be likely to place him at even higher risk.  We find  that
           he has no family there to support him.


           115.   Turning to  Article  8,  we  note  the  findings  of  the
           previous Panel with regard to family life.  We  found  the  oral
           evidence of Mr. H insufficient to show that he had established a
           family life with his family.  He was not living  with  them  and
           whilst we had no doubt of the genuine good intentions of Mr.  H,
           he was not even aware that the Appellant  had  worked,  obtained
           false ID and been convicted  and  sentenced  for  that  offence.
           Clearly the Appellant has established a private  life  over  the
           years and we find as a fact that the H family have been  friends
           since 2004.  We also take  into  account  the  evidence  of  Mr.
           Hughes.  He is an experienced retired Probation Officer and  has
           formed  a  supportive  and  trusting   relationship   with   the
           Appellant.  We find as a fact that the  Appellant  has  met  his
           family  and  that  these  relationships  are  important  to  the
           Appellant's mental well-being.


           116.   We also find as  a  fact  that  the  Appellant  has  only
           recently started individually focussed therapy with Ms Wolfe and
           that he is beginning to make some improvement.   We  accept  the
           expert evidence as to the likely effect  upon  his  progress  of
           disruption to this treatment and removal from the supportive and
           trusting relationships he has established in the UK.


           117.   The circumstances have changed since the  previous  Panel
           decision in 2009.


           118.   We note that the Appellant did  not  have  a  history  of
           offending and was regarded as of low risk of  further  offending
           at the time of sentence.  He had committed one offence of  using
           a false document to obtain  work.   We  regard  as  particularly
           relevant  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Hughes  with  regard   to   the
           Appellant's future if allowed to remain in the UK.   He  was  an
           experienced former Chief Probation Officer who had worked for 36
           years for the Probation Service.  He did not consider  that  the
           Appellant was at risk of reoffending.  He thought he would  make
           a positive contribution if allowed to remain in the UK.  We give
           weight to his views on this issue.


           119.   We note the decision in MM in which it was indicated that
           the UTJ had focussed on the issue of comparative availability of
           treatment and not on the question  of  proportionality  and  the
           importance of addressing the specific aspect of public  interest
           relied on by the Respondent when considering Article 8.  We  are
           satisfied in this case that it would  not  be  proportionate  to
           deport the Appellant.  We find that he would be of minimal  risk
           of reoffending given  the  medical  and  social  support  he  is
           receiving in the UK and lack of a history of offending.   He  is
           suffering from a serious  mental  illness  and  would  not  have
           support from family or friends in Liberia and would have to  try
           and build new relationships in the country where he  experienced
           the causes of his PTSD.  The disruption to his current treatment
           and relationships caused by removal would increase the  risk  of
           suicide.  This is a factor we have taken into the  balance.   We
           were not addressed by Ms Pos on the reception  arrangements  for
           him in Liberia to deal with the risk of suicide.




           120.    The  legitimate  public  interest  aim  pursued  by  the
           Respondent is protection of the public from crime  and  disorder
           and we accept that includes an element of deterrence.   However,
           we do not believe the Appellant poses a significant risk to  the
           public in future and  we  do  not  believe  that  the  need  for
           deterrence alone can outweigh the adverse effect upon his mental
           health of removal.  We find in the circumstances  of  this  case
           there were grounds to revoke the deportation order."


      Scope of this appeal


  31. The earlier directions in this case ordered that the scope of the
      appeal should be that set out in paragraph 4 of the appellant's
      statement of case dated 13 October 2013 and paragraph 2 of the
      respondent's statement of case dated 22 August 2013 these are,
      respectively;


         "......The issues to be determined in his appeal are:
         i. In light of his mental illness, would he be at real risk of
            inhuman and degrading treatment if he were returned to Liberia?
        ii. If so, does it follow that he is entitled to humanitarian
            protection?
       iii. Would he be at real risk of persecution if he were returned to
            Liberia?
        iv. If so, would such persecution be for a Convention reason, namely
            for reasons of membership of a particular social group,
            specifically mentally ill people." and


         "On 26th of June 2013 the UT linked this appeal to that in
         Kalafallah v Secretary of State for the Home Department and listed
         both appeals to be heard after the decision of the Court of Appeal
         in AE (Algeria) v Secretary Of State for the Home Department.
         Specifically, the present appeal and that in Kalafallah were listed
         to be heard together (following the appeal in AE (Algeria)) in
         order to enable the UT to consider whether they disclosed enhanced
         circumstances, when considering whether the test of exceptional
         circumstances as set out in N (FC) v Secretary Of State for the
         Home Department [2005] UKHL is met, as envisaged by the
         Presidential Panel in the case of GS and EO (Article 3 - health
         cases) (India) [2012] UKUT 00397 (IAC)."


  32. Whilst this appeal is no longer linked to  Kalafallah  we  must  still
      consider the full scope of this appeal, as defined.


      Assessment of the medical/psychiatric evidence


  33. The medical and psychiatric evidence  is  contained  in  the  scarring
      report from Dr Cooper  dated  12  March  2009,  the  Detainee  Medical
      Records from  2009,  the  scarring  report  from  Dr  Arnold  dated  4
      September 2010, four psychiatric reports from Professor  Katona  dated
      30 November 2010, 24 April 2012, 13 December 2013 and 1 February  2014
      together with his oral evidence at the hearing and three reports  from
      Sally Wolfe of "Freedom from Torture" (Formerly the Medical Foundation
      for the Care of Victims of Torture") dated 5 April 2012,  3  May  2012
      and 20 December 2013.






  34.  The findings of the panel which have been preserved remain  valid  at
      the date of that hearing  in  May  2012.  However,  they  need  to  be
      reviewed in the light of any change in circumstances or opinions since
      then. We can see no reason to depart from the  panel's  findings  that
      the appellant is suffering from a complex form of PTSD  which  in  the
      opinion of Professor Katona would only  be  caused  by  some  kind  of
      repetitive inter-personal cruelty of the kind related to  him  by  the
      Appellant who had been a child soldier. He suffers from complex  PTSD.
      The panel found there was at least a risk  that  an  adverse  decision
      would lead to a suicide attempt although there had been no history  of
      self-harm.  Whilst in the  UK  the  Appellant  would  have  access  to
      professional mental health support and there would  be  no  reason  to
      doubt that the respondent would make  suitable  arrangements  for  his
      protection on the return journey in accordance with  her  policy.   We
      also accept the finding, based on Ms Wolfe's opinion,  that  returning
      him to the place where he suffered the trauma would be likely to place
      him at even higher risk.


  35. In addition, drawing on the oral evidence given by  Professor  Katona,
      we find that, since the hearing before the  panel  there  has  been  a
      modest but significant and continuing improvement in  the  appellant's
      depression but not his symptoms of PTSD. As it is not clear  from  the
      findings of the panel we record that he is suffering  from  depression
      as well as complex PTSD. He is nowhere near a  full  recovery.  If  he
      became aware that he was about to be returned to Liberia the  prospect
      would terrify him exacerbated by the prospect of the cessation of  his
      therapy and breaking off contact with those who have  been  supporting
      him. His depression and PTSD would become worse. We  accept  Professor
      Katona's evidence that  the  three  main  obstacles  to  returning  to
      Liberia and fending for himself would be the likely  deterioration  in
      his mental health, the difficulty  in  accessing  such  mental  health
      facilities as exist in Liberia and the problem of  distrusting  people
      there, particularly those in authority.  His  medication,  Mirtazapine
      (an antidepressant), which is a relatively safe drug is less important
      than access to therapy and not a complete treatment  on  its  own.  In
      Professor Katona's opinion he should be  clinically  monitored,  which
      would not have to be by a psychiatrist but could be by a GP or trained
      nurse.


  36. Professor Katona has not seen any major setback in the appellant after
      past immigration decisions and is not aware  that  he  has  ever  been
      hospitalised. He believed that the  appellant  worked  at  the  Nissan
      plant near Newcastle and more recently has been working as a part-time
      kitchen porter. His ability to work in this country  would,  up  to  a
      point, help him in Liberia.


  37. We need to update the finding as to the risk of suicide reached by the
      panel who found that there was  "at  least  a  risk  that  an  adverse
      decision would lead to a suicide attempt although there  has  been  no
      history of  self-harm".  Professor  Katona  was  not  aware  that  the
      appellant had ever attempted to commit suicide.  His  strong  suicidal
      thoughts had diminished since 2012. Professor Katona's view as to  the
      current risk of suicide was, he accepted, "informed  speculation".  He
      accepted that the best indication of the risk of completed suicide was
      a previous attempt but the lack of a previous attempt was not a strong
      indication of a lack of risk. We accept his view that the appellant is
      not currently at high risk of committing suicide although the risk  of
      increased suicidal thoughts will increase if he faces the prospect  of
      imminent return.


      Assessment of country conditions and medical facilities in Liberia


  38. The evidence of Dr Harris is part  expert  psychiatric  evidence  part
      country evidence as to mental health treatment  in  Liberia  with  the
      greater emphasis on the latter because he is based in Liberia and  has
      not seen or interviewed the appellant. We have reports from him  dated
      15 May 2012, 12 December 2013 and 29 January 2014. As the  video  link
      by which it was  intended  that  he  should  give  oral  evidence  was
      unsuccessful  we  also  have  the  written  questions  posed  by   the
      respondent with his answers and the written  questions  posed  by  the
      appellant with his answers. He qualified as a doctor in Liberia and in
      psychology in England. He is registered as a medical  practitioner  in
      Liberia and in the UK. He is an associate professor of  psychiatry  at
      the College of Medicine at the University of Liberia. He is working as
      a psychiatrist  in  Liberia  operating  an  outpatient  mental  health
      service in Monrovia. We find that he is well qualified to express  his
      opinions to which we give considerable weight.


  39.  Dr  Harris  is  currently  the  only  fully  qualified   psychiatrist
      practising in  Liberia  which  is  a  country  with  a  population  of
      approximately 3.5 million. There was  another  qualified  psychiatrist
      but he has left the country. We find that there is only one  "Wellness
      Centre" for the treatment of mental illness in  Liberia,  in  Gbarnga,
      and the psychiatrist who worked there is the one who  has  since  left
      the country. Since then it has been managed by a nurse  with  informal
      training. There is at least one mental health clinician in each county
      of the country. These are nurses who have  undergone  approximately  a
      five-month training programme in the  recognition  and  management  of
      uncomplicated mental disorders at a basic level.  There  is  only  one
      hospital offering mental health facilities in Liberia, the E  S  Grant
      Mental Hospital in Monrovia, where Dr  Harris  works  as  a  part-time
      consultant. The country has no formal special support services able to
      respond to crisis situations or able to provide support to individuals
      at high risk of suicide. Mental health services  in  the  country  are
      "extremely basic at best". Without employment or family support  those
      with mental  health  issues  have  to  fend  for  themselves  and  the
      appellant would not be able to obtain adequate psychiatric  management
      and support in Liberia. In Dr Harris' opinion he  is  unlikely  to  be
      employable. Unless he is employed or has significant family support in
      Liberia he is likely to become destitute. His mental health is  likely
      to deteriorate significantly.


  40. In one report Dr Harris  expressed  the  view  that  misunderstandings
      about mental disorders and stigma associated with mental illness  were
      widespread  and  pervasive  in  Liberia.  "Those  with  severe  mental
      illnesses may be seen roaming about the streets of the capital city in
      deplorable physical condition, sometimes  half  naked".  There  was  a
      tendency to blame individuals for their illness and to  ostracise  and
      ridicule individuals who are mentally ill. People with some  types  of
      mental illness were sometimes believed to be demon possessed. However,
      we accept Dr  Harris  clarification  in  post  hearing  questions  and
      answers that a person such as the  appellant  suffering  from  complex
      PTSD and depression  would  be  unlikely  to  manifest  the  range  of
      symptoms and behaviours which would result in his behaving in this way
      or result in ostracism, being treated as demon possessed  or  involved
      in substance abuse. He would not be classified  as  suffering  from  a
      psychotic  illness  even  though  he  might  manifest  some  psychotic
      symptoms.


  41. We accept Dr Harris opinion that conditions for and treatment  of  the
      mentally ill in Liberia have improved and are  continuing  to  improve
      since the war in that  country  and  that  the  Government  have  made
      rehabilitation of healthcare facilities and  reviving  the  healthcare
      sector a priority but subject to his caveat that there is still a long
      way to go. He does not accept the suggestion that  there  has  been  a
      dramatic increase in mental health care access across  Liberia  taking
      the view, which we accept, that access to facilities staffed by  those
      who have some basic training in mental health diagnosis and management
      has improved but that this does not necessarily correlate to a general
      improvement in mental health care the quality of  which  still  leaves
      much to be desired. There is still a basic lack of resources  for  the
      management of the mentally ill in Liberia.


  42. Dr Harris evidence is that there was no provision  for  mental  health
      services in the government's 2013 budget and  only  US$25,000  in  the
      2014 budget. He accepts that approximately 44% of the adult population
      in Liberia suffers from symptoms of PTSD and that large numbers suffer
      from a Major Depressive Disorder. In this respect the appellant  would
      not be worse off than a large proportion  of  the  population.  Whilst
      those  offering  the  limited  mental  health   treatment   facilities
      available are likely to have encountered these illnesses it  does  not
      mean that they are experts in treating them. Any treatment  which  the
      appellant would be able to access  would  be  basic  and  rudimentary.
      Unless, through friends, family or employment  he  had  the  funds  he
      would find it difficult to access medication. As to the drug currently
      being taken by the appellant, Mirtazapine, Dr Harris  latest  evidence
      is that it is not available at the hospital where he  is  a  part-time
      consultant but that it  can  be  obtained  on  prescription  from  one
      pharmacy in Monrovia. In the light of Dr Harris evidence we find  that
      such medication would have to be paid for  unless  the  appellant  was
      able to obtain help from a  very  charitable  donor,  which  would  be
      unlikely.


  43. Dr Harris has amplified his previously expressed opinions and  is  now
      of the view, which  we  accept,  that  unless  the  appellant  obtains
      employment or has significant family support he is  likely  to  become
      destitute in Liberia. He points out that social adjustments for  those
      returning to the country are difficult in the  best  of  circumstances
      and that in the absence  of  supportive  social  relationships  forced
      return to an environment of previously experienced trauma  may  itself
      be traumatic.


  44. We have studied the voluminous country information put before us which
      has provided a helpful  context  for  the  opinions  expressed  by  Dr
      Harris. Having done so we  accept  his  opinions  as  the  best,  most
      accurate and up-to-date information as to  the  situation  facing  the
      appellant were he now to return to Liberia particularly in relation to
      his mental health and mental health treatment in Liberia.

      Discussion


  45. In order to show that he is entitled to asylum it is for the appellant
      to establish, to the standard of a reasonable  likelihood  or  a  real
      risk that he faces persecution for a Convention reason in the  country
      to which it is proposed to return him. His argument is that  he  would
      face social ostracism and stigmatisation, destitution and homelessness
      and harmful "spiritual" treatment for "demonic possession".


  46. It is also argued that the appellant  would  face  persecution  for  a
      Convention reason as a member of  a  particular  social  group  namely
      "mentally ill people".


  47. Applying Article 10 (1) (d) of the Qualification Directive;

         "A group shall be considered to  form  a  particular  social  group
         where in particular:
         i. Members of that group  share  an  innate  characteristic,  or  a
         common background that cannot be changed, or share a characteristic
         or belief that is so fundamental to identity or conscience  that  a
         person should not be forced to announce it, and
         ii. That group has a distinct identity  in  the  relevant  country,
         because it is perceived  as  being  different  by  the  surrounding
         society..."


  48. Either but not necessarily both of these criteria need to  be  met  (K
      and Fornah v SSHD [2007] 1 AC 412). Not all members of the group  need
      to be at risk of persecution and it is no bar to  asylum  status  that
      there is more than one reason for the persecution. There has to  be  a
      causal relationship between membership of the  group  and  the  feared
      persecution.


  49. We do not accept that mental illness is an innate characteristic which
      is unchangeable in the sense that it is beyond the sufferer's power to
      change it. It can be changed by treatment, whether or not the sufferer
      seeks this. It may well change over time without treatment. There is a
      valid comparison with physical illness; neither  can  be  said  to  be
      unchangeable. Some mental illnesses may be long-lasting, some may come
      and go and others may be of short duration. There are  many  types  of
      mental illness just as there are many types  of  physical  illness.  A
      group defined as "mentally ill people",  even  in  the  context  of  a
      particular country such as Liberia, is too vague  and  ill-defined  to
      identify those who might belong to it. It does  not  have  a  distinct
      identity. Whilst those with obvious symptoms of some types  of  mental
      illness might be identifiable that  will  not  be  the  case  for  all
      individuals and  all  types  of  mental  illness.  We  find  that  the
      appellant has not established that he belongs to a  particular  social
      group or, as a result, that there is a Convention reason.


  50. Article 3 of the European Convention of Human Rights  is  in  absolute
      terms: "No one  shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or
      degrading treatment or punishment". It is common ground that there  is
      a high threshold in cases which raise mental or physical illness as  a
      reason for challenging removal and that this threshold is particularly
      high in "foreign" cases such as this. Article 3  does  not  require  a
      Contracting State to undertake  the  obligation  of  providing  aliens
      indefinitely  with  medical  treatment  social  and  other  forms   of
      assistance lacking in their home countries.  Lord  Hope  in  (N  v  UK
      (2008) 47 EHRR 39) concluded that a case which might succeed would  be
      one involving removal to "a place which lacked the medical and  social
      services which (the applicant) would need to prevent  acute  suffering
      while he is dying".

  51. The starting point is  whether  there  are  exceptional  circumstances
      which would render an individual's removal a violation of Article 3 (D
      v UK (1997) 25 EHRR 423).  In  addition  to  an  individual's  medical
      condition exceptional circumstances can include conditions which  that
      individual would face on return if  they  undermine  his  basic  human
      dignity such as homelessness and destitution. The humanitarian grounds
      against the removal need to be compelling (N v UK). An  assessment  of
      an individual's circumstances in the country of  return  is  required,
      focusing on the practical availability of the treatment or care rather
      than its theoretical availability. The assessment  should  be  of  the
      current situation in the receiving country as opposed to any questions
      of improvement or deterioration over a period. We accept that  serious
      illness includes either or both of physical and mental illness (Pretty
      v UK (2002) 35 EHRR), MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2014]
      EWCA Civ 829 and AJ (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1736 (at paragraph 12).


  52. In GS and EO (Article 3 - health  cases)  (India)  [2012]  UKUT  00397
      (IAC) a Presidential panel of the Upper  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
      ratio derived from the leading cases  in  relation  to  an  individual
      suffering  from  a  naturally  occurring  illness  was   whether   the
      conditions which would meet that individual on return would  undermine
      their basic human dignity. The imminent prospect  of  death  could  be
      part of the central question but cases which might  succeed  were  not
      limited to individuals who were terminally ill. The cumulative  effect
      of serious illness together with lack of medical  care  or  family  or
      social support might bring a case to  the  requisite  high  threshold.
      However, on the facts of that case it was held that the fact that life
      expectancy was dramatically shortened by  the  withdrawal  of  medical
      treatment in the host state was not capable of amounting to the highly
      exceptional case that engaged Article 3. The Tribunal did not make any
      findings in relation to the consequences of removal of a  person  with
      mental rather than physical illness including cases where the risk  on
      removal was that of suicide. The panel was not referred to any suicide
      cases which had been considered by the Strasbourg Court.




  53. In J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 the Court of Appeal  held  that  there
      was not a different test in cases where the Article 3 breach relied on
      was a risk of suicide or other self-harm.  Counsel's  submission  that
      there should be a different approach  from  that  established  by  the
      Strasberg jurisprudence in cases where there was  a  claimed  risk  of
      suicide was rejected. It was important to consider whether the claimed
      fear of ill-treatment in the receiving state  on  which  the  risk  of
      suicide was said to be based was objectively  well  founded.  In  this
      context it was relevant to consider whether the removing or  receiving
      states had effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.


  54. The Court of Appeal in MP and NT agreed that "risk of  suicide"  cases
      fell within the same class as Article 3 ill-health cases generally.


  55. An individual who succeeds on Article  3  grounds  by  reason  of  his
      mental health, risk of suicide or homelessness and degradation is  not
      on that basis alone entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection. In
      MP and NT at paragraph 48 Maurice Kay LJ indicated that the two  types
      of protection  were  not  completely  coextensive.  The  Qualification
      Directive was not intended to catch Article 3 cases where the risk was
      to health or of suicide rather than of persecution. N  v  UK  made  it
      clear that the difference was that the alleged harm would not  emanate
      from the intentional acts or omissions of public authorities  or  non-
      state bodies but instead from a naturally occurring  illness  and  the
      lack of sufficient resources to deal with it in the receiving country.
      In MP and NT it was not accepted that the Sri Lankan authorities  were
      responsible for the claimant's mental ill-health and suicide risk.


      Application to this appeal


  56. In his claim for asylum the appellant's position is that he would face
      social ostracism and stigmatisation, destitution and homelessness  and
      harmful "spiritual" treatment for "demonic possession". This relies on
      an interpretation of what was said in one of Dr Harris' reports  which
      has been clarified since it was first expressed.  Dr  Harris'  current
      opinion is that a person such as the appellant suffering from  complex
      PTSD and depression  would  be  unlikely  to  manifest  the  range  of
      symptoms and behaviours which would result in his behaving in this way
      or result in ostracism, being treated as demon possessed  or  involved
      in substance abuse. He would not be classified  as  suffering  from  a
      psychotic  illness  even  though  he  might  manifest  some  psychotic
      symptoms. He would not come within the group  of  "those  with  severe
      mental illnesses (who) may be seen roaming about the  streets  of  the
      capital city in deplorable physical condition, sometimes half  naked",
      those who have been known to be chained or attached to logs  or  those
      who are seriously ill treated because of a perception of their  mental
      ill-health.






  57. Even  if  he  were  to  be  homeless  and  destitute  or  suffer  some
      discrimination we find that the appellant has not established that the
      way in which he would be treated on return to Liberia would amount  to
      persecution. Furthermore, there would be no Convention reason. For the
      reasons we have given the appellant is not a member  of  a  particular
      social group.


  58. In relation to the Article 3 grounds the appellant is  suffering  from
      depression and  a  complex  form  of  PTSD  caused  by  some  kind  of
      repetitive inter-personal cruelty  suffered  by  him  before  he  left
      Liberia much of it relating to his having been a child soldier.  Since
      the hearing before the panel there has been a modest  but  significant
      and continuing improvement in his depression but not his  symptoms  of
      PTSD. He is nowhere near a full  recovery.  He  continues  to  receive
      counselling and is taking Mirtazapine. If he became aware that he  was
      about to be  returned  to  Liberia  the  prospect  would  terrify  him
      exacerbated by the prospect  of  the  cessation  of  his  therapy  and
      breaking off contact with those who  have  been  supporting  him.  His
      depression and PTSD are likely to become worse.


  59. We accept Professor Katona's opinion that the appellant's  medication,
      Mirtazapine, which is a relatively safe antidepressant drug,  is  less
      important than access to therapy and is not a  complete  treatment  on
      its own. Mirtazapine is only available from one pharmacy  in  Monrovia
      and has to be paid for. It is not likely that the appellant would have
      the means to acquire this. We accept Professor Katona's  opinion  that
      the appellant should be clinically monitored in Liberia,  which  would
      not have to be by a psychiatrist but could  be  by  a  GP  or  trained
      nurse. We find that whilst the appellant  would  not  have  access  to
      counselling, which has also been referred to as  individually  focused
      therapy, he could have some access  to  a  nurse  with  mental  health
      training. Dr Harris evidence was that there were a limited  number  of
      trained nurses throughout the country.


  60. The panel found and we accept it is still the case that the  appellant
      has no family in Liberia to help or support him. Such help and support
      would be very important in assisting him to resettle in Liberia and to
      obtain a job. Without support or a  job  he  is  likely  to  suffer  a
      deterioration in his  mental  health,  a  lack  of  accommodation  and
      destitution. We note that his  mental  ill-health  has  not  made  him
      incapable of working in this country. He  worked  at  the  Nissan  car
      plant near Newcastle for several months and was a team leader  in  the
      packaging area. Subsequently  he  has  been  working  as  a  part-time
      kitchen porter. We accept that he would find it  difficult  to  obtain
      employment in Liberia. We have not been told and are not able to  take
      into account any  resettlement  arrangements  or  payments  which  the
      respondent might provide.


  61. As to the risk of suicide, Professor Katona was  not  aware  that  the
      appellant had ever attempted to commit suicide.  His  strong  suicidal
      thoughts had diminished since 2012. Professor Katona's view as to  the
      current risk of suicide was, he accepted, "informed speculation".  The
      best indication of the  risk  of  completed  suicide  was  a  previous
      attempt but the lack of a previous attempt was not a strong indication
      of a lack of risk. We accept  his  view  that  the  appellant  is  not
      currently at high risk of committing  suicide  although  the  risk  of
      increased suicidal thoughts will increase if he faces the prospect  of
      imminent return to the country where he suffered the trauma which  has
      caused his current mental ill-health. Whilst in the UK  the  Appellant
      would have access to professional mental health support and  there  is
      no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  respondent   would   make   suitable
      arrangements for his protection during the process of  his  return  in
      accordance with her policy.


  62. On his return to  Liberia  the  appellant  will  not  have  access  to
      specialist or dedicated treatment for suicidal  ideation  but  he  can
      have access to a clinic with a nurse who  has  limited  mental  health
      treatment training. Whilst there is a real risk that,  lacking  family
      support, the appellant would become destitute  we  are  not  persuaded
      there is a real risk that he will  commit  suicide.  His  mental  ill-
      health, even if it deteriorates because he  is  forced  to  return  to
      Liberia, is not otherwise life-threatening.

  63. We must assess  the  risks  of  persecution  or  infringement  of  the
      appellant's Article 3 human rights on the basis of a current return to
      Liberia. However, the appellant's mental health is  reasonably  likely
      to be conditioned  by  his  knowledge  that  his  appeal  has  already
      succeeded on Article 8 human rights  grounds  and  that  he  has  been
      granted leave to remain in the UK for a period expiring in March 2015.
      He will know that he can make  a  further  application  for  leave  on
      Article 8 grounds before his current leave expires which will  succeed
      or fail largely on the state of his mental health  and  conditions  in
      Liberia at that time.


  64. We are not persuaded that, looking at all the evidence relating to him
      and to Liberia, the appellant has established that on return  to  that
      country his mental ill-health  will  reach  the  very  high  threshold
      required for Article 3 foreign cases even when combined with the  real
      risks of homelessness and destitution.


  65. In relation to humanitarian protection we find that the  threshold  is
      the same as that  for  Article  3.  If,  as  we  have  concluded,  the
      appellant fails on Article 3 grounds then he also fails in  his  claim
      for humanitarian protection. Furthermore, he also fails because we  do
      not accept that the Liberian authorities or any agents of  persecution
      were responsible for any risks he faces.


      Conclusions


  66. In previous determinations there have been  anonymity  directions.  In
      view of the state of the appellant's  mental  health  we  consider  it
      necessary to continue the anonymity direction. We make an order  under
      rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead
      members of the public to identify the appellant.








  67. The appellant's appeal has already succeeded on Article 8 human rights
      grounds and that decision stands. We dismiss his appeal on  Article  3
      and humanitarian protection grounds.












      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

