








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04449/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on  |
|On: 1 August 2016                    |On: 10 November 2016                 |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mrs Samantha Mary Ann Steele
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Cronin, counsel (instructed by Danielle Cohen
                    Immigration Law Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.


   2. The claimant is a national of Zambia, born on 4 March 1993. Her appeal
      against the decisions of the  respondent  dated  15  January  2015  to
      refuse to extend her leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  ten
      years' lawful long residence and to  remove  her  under  s.47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, was  allowed  by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Callow in a decision  promulgated  on  14  October
      2015.


   3. Judge Callow found that the secretary of state's decision was  not  in
      accordance with the law as she had omitted to  consider  applying  the
      policy dated 8 May 2015 - long residence - to the claimant's  "excess"
      absences [6c].  He stated that taking account of the policy,  and  the
      fact that during her early schooling in the UK between the ages of  11
      and 13 when she was unable to choose to  remain  in  the  UK  for  her
      school vacation and had to  undertake  school  trips,  these  absences
      totalling 308 days "occurred in particularly compelling  circumstances
      [6(c)]." The appeal was allowed to the extent that it was remitted  to
      the respondent for her to consider  exercising  discretion  under  the
      relevant Rule in accordance with the law.


   4. He also allowed the  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention. She referred to the 'principles'  arising  from  decisions
      such as MF (Article 8 - new Rules) [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC), and R  (re
      Nagre)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)   and   other   decisions,
      "....wherein it is necessary to consider whether there are  compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules which  would
      justify the grant of protection under Article 8" [11]. This involves a
      consideration   of   the   principles,   and   in    particular,    of
      proportionality, according to the approach in Huang and another v SSHD
      [2007] UKHL 11 and other cases [11].


   5. He  found  that  the  claimant  and  her  partner  are  in  a  durable
      relationship.  While  they  do  not  continuously  live  together   as
      partners, they do so frequently  and  their  relationship  amounts  to
      family life. "... In any event, it would be considered to be  a  major
      factor in an assessment of private life". The notion of family life is
      not confined to families based on marriage and might  encompass  other
      relationships [12].


   6. He found that as the Rules were not a complete code, all  the  factors
      relevant to family and private life must  be  considered  and  weighed
      against the public interest. She also  referred  to  paragraph  276AOO
      which expressly  recognises  and  accommodates  the  possibility  that
      Article 8 rights may necessitate the grant  of  leave  notwithstanding
      that the Rules mandate refusal of leave. It  refers  to  circumstances
      where an  applicant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  in  paragraph
      276ADE(1) where the secretary of state grants leave to remain  outside
      the Rules on Article 8 grounds  [13].  A  similar  acknowledgement  is
      contained in the new paragraph GEN 1.10 of Appendix FM  introduced  by
      paragraph 51 of HC 532.


   7. Judge Callow held that it therefore followed that should he find  that
      the appeal does not succeed under the long residence Rules, the  Rules
      themselves make it clear that there  is  no  incongruity  between  the
      decision that a person does not qualify  for  leave  to  remain  under
      paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of the Rules on the  one  hand  and  a
      decision that removing the person would breach Article 8 on the  other
      hand, requiring a grant of leave to remain. [13]


   8. He referred to Part VA of  the  Rules,  addressing  Article  8  public
      interest considerations. Regard must be had  to  the  public  interest
      question as to whether an  interference  with  a  person's  rights  to
      respect for private and family life is justified under  Article  8(2).
      He cited the relevant provisions under s.117B [14].


   9. He concluded that the public interest was not  adversely  affected  in
      this case. The claimant is lawfully in the UK and is financially  self
      sufficient. She speaks perfect English. Her family  and  private  life
      have long been established over time commencing when the claimant  was
      a child and through her teenage years to adulthood.  She  is,  in  the
      words of her partner's father, "quintessentially British." [16]


  10. Section 117B is not exhaustive.  In  the  event,  he  found  that  her
      removal would be a disproportionate interference with both her and her
      partner's, as well their families' and their friends' right to respect
      for family and private life rights [16]. Those are deserving of weight
      and significance, making the  respondent's  removal  disproportionate.
      [16]


  11. On 26 May 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  granted  the  secretary  of
      state permission to appeal. The contention  was  that  the  Judge  had
      failed to consider the  Article  8  claim  through  the  lens  of  the
      Immigration Rules and  consequently  failed  to  appreciate  that  the
      claimant needed to demonstrate compelling circumstances to be entitled
      to a grant of leave to remain outside the Rules.


  12. He found that whilst the Judge  is  clearly  entitled  to  take  those
      matters into account as referred to in [16] of the  determination,  it
      is arguable that the assessment  did  not  sufficiently  disclose  the
      existence of compelling circumstances capable of  supporting  a  claim
      for leave to remain outside the Rules,  or  that  he  gave  sufficient
      consideration  to  the  fact  that   the   claimant's   private   life
      relationships  were  established  when  the  immigration  status   was
      arguably precarious.


      The hearing on 1 August 2016


  13. I was informed at the hearing that the secretary of state had  not  as
      yet given a decision exercising her discretion in accordance with  the
      law as required by the Judge at  [6(e)].  There  has  been  no  appeal
      against that decision.


  14. Mr Melvin on behalf of the secretary of state submitted  that  private
      life was developed when the claimant was a student in  the  UK.  There
      are no compelling circumstances in this  case.  The  determination  is
      therefore "irrational or perverse".


  15. The Judge did not consider the Immigration Rules on private and family
      life, and in particular whether the claimant may or may not  meet  the
      Immigration Rules. If the requirements of the  Rules  cannot  be  met,
      then  the  Judge  had  to   identify   compelling   or   compassionate
      circumstances outside the Rules in accordance with the decisions  such
      as Singh [2015] and SS (Congo) [2015].


  16. There was no expectation that the  claimant  would  obtain  indefinite
      leave to remain. There was accordingly no proper reasons given why the
      appeal should have been allowed under Article 8. On the basis  of  the
      evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in August  2015,  although  he
      was entitled to have regard to the evidence "going forward" there  are
      no exceptional circumstances disclosed.


  17. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Cronin submitted that  at  the  date  of
      hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  she,  as  the  claimant's
      counsel, discussed  the  claimant's  travel  schedule  from  passports
      submitted with her application. The calculation of her travel required
      consideration of very  faint  and  overlapping  stamps  with  multiple
      destinations. She noted that the claimant's solicitor  had  now  spent
      many hours with the assistance of a magnifying lens and  she  informed
      the Tribunal that "regretfully" the calculation which showed  absences
      of 577 days or 548 days if her compulsory school trips are discounted,
      underestimated the absences. The revised estimate showed that  in  the
      period 6 July 2006 until 6 July 2016, she was absent for 604 days,  or
      581 days if her compulsory school trips are discounted. The claimant's
      lawyers apologised for "the inadvertent error."


  18. Ms Cronin submitted that she still nevertheless stands to benefit from
      the discretions detailed in the long residence policy. The bulk of her
      absences (306 days) occurred in her first three  years  when  she  was
      aged 11-13. She was 11 and a half years old when she  entered  the  UK
      and is now 23 years and four months old. She has accordingly spent  at
      least half her life in the UK. In the  event  that  her  residence  is
      considered to be "continuous", Ms  Cronin  submitted  that  she  would
      succeed under paragraph 276ADE(v).


  19. In her response to the secretary of  state's  grounds,  she  submitted
      that there was not any challenge in respect of any of the findings  of
      fact made by the Judge nor were illustrations provided from  the  text
      to support the generic unspecified grounds.


  20. She submitted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes, who had initially
      refused the secretary of state's application for permission to  appeal
      noted that contrary to the grounds, Judge Callow did in fact  consider
      and make findings concerning the Rules - failed for lack of continuous
      residence and that the claimant and her fianc� were  not  partners  as
      defined in the Rules (Appendix FM), and gave reasons for the decision.
      She accordingly submitted that the secretary  of  state's  grounds  at
      paragraphs 8 and 9 are not sustainable.


  21. She further submitted that the contention that the assessment did  not
      sufficiently  disclose  the  existence  of  compelling   circumstances
      capable of supporting a claim for leave to remain outside the Rules or
      give sufficient consideration to the fact that the claimant's  private
      life relationships were established when her  immigration  status  was
      arguably precarious, had not been advanced as part of these reasons as
      grounds of appeal.


  22. The Judge had properly directed himself as to the relevant  principles
      and the correct approach to Article 8 claims as detailed in the  cases
      which he cited and engaged with at [11] and [14 to 16]. This  included
      a reference to s.117B.


  23. He made findings as to the claimant's long  standing  and  very  close
      ties established during her childhood and adolescence in the  UK;  her
      durable family life with Mr [G] and that she is "revered"  by  and  is
      wholly integrated into his family.  Her  relationships  are  "intense,
      essential and valued... formed over an extended period" and  that  she
      is wholly financially supported here by her father. These findings are
      not subject to any challenge.


  24. The Judge also properly directed himself with regard to the  existence
      of family life at [12 and 16].  He noted that the  Rules  were  not  a
      complete code and that the Rules were amended from  28  July  2014  to
      align certain Rules with public  interest  considerations  in  s.117B:
      HC532, explanatory memorandum, paragraph 7.16 - [13].


  25. She submitted that the Judge had proper  regard  to  paragraph  276AOO
      which for the first time expressly  recognised  and  accommodated  the
      possibility that Article 8 rights may necessitate the grant  of  leave
      notwithstanding that the Rules mandate refusal of leave [13].


  26. Similar acknowledgements are contained in the new paragraph  GEN  1.10
      of Appendix FM. Accordingly, the Rules themselves make it  clear  that
      there is no incongruity between a decision that the  person  does  not
      qualify for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix  FM  of
      the Rules on the one hand, and a decision  that  removing  the  person
      would breach Article 8, thereby requiring a grant of leave  to  remain
      on the other hand.


  27.  She  contended  that  contrary  to  Upper   Tribunal   Judge   Blum's
      'observations', the Judge's finding regarding the claimant's  intense,
      essential and  valued  relationships,  their  long  duration  and  her
      formative  years  in  the  UK,  is   the   language   of   "compelling
      circumstances". His finding that they  are  deserving  of  weight  and
      significance, making her removal  disproportionate,  is  a  conclusion
      that supports his finding as to compelling circumstances. There is  no
      requirement that the Judge should have  used  the  phrase  "compelling
      circumstances".  The  question  is  whether  he  has   undertaken   an
      equivalent assessment, which she submitted Judge Callow  had  done  in
      this case.


  28. With regard to the secretary of state's general submissions concerning
      a failure properly to decide with reference to the Rules, she repeated
      that the Judge did consider and decide the  relevant  Rules.  He  also
      noted that the Rules do not codify Article 8. The Strasbourg  approach
      requires a cumulative consideration of the totality of the ties to the
      host country. The Strasbourg court determines the existence of  family
      life on a case by case basis looking  at  the  circumstances  of  each
      case, the relevant criterion being the existence of the effective ties
      between the individuals concerned and not simply on family  life  ties
      beyond those between partners and parents and minor children,  nor  of
      "private life" relationships between relatives.


  29. She referred to R (Ali and Bibi) v SSHD [2015] 1 WLR 5055, where  Lady
      Hale cited Jeunesse v Netherlands [2015] 60 EHRR 17, but noted that in
      the UK we have, at least since the decisions in Huang  and  Quila  and
      another, spelled out the principles  in  conventional  proportionality
      terms.  The  Supreme  Court  applied  a  conventional  proportionality
      analysis rather than an exceptionality test and held that at least  in
      some cases, the application of a pre-entry English language  test  for
      spouses could well lead to a breach of Article 8.


  30. Unlike the deportation context, where the Tribunal is required to find
      exceptional circumstances over and above the  criteria  in  paragraphs
      399-399A of the Rules, this is not a requirement outside that context.




  31. Although the Judge may have given  "abbreviated  attention"  regarding
      the public interest considerations, this does not amount to  an  error
      of law because the finding as to family life was not 'challengable'.


      Assessment


  32. The secretary of state has contended that the First-tier Judge did not
      identify any compelling or compassionate circumstances justifying  the
      consideration of private or family life outside  the  Rules.  That  is
      said to constitute a material error. Nor did the Judge  consider  that
      her relationship with her partner, who did not "appear" in the refusal
      letter, was formed at a time when her leave was precarious in nature.


  33. Judge Callow did properly direct  himself  as  regards  the  principle
      applying to Article 8 claims. He referred to  decisions  including  MF
      (Article 8 - New Rules) and R (in re Nagre) and other cases  at  [11].
      He noted at [11] that it is necessary to consider  whether  there  are
      compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the  Rules
      which justify the grant of protection under Article 8.  That  involved
      the consideration of principles, and in particular of proportionality,
      according to the approach in Huang, supra, and other cases.


  34. He found  that  the  claimant  and  her  partner  were  in  a  durable
      relationship. Their relationship amounts to a family life. The  notion
      of family life is not confined to families based on marriage and might
      encompass other relationships [12].


  35. He also noted  [16]  that  family  and  private  life  had  long  been
      established over a time, commencing when she was a child  and  through
      her teenage years to adulthood. She is quintessentially  British.  She
      met her partner in her second year at university in 2013. Once she has
      completed her studies and her partner's business is  established  they
      intend to live together. She is revered by her partner's parents.  She
      is very much a member of their family.


  36. Nor was it challenged that she has been wholly  financially  supported
      here by her father.


  37. The Judge records at [4] with regard to Article  8,  that  whilst  the
      presenting officer did not challenge counsel's submissions, he had  no
      independent submissions to make. Nor did he have any questions to  ask
      of the claimant and her witnesses. It was thus agreed  that  it  would
      not be necessary for them to be called. It was on that basis that  the
      appeal was addressed by way of submissions only.


  38. The Judge  considered  the  significance  of  paragraph  276AOO  which
      accommodates the possibility that Article 8 rights may require that  a
      grant of leave be given  notwithstanding  that  the  Rules  mandate  a
      refusal of leave. The  paragraph  refers  to  circumstances  where  an
      applicant does not meet the requirements in  paragraph  276ADE(1)  but
      the secretary of state grants leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  on
      Article 8 grounds.


  39. There is a similar acknowledgement contained in paragraph GEN 1.10  of
      Appendix FM.


  40. Accordingly, the Judge noted that the Rules themselves made clear that
      there is no incongruity between a decision  that  a  person  does  not
      qualify for leave to remain under Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  on
      the one hand and a decision that  removing  the  person  would  breach
      Article 8, thereby requiring leave to remain on the other hand.


  41. Although not expressly identifying his reasons for proceeding with the
      assessment under Article 8, he found that the claimant and her partner
      are in a durable relationship; that they frequently live  together  as
      partners and that their relationship amounts to family life.  He  also
      had regard to her lengthy residence in the UK which was lawful.  These
      findings that these factors deserve weight  and  significance,  making
      her removal disproportionate, constitute the compelling  circumstances
      justifying an assessment under Article 8.


  42. I  find  that  the  Judge  was  aware  of  the  need  that  compelling
      circumstances had to be shown  and  that  the  factors  identified  in
      particular at [12] constitute the basis for his assessment  that  they
      did exist. He also noted that the Rules are not a  complete  code  and
      all the factors relevant to family and private life must be considered
      and weighed against the public interest.


  43. I find that Judge  Callow  has  in  substance  found  that  there  are
      compelling circumstances. There is  no  contention  that  the  factors
      relied on at [12] and [7] were  not  capable  of  supporting  such  an
      assessment.


  44. I also find that he has had  proper  regard  to  the  public  interest
      considerations applicable  in  this  case.  [16]  He  noted  that  the
      claimant is lawfully here and  is  financially  self  sufficient.  She
      speaks  perfect  English.  Her  family  and  private  life  have  been
      established over a long period, commencing when she was  a  child  and
      through her teenage  years  to  adulthood.  Her  relationship  between
      herself and Mr [G] and his family and that  with  her  school  friends
      constitute private life. These relationships were  intense,  essential
      and valued, once formed over an extended period.


  45. Although his decision might have been more  structured,  the  decision
      reached was sustainable on the agreed facts. I do not find that  Judge
      Callow has made any material error on a point of law.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
      making of any material error on a point of law. It  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed      Date 30/8/20016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

