
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04803/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LITING HUANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jagadesham, instructed by Waterstone Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Liting Huang, was born on 26  January  1990  and  is  a
    female citizen of China.  She entered the United Kingdom as  a  student
    in 2009.  On 31 October 2014, she applied for leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of her family life with her same sex partner.   That  application
    was refused on 21 January 2015 and the respondent appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Myers) which, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29
    April 2013, allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.
     I shall hereafter refer to the appellant as  the  respondent  and  the
    respondent as the appellant (as they appeared respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).

 2. Judge Myers heard evidence from the appellant  and  from  her  partner,
    [XG] (hereafter Ms G).  The parties agree that  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  turned  upon  the   question   of   "insurmountable
    obstacles" as provided for under Appendix FM, R-LTRP1.1(iii) (that  is,
    the  application  of  EX1).   The   judge   found   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles preventing the  return  of  the  appellant  to
    China and that EX1 applied to the appellant, and it was for that reason
    this appeal was  allowed.   The  Secretary  of  State  give  makes  two
    challenges to that decision.  First, it  is  asserted  that  the  judge
    effectively reversed the burden of proof (which should have been on the
    appellant) allowing the appeal on the basis that there was "no evidence
    that as a British citizen [the appellant's civil  partner]  would  have
    any entitlement to reside in China and if this appeal  is  unsuccessful
    she would have to renounce her British  citizenship  if  she  returned"
    [15].  The Secretary of State acknowledges that dual nationality is not
    recognised in China.  She also challenged the decision of the judge for
    failing to consider whether there was any evidence "from the  appellant
    that she would not be able to reside  with  her  partner  on  either  a
    renewable partnership visa or a working visa."

 3. I do not find that that  ground  has  merit.   The  question  of  Ms  G
    returning to China having renounced her British citizenship  was  never
    put before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is  an  argument  that  the
    Secretary of State  has  only  raised  now,  on  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  At [15], Judge Myers noted that,

         "Ms G would thus have an invidious decision to make if this  appeal
         is dismissed; there is no evidence that as a  British  citizen  she
         would have any entitlement to reside in China and if this appeal is
         unsuccessful she would have to renounce her British citizenship  if
         returned or live apart from her partner.  She has lived in  the  UK
         since 2003 and has made her life here and  I  accept  her  evidence
         that if the appeal fails she would not return to China."

 4. The judge concluded, "I find the situation facing Ms G goes beyond mere
    disruption  and  inconvenience  and  does  amount   to   insurmountable
    obstacles.  Accordingly, I allow the appeal."  The real  question  here
    is whether the judge was entitled, on the basis of the evidence  before
    her, to reach that conclusion.  I find that she was  so  entitled.   At
    [13], the judge noted that it was

         "... accepted by the respondent that [Ms G] had to leave  China  in
         distressing circumstances after the death of her parents while  she
         was still a child  and  it  is  understandable  that  it  would  be
         traumatic for her to have to live in a country which persecuted her
         parents."

 5. The judge considered that that fact  combined  with  the  stark  choice
    facing Ms G of splitting from  her  partner  (with  whom  both  parties
    accepted she had a genuine  relationship)  or  renouncing  her  British
    citizenship ultimately led to a conclusion that these matters  amounted
    to "insurmountable obstacles"  preventing  the  appellant's  return  to
    China.  That was not a conclusion, on the evidence, which  was  in  any
    way perverse but, rather, an outcome available to the judge  which  and
    she had supported by cogent and  clear  reasoning.   I  find  that  the
    question of the alleged reversal of the burden of proof does not  arise
    and there was no reason for the appellant to adduce evidence  regarding
    the availability of partnership or working visas in China given that at
    no stage during the First-tier Tribunal proceedings was such a scenario
    ever suggested.

 6. The second ground attacks the judge's conclusion that the renouncing of
    Ms G's British citizenship would amount to an  insurmountable  obstacle
    preventing the appellant's return to China.  The judge noted [14]  that
    "foreign nationals who once held  Chinese  nationality  may  apply  for
    restoration of nationality if they have a legitimate  reason  ..."   In
    the light of that observation, the Secretary of State argues that Ms  G
    could regain her Chinese nationality and that  she  and  the  appellant
    could live together in  China.   However,  that  scenario  is  entirely
    speculative; what is certain is  that  Ms  G  would  lose  her  British
    nationality upon  return  to  China  if  she  were  to  regain  Chinese
    nationality whilst she would not be certain, as a British national,  to
    exercise any right to reside in China.  Whether she would  be  able  to
    show that she had a "legitimate reason"  for  the  restoration  of  her
    Chinese nationality would be a matter beyond her control.  Against that
    background, I find that the judge did not err in law by concluding that
    the loss of Ms G's British nationality combined with her  return  to  a
    country which she had left  in  distressing  circumstances  established
    that there existed insurmountable obstacles.  The Upper Tribunal should
    hesitate  before  interfering  with  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal where those findings have  been  reached  following  a  proper
    examination of all the evidence and where there are justified and clear
    and adequate reasons.  In the circumstances, the Secretary  of  State's
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
