
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05726/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 April 2016                      |On 19 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              BACHANA SHURGAIA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant: Mr J Heybroek, instructed by Geeta Patel & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. By  my  decision  promulgated  on  17  March  2016  (appended  to  this
    decision), I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").
    I hereby remake the decision of the FtT.

 2. The basic facts relevant to this appeal are not controversial  and  are
    as follows:

      a. The appellant is a Georgian citizen born on 25 December 1989.

      b. On 12 August 2012 he married in Georgia. The woman he married  was,
         at the time, a Georgian national who had lived most of her life  in
         the UK and who subsequently, on 23 April  2014,  became  a  British
         citizen.

      c. The appellant and his wife  have  a  daughter,  who  is  a  British
         citizen born on 4 June 2013.

      d. The appellant's wife returned to the UK from  Georgia  without  her
         husband whilst she was pregnant.

      e. The appellant applied to enter the  UK  as  a  visitor  before  his
         daughter  was  born.  His  application  was  refused  but   allowed
         following an appeal and on 21 May 2014 the  appellant  was  granted
         leave to enter the UK as a family visitor valid until  21  November
         2014.

      f. On 20 November 2014 the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on
         the basis of his family and private life.

The Respondent's Decision

 3. By way of a decision dated 22 January 2015, the respondent refused  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain on the basis  that  he  was
    unable to  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances to warrant  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Rules.

 4. In respect of the Immigration Rules, the  respondent  first  considered
    whether the appellant was able  to  satisfy  the  partner  route  under
    Appendix FM. It found that he could not because, at the  time  he  made
    the application, he was a visitor and under sub paragraph E-LTRP 2.1  a
    person in the UK as a visitor is not eligible for leave to  remain  via
    this route. Similarly, the respondent found that the appellant was  not
    able to satisfy the eligibility requirements of the parent route  under
    Appendix FM.  The respondent's decision also briefly considered whether
    the appellant should be granted leave on the basis of his private  life
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1) and found that,  having  lived  only  5
    months in the UK at the time of the application, he could not meet  the
    requirements therein.

 5.  Under  the  heading  "Decision  on  Exceptional  Circumstances",   the
    respondent considered whether leave should be granted outside the Rules
    under Article 8 ECHR. In finding that no such leave should be  granted,
    the respondent stated that:

      a. There appeared to have been a deliberate attempt by  the  appellant
         to circumvent the Immigration Rules by entering as  a  visitor  and
         thereafter seeking to switch to a different category. It was  noted
         that in order for the appellant to be granted entry clearance as  a
         visitor he would have had to have stated that  his  true  intention
         was to return to Georgia.

      b. He could return to Georgia for the correct entry clearance and  his
         child could remain the UK whilst he did so. To the extent that  his
         wife relied on him to provide child care she could access childcare
         or help from family members during his absence.

Factual Findings

 6. I heard oral evidence from the appellant (through an  interpreter)  and
    his wife (in English). Both adopted their witness statements  and  both
    were cross examined by Mr  Melvin.  Having  considered  their  evidence
    (written and oral) along with all of the evidence that  was  before  me
    and the FtT, I make the following findings of fact:

      a. The appellant and his wife (who became a British citizen  in  2014)
         first met through the internet in December 2009 and  after  several
         visits to Georgia by the appellant's wife they  married  in  August
         2012.

      b.  After  the  marriage,  when  about  three  months  pregnant,   the
         appellant's wife returned to the UK without the appellant.

      c. The appellant's wife gave birth to a daughter  (who  is  a  British
         citizen) in the UK.

      d. The appellant's wife has no intention  of  moving  to  Georgia  and
         wishes to raise her child in the UK. If the appellant is removed to
         Georgia his wife and daughter will not follow him.

      e. Before the child was born, the appellant applied to visit his  wife
         in the UK but was only given leave to enter  following  an  appeal,
         and therefore was unable to travel to the UK until around the  time
         of his daughter's first birthday.

      f. The appellant claims that his intention, when making an application
         to enter the UK as a visitor, was to return to  Georgia  (where  he
         had a good job) and that it was only  after  arriving  in  the  UK,
         because of the attachment he felt to his daughter, that he  changed
         his mind and decided to stay. I do not accept  this  is  the  case.
         Having heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  his  spouse,  I
         think it  more  likely  (and  therefore  find  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities) that the appellant always intended to remain in  the
         UK in order to continue his life with his wife  and  daughter,  his
         wife having decided she no longer wished to live in Georgia and  he
         at that time being unable to satisfy the requirements in the  Rules
         to gain leave to enter the UK as a spouse.

      g. The appellant's wife works in two different jobs and  supports  the
         family financially. Her income is, or will shortly  be,  sufficient
         to satisfy the Immigration Rules if the appellant were to  make  an
         application from Georgia.

      h. The appellant has a genuine attachment to  his  child  and  is  her
         primary carer (whilst his wife works).

      i. If the appellant were not able to look after the  child,  his  wife
         would have to reduce her workload with a  consequent  reduction  in
         income due to child care costs.

Consideration and decision

 7. It was common ground that  the  appellant  is  unable  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons identified by the respondent  and  as
    set out in paragraph [4] above and therefore that the appeal  falls  to
    be determined outside the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

 8. The appellant lives with his wife and child and is the primary  day  to
    day carer for his child. As such, it is clear that  removing  him  from
    the UK - and thereby separating him from his wife and child (who  would
    not move with him to Georgia) - would constitute an  interference  with
    his (and their) family life of sufficient gravity to potentially engage
    the operation of Article 8.

 9. Accordingly, the issue for me  to  resolve,  and  upon  which  I  heard
    submissions, is whether removal of the  appellant  is  a  proportionate
    interference with his right to private and family life under Article 8.



10. In assessing proportionality, it is necessary to consider Section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002  Act")
    which sets out a  series  of  mandatory  considerations.  Section  117B
    provides as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

11. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act was considered recently  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015]  UKUT  00674
    (IAC) where, at [20] - [21], the following was stated (emphasis added):

         "In section 117B(6), Parliament has  prescribed  three  conditions,
         namely:

      a) the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

      b) such person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
         a qualifying child, namely a person who is under the age of 18  and
         is a British citizen or has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
         continuous period of seven years or more; and

      c) it would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying child to  leave
         the United Kingdom.

         Within this discrete regime, the  statute  proclaims  unequivocally
         that where these three conditions are satisfied the public interest
         does not require the removal of the parent from the United Kingdom.
         Ambiguity there is none.

         Giving effect to the analysis above, in our judgment the underlying
         Parliamentary intention is  that  where  the  three  aforementioned
         conditions are satisfied the public interests identified in section
         117B(1) - (3) do not apply."

12. There is no dispute as to whether the first two of the three conditions
    of Section 117B(6)  are satisfied.  The  appellant  is  not  liable  to
    deportation and he has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
    daughter who is a British citizen.

13. The third condition requires that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    the appellant's daughter to leave the UK. The Home Office's Immigration
    Directorate Instruction Family Migration dated August 2015 ("the  IDI")
    sets out  at  section  11.2.3  the  circumstances  in  which  it  would
    reasonable to expect a British  Citizen  child  to  leave  the  UK.  It
    states:

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would unreasonable  to
         expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent  or
         primary carer."

14. The appellant's daughter is a  British  citizen.  Her  mother,  also  a
    British citizen, wishes and intends to raise  her  in  the  UK.  Having
    regard to the IDI, it is clear that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the UK with her father.

15. Mr Melvin sought to persuade me that Treebhawon was wrongly decided and
    that I should rely on, or at least adopt the logic of,  an  unpublished
    decision that took a contrary view. I am not persuaded to  do  so.  The
    reasoning in Treebhawon is clear and cogent and I am not  persuaded  to
    depart from it.

16. I recognise that the public interest considerations at sections 117B(1)
    - (3) of the 2002 Act strongly favour the appellant being removed  from
    the  UK.   Subsection  (1)  states  that   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration controls is in  the  public  interest.  The  appellant  has
    entered the UK as a visitor with the intention  to  remain  permanently
    and as such this is a case where the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control  is  brought  into  sharp  focus  and  warrants   being   given
    considerable weight. With respect to sub-paragraphs (2)  and  (3),  the
    appellant does not speak English and is not financially independent.

17. However, the consequence of having found that the three  conditions  of
    Section 117B(6) are satisfied is that  the  public  interest  does  not
    require the appellant's removal. This  is  the  clear  and  unambiguous
    language of  the  2002  Act,  the  interpretation  of  which  has  been
    confirmed by the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon. Accordingly, the  public
    interest considerations identified in sections 117B(1)  -  (3)  do  not
    apply however strong they might otherwise have been.

18. As the public interest does not require  the  appellant's  removal,  it
    follows that the balancing of the public interest against his Article 8
    rights can only be decided in his favour and for this reason his appeal
    is allowed.

DECISION

19. I remake the decision of the FtT by  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    outwith the framework of the Immigration Rules under Article 8 ECHR.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 17 April 2016                 |

