
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05451/2014
                                                               IA/05452/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 September 2014                           |On 18 September 2014         |
|Prepared 4 September 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Ms Veronica Omonike Wilkey
                         Mr Oluwasegun Elijah Wilkey
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Unigwe, Counsel instructed by Charles Hill & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this determination the Appellant is referred to as the Secretary  of
    State and the Respondents are referred  to  as  the  first  and  second
    Claimants.

2.   The Claimants, nationals of Nigeria, dates  of  birth  respectively  23
    July 1959 and 15 March 1988, appealed against the Secretary of  States'
    decisions to refuse to issue residence cards dated 16 January 2014.

3.   The basis of the refusal of the first Claimant was that she had  failed
    to prove that she was in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national.
    The  refusal  of  the  second  Claimant  was  that  he  had  failed  to
    demonstrate that he was related to his EEA family member (the  Sponsor,
    Mr Richards) as claimed and also dependent upon him.  The refusals were
    therefore with reference to Regulations 7  and  8  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

4.   Their appeals came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lal,  who  on  1
    August 2014 allowed the Claimants' appeals  in  respect  of  the  first
    Claimant on the basis that she was in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  and
    durable relationship within the meaning of the 2006  Regulations  under
    Regulation 8. The judge accepted the evidence of the first claimant and
    the Sponsor as to the nature of their relationship and its extent.  The
    judge went on to allow the first Claimant's  appeal  on  the  basis  of
    entitlement to a residence card  under  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

5.   The second Claimant identified in the title  to  the  determination  is
    the son of the first Claimant. The judge  made  no  findings  that  the
    second Claimant is not related for the purposes of the  Regulations  to
    the Sponsor.

6.   There was, as has  been  confirmed  to  me,  in  the  written  evidence
    provided to the judge no evidence of dependency as between  the  second
    Claimant and the first Claimant or the second Claimant and the Sponsor.
     The only apparent connection in  the  evidence  was  that  the  second
    Claimant lived with the first Claimant and  the  Sponsor.   The  second
    Claimant at the material times before the judge was aged 24/25 years.

7.   Considering the judge's Record of Proceedings, it  is  apparent  to  me
    that no evidence was called from the  second  Claimant  concerning  his
    dependency and/or relationship and nor did either Mr  Richards  or  the
    Sponsor or the first Claimant identify any elements of  the  dependency
    other than on the part of the first Claimant claim that her son was her
    dependant.

8.   It is a matter of considerable regret that  the  determination  of  the
    judge simply failed to give either any relevant finding on the issue of
    relationship or dependency and the judge failed to provide any  reasons
    as to why the appeal of the second Claimant was allowed.   The  failure
    to do so was a clear error of law and it was  irrational  to  allow  an
    appeal when there was simply was none of the relevant evidence to  meet
    the requirements of the Regulations, put before the judge.

9.   The grounds of  application  permitted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Macdonald, a Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  dated  20
    August 2014 reflect the grounds advanced by the Secretary of  State  in
    particular that the judge should not have allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    first Claimant but rather should have, with the findings clearly  made,
    referred the matter back to the Secretary of State for the exercise  of
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.  It is clear
    that under that Regulation the Secretary  of  State  has  a  discretion
    whether to issue a residence card  for  those  identified  as  extended
    family members as the  judge  had  found  in  the  case  of  the  first
    Claimant.

10.  It is not, as was argued on behalf of  the  first  Claimant,  the  case
    that it is simply  open  to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  ignore  the
    Tribunal's findings of fact when the matter  is  returned  for  further
    consideration on the exercise of discretion. So one is  not,  as  might
    appear to be argued, in a continuous position  of  the  risk  of  cases
    succeeding in the Tribunal and then failing  thereafter  when  remitted
    for consideration by the Secretary of State in accordance with the  law
    and the findings made.

11.  It is also clear because there was no evidence identified by Mr  Unigwe
    to support the judge's decision. There was no notice on behalf  of  the
    Claimants seeking to challenge or cross-appeal against the  application
    permitted for the Secretary of State. Mr Unigwe did not show there were
    material omissions and findings that should have been made or  evidence
    that had been ignored  by  the  judge.  Indeed  even  in  the  skeleton
    argument provided by Mr Unigwe for  the  hearing  today  there  are  no
    identified omissions or any cross-claim of a lack of rationality in the
    decision in the light of evidence that had been provided to the judge.

12.  I am therefore satisfied that the Original  Tribunal  in  dealing  with
    the first Claimant made an error of law in seeking to  determine   that
    leave should be granted to an extended family member.  I do not  accept
    that  it  was  the  Tribunal's  responsibility  to  make  that  primary
    decision.  What has happened no more or less is that the  Secretary  of
    State's view of the relationship as between the Sponsor and  the  first
    Claimant has been rejected by the judge for the reasons the judge gave.
    In those circumstances the Secretary of State must look at this  matter
    on  the  basis  of  the  judge's  finding  on  the   first   Claimant's
    relationship with the  Sponsor.   There  is  no  basis  to  reopen  the
    question of the validity of her marriage  to  the  Sponsor  insofar  as
    Regulation 7 applied.

13.  In relation to the second Claimant the original Tribunal's decision  is
    in error of law for a failure to provide adequate reasons. On the  face
    of it there was an error of law based on misunderstandings or  mistakes
    of fact for there were no  facts  found,  in  relation  to  the  second
    Claimant, to be a proper basis for the judge's decision.

14.  In these circumstances therefore the original  Tribunal's  decision  in
    relation to the first claimant cannot stand.  The following decision is
    substituted. The appeal by the Secretary of State  in  respect  of  the
    first claimant is allowed to the  extant  that  the  matter  is  to  be
    remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the  exercise  of
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.

15.   The original Tribunal's decision in respect  of  the  second  Claimant
    can not stand. The decision  will  have  to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Having heard submissions by the  parties'  representatives  I
    was satisfied that the appropriate course was for  me  to  remake  this
    decision on the basis of the evidence before me.  It is  of  note  that
    directions have been sent out in connection with the hearing today  and
    no further evidence  was  adduced  in  relation  to  second  Claimant's
    position. I have taken into account the material statements before  the
    judge and the Record of Proceedings.

16.  In these circumstances therefore I find that the only course given  the
    lack of evidence is that  the  appeal  of  the  second  Claimant  fails
    because on the evidence he does  not  demonstrate  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of an extended family member under the  2006  Regulations.
    This decision does not prevent a  further  application  being  made  in
    connection with or on behalf of the second Claimant

17.  The judge made  no  anonymity  order  in  relation  to  either  of  the
    claimants and given the age of the second Claimant I  do  not  find  it
    necessary or appropriate to make an anonymity  order  in  remaking  the
    decision on the second Claimant or in relation to the first Claimant.

18.  The judge in dealing with the first and  second  Claimants  made  whole
    fee awards. Given the second claimant's appeal failing the position  is
    that no appeal award is appropriate. In respect of  the  claim  of  the
    first claimant it seems to me that the first claimant having  succeeded
    on the principle of  showing  a  durable  relationship,  to  which  the
    Secretary of State had objected, that the appeal served its purpose and
    whatever else may be said about the determination it seems to  me  that
    it would be unfair to remove the fee  award  which  had  been  made  in
    favour of the first claimant.

19.   The Secretary of State's appeal  in  respect  of  the  First  Claimant
    succeeds to the extent that the matter is remitted to her  to  consider
    the exercise of the discretion under the 2006 Regulations.

20.   The appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  respect  of  the  second
    Claimant is allowed. The following decision is substituted. The  appeal
    of the second Claimant is dismissed





Signed                                  Date 9 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
