

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05619/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 30 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M M J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Youssefian, legal representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although it is the Secretary of State who pursues this appeal, I  refer
    to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal. Thus I refer to
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC ("the FTTJ") promulgated on  28  August
    2015, in which he allowed  the  appellant's  appeal,  on  human  rights
    grounds, against the refusal of leave to remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen under the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    my references to the appellant's depression and suicidal thoughts,  she
    is entitled to anonymity in these proceedings.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She claims to have entered  the
    UK on 9 December 2001 on a visit visa valid for six months.   Her leave
    to remain was extended but on 7 March 2003  her  immigration  exemption
    was curtailed. She remained in the UK nonetheless.  On 5 July 2012  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of her marriage to a
    person settled in the UK.  That application was refused with  no  right
    of appeal on  9  February  2013.  The  decision  was  reconsidered  and
    maintained on 22  January  2015.  The  application  was  refused  under
    Appendix  FM  because,  although  the  appellant  met  the  suitability
    criteria, she did not fulfil the requirements  for  family  life  as  a
    partner. The  respondent  also  refused  the  application  because  the
    appellant did not meet the criteria in paragraph 276ADE.


 5. The appellant appealed that decision. She relied on the  provisions  of
    EX.1 to the effect that there "would be insurmountable obstacles  or  a
    substantial degree of harshness if the appellant's  spouse,  a  British
    citizen, had  to  continue  family  life  with  his  wife  in  Jamaica"
    (paragraph 3 of the FTTJ's decision).

 6. The FTTJ concluded that the factors identified by  the  appellant  "did
    not present insurmountable obstacles or  that  it  would  be  harsh  to
    expect the appellant's husband to reside with the appellant in  Jamaica
    to further their family life  in  that  country"  (paragraph  4).   The
    appellant has not appealed those findings.  The FTTJ concluded  however
    that it was highly likely that an application for entry clearance as  a
    spouse would be successful; he did not consider "there to be any public
    interest or any other sensible reason to require the appellant to leave
    and embark upon the expense and disruption to her family life that such
    a process would involve".   He  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 7. The respondent was granted permission to appeal by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brunnen who decided that it was arguable the FTTJ  had  erred  in
    law by failing to have regard to s117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and failing to have regard to Chen IJR [2015]  UKUT
    189 (IAC).

Error of Law Submissions

 8. I noted to both parties that there was no cross-appeal by the appellant
    with regard to the findings under the Immigration Rules. Mr  Youssefian
    confirmed that was the case.


 9. The respondent's grounds of appeal to this Tribunal are  limited  to  a
    submission that the  FTTJ  erred  in  his  approach  to  the  Chikwamba
    principle in two ways

        a. Since the  introduction  of  s117B,  the  rationale  behind  the
           requirements for entry clearance applications to be made  is  no
           longer simply a public policy requirement but is instead part of
           the public interest in ensuring immigration control as  set  out
           in 117B(1). The "good reason" for this  requirement  is  written
           into primary legislation. As such, the public  interest  factors
           written into 117B and as expressed in the Immigration Rules  are
           to be accorded significant weight.


        b. There is no consideration as to why any  significant  separation
           would interfere disproportionately with protected  rights.  Chen
           at paras 39 - 42 states that it remains  for  the  appellant  to
           establish that there would be significant interference with  her
           family life by her temporary removal. This interference is to be
           assessed against the public interest factors before  it  can  be
           said to be disproportionate. That assessment has not been done.


10. Mr Duffy, for  the  respondent,  expanded  upon  those  grounds  and  I
    summarise as follows.  There was no  analysis  or  explanation  of  why
    returning to seek entry clearance was a  disproportionate  interference
    with the appellant's and her husband's rights to  a  family  life.   He
    submitted that the  guidance  in  Chikwamba  and  Hayat  had  not  been
    followed. The appellant did not fulfil the criteria in the  Immigration
    Rules; there was no longer a requirement for an applicant to have entry
    clearance in order to meet the provisions in the Rules for the grant of
    leave to remain as a spouse (contrary to the situation  in  Chikwamba).
    The appellant could, in theory, qualify under section EX.1. She did not
    do so.

11. Furthermore, the FTTJ had not given due regard to  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control, as required by s117B.

12. The respondent averred that the findings between [5] and [7] should  be
    set aside.

13. Mr Youssefian, for the appellant, submitted, in summary,  that  it  was
    clear the FTTJ had had in mind the public interest factors in  s117A-D.
    The appellant was able to satisfy the relevant criteria, including  the
    English language requirement, and financial independence.

14. Mr Youssefian made lengthy submissions to the effect that Chen had been
    wrongly decided.  He  noted  that  paragraph  39  appeared  to  provide
    guidance in Chikwamba cases but said that this was  at  odds  with  the
    Court of Appeal judgments in  MA  (Pakistan),  Hayat  and  Agyarko.  He
    accepted that Hayat had been considered by the Court of Appeal in  Chen
    but submitted that MA (Pakistan) had not been considered;  he  accepted
    that Agyarko post-dated Chen.  He explained at length his reasoning for
    such an approach. In essence, he submitted that the Upper  Tribunal  in
    Chen had departed from the  principle  that  a  "sensible  reason"  was
    required for an individual to be required make an application for entry
    clearance from abroad (per para 30 (c) and (d) of Hayat).  In  summary,
    Mr Youssefian's submission was that  there  was  no  error  of  law  in
    failing to refer to Chen because it was wrongly decided; the  FTTJ  had
    rightly been guided by Chikwamba and Hayat, in circumstances where  the
    appellant met all the criteria in the Immigration Rules for  the  grant
    of entry clearance as a spouse.  He submitted this guidance  was  still
    valid, despite the introduction of s117A-D.


15. Mr Youssefian accepted that if I decided that Chen  was  not  wrong  in
    law, the appellant was in some difficulty  because  the  FTTJ  had  not
    provided detail about the significant interference to her  family  life
    resulting from the need for her to  apply  for  entry  clearance.    He
    noted that the evidence before the FTTJ was of the appellant's unstable
    mental health, including suicidal thoughts and the benefit  to  her  of
    being with her husband.

16. Mr Duffy, in reply, accepted that the respondent had not made a reasons
    challenge to this  tribunal.   He  noted  that  Chikwamba  was  a  case
    involving insurmountable obstacles  and  children.  Hayat  refined  the
    principles in  Chikwamba.  The  "sensible  reason"  for  requiring  the
    appellant to return to Jamaica to make an entry  clearance  application
    was  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration  control,   as
    enshrined in statute. There  should  have  been  consideration  of  the
    appellant's circumstances: why was the  interference  disproportionate?
    How long would the appellant  have  to  wait  for  an  entry  clearance
    decison? How long was the potential separation? None  of  these  issues
    had been addressed in the decision. Even if Chen  were  not  at  issue,
    under Hayat principles the FTTJ had not addressed the appellant's case.

Findings - Error of Law

17. There is no challenge by either party to the FTTJ's findings  that  the
    appellant did not fulfil the criteria in the Immigration Rules. Nor  is
    there any challenge to the FTTJ's finding as follows:


            "3. ... During the appeal it  became  very  apparent  that  Mr.
           Youssefin [sic] was not challenging the findings [sic] that  the
           appellant could not come within  Appendix  FM  and/or  paragraph
           276ADE, save to the extent that he  argued  that  the  appellant
           could rely upon EX1  of  Appendix  FM  because  there  would  be
           insurmountable obstacles or a substantial degree of harshness if
           the appellant's spouse,  a  British  citizen,  had  to  continue
           family life with his wife in Jamaica. That was put on the  basis
           that he had lived all his life in United Kingdom; never  visited
           Jamaica; would face cultural changes; is now 56  years  of  age;
           had secure employment as a driver on the London underground; and
           has a house in the United Kingdom.


           4.    I considered those factors and came to the conclusion that
           they did not present insurmountable obstacles or that  it  would
           be harsh to expect the appellant's husband to  reside  with  the
           appellant in Jamaica  to  further  their  family  life  in  that
           country."


18. The FTTJ finds that the entry clearance application is highly likely to
    be successful [5].  He then goes on to say:

           "6.  Accordingly,  reliance  is  placed  upon  the  futility  of
           requiring the appellant to return to Jamaica  to  make  what  is
           highly likely to be a successful spouse application.  It  is  on
           that sole basis that the appellant's reliance upon article 8 has
           any merit, bearing in mind the decision of the higher courts  in
           Chikwamba.


           7.  The only public  interest  in  requiring  the  appellant  to
           depart is to mark the fact that those who choose  to  flout  the
           immigration laws of this country should not  gain  an  advantage
           over others who abide by them.  I have come  to  the  conclusion
           that this does not apply in the  instant  case  because  if  the
           appellant departs for Jamaica and makes a spouse application  it
           is so highly likely to succeed that I do not consider  there  to
           be any public interest or any other sensible reason  to  require
           the  appellant  to  leave  and  embark  upon  the  expense   and
           disruption to her family life that such a process would involve.


           8.  Hi [sic] record that both the appellant and her husband gave
           evidence in accordance with their respective witness  statements
           which are hereby incorporated by reference. There was no  cross-
           examination.


           9.  Accordingly I allowed the appeal based upon article 8 ECHR."

19. The respondent does not challenge the decision of the FTTJ to  consider
    the appeal outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  challenge  is  to  the
    assessment of proportionality.


20. I am satisfied that the FTTJ erred in  law  in  failing  to  take  into
    account the guidance in Chen.  It was recognised in Chen that  Appendix
    FM did not include consideration of the question whether  it  would  be
    disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his home  country
    to make an entry clearance application to re-join family members in the
    UK.  There may be no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
    enjoyed outside the UK but where temporary separation to enable to make
    an application for entry clearance may be  disproportionate.   However,
    in all cases, it will  be  for  the  individual  to  place  before  the
    Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  such  temporary  separation  will
    interfere disproportionately with protected rights.   The  guidance  is
    that it will not be enough solely to rely on the Chikwamba case law.


21. I have considered the submission of Mr Youssefian that Chen was wrongly
    decided. However, the Upper Tribunal in Chen specifically rejected  the
    submission that the use  of  the  phrase  "sensible  reason"  in  Hayat
    amounted to a test for applying the guidance in Chikwamba;  the  burden
    remained on the applicant to place before the Secretary  of  State  all
    material that he or she relied upon to suggest that removal pursuant to
    the refusal of leave would breach Article 8 (paragraph 36 of Chen).   I
    do not accept, therefore, the proposition that the findings in Chen are
    not in line with earlier judgments on  the  application  of  Chikwamba.
    The Upper Tribunal in Chen  has  taken  those  earlier  judgments  into
    account and the judgment is not at odds with  them.   The  FTTJ  should
    have taken into  account  the  guidance  in  Chen  which  was  directly
    relevant to this appellant's personal situation and  circumstances.   I
    refer to paragraph 39 of Chen:

         "39. In my judgement, if it is shown by an individual  (the  burden
         being on him or her) that an application for entry  clearance  from
         abroad would  be  granted  and  that  there  would  be  significant
         interference with family life by temporary removal, the  weight  to
         be accorded to the formal requirement of obtaining entry  clearance
         is reduced.  In  cases  involving  children,  where  removal  would
         interfere with the child's enjoyment of family  life  with  one  or
         other of his or her parents whilst entry clearance is obtained,  it
         will be easier to show that the balance on proportionality falls in
         favour of the claimant than in cases which do not involve  children
         but where removal interferes with family life between  parties  who
         knowingly entered into  the  relationship  in  the  knowledge  that
         family life was being established whilst the immigration status  of
         one party was "precarious". In other words, in the former cases, it
         would be easier to show that the  individual's  circumstances  fall
         within the minority envisaged by the House of Lords in Huang or the
         exceptions referred to in judgments of the ECtHR than in the latter
         case. However, it all depends on the facts."

22. In Chen, as here,  the  appellant  and  her  husband  had  begun  their
    relationship well after the appellant's leave had  expired;  they  were
    married in the  full  knowledge  that  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully. In neither Chen's case nor  this  case  did  the  appellant
    produce evidence of the length of disruption  to  family  life  if  the
    appellant were remove and had to apply for entry  clearance.    In  the
    present case the appellant's evidence in her witness statement is  that
    "any forced separation would make [her] depressed again" but  there  is
    no medical evidence to support this and, in any event, the  FTTJ  found
    that there were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
    continued in Jamaica.  There is indeed, very little evidence to support
    the appellant's contention that a temporary separation would give  rise
    to significant disruption and interference with the couple's  protected
    rights.  The FTTJ has failed to refer to the paucity of the evidence on
    the issue.


23. Notwithstanding his finding that the  appellant  does  not  fulfil  the
    criteria in the Immigration Rules for leave to remain on the  basis  of
    her family life, the FTTJ has failed to consider the public interest in
    the maintenance of effective immigration control, contrary to s117B(1),
    instead making only passing reference to "the only public  interest  in
    requiring the appellant to depart is to mark the fact  that  those  who
    choose to flout the immigration laws of this country should not gain an
    advantage over others who abide by them."  That is not the only  public
    interest: the FTTJ has failed to take into account  the  provisions  of
    s117B(4) to the effect that little weight is to be given to  a  private
    life or a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner  that  is
    established by a person at a  time  when  that  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.   Nowhere in  the  decision  is  there  reference  to  this
    important sub-section of s117B. On the contrary,  the  FTTJ  states  he
    does "not consider there  to  be  any  public  interest  or  any  other
    sensible reason to require the appellant to leave and embark  upon  the
    expense and disruption to her family life that  such  a  process  would
    involve".  Such a finding is unsustainable given s117B(1) and  (4)  and
    the lack of evidence as regards the claimed "disruption to  her  family
    life" and the failure of the appellant to  demonstrate  "insurmountable
    obstacles or that it would be harsh to expect the  appellant's  husband
    to reside with the appellant in Jamaica to further their family life in
    that country." [4].

24. The failure of the FTTJ to apply the guidance in Chen, a case which has
    similarities to this one, and his failure to give consideration to  the
    public interest factors in s117B(1) and (4), amount to  errors  of  law
    which could have impacted on the outcome of the appeal. The  assessment
    of  proportionality  is  unsafe  and  unsustainable  on  the  evidence.
    Paragraphs 6 and 7 must be set aside. I do not set  aside  paragraph  5
    because there is no specific challenge in the respondent's  grounds  to
    the findings in that paragraph.


25. Mr Duffy submitted that, if I found there to be  a  material  error  of
    law, the appropriate course was for the decision to be  remade  on  the
    preserved facts.  Mr Youssefian sought to persuade me that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing  or,
    alternatively, that it should remain in the Upper Tribunal  with  fresh
    evidence being taken from the appellant. I reject both these  proposals
    because there is no challenge to the facts in  this  case  and  I  have
    before me the witness statements of  the  appellant  and  her  husband.
    Their evidence was not tested by cross-examination  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I see no need for it to be updated,  particularly  as  the
    findings of fact  of  the  FTTJ  are  unchallenged  by  the  appellant.
    Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal is an option to be  used  sparingly
    and is inappropriate in this case.  Given the findings of fact  of  the
    FTTJ have been preserved, I remake his decision in  reliance  on  those
    facts, in accordance with the law.


26. I therefore proceed to remake  the  decision  under  Article  8.   Both
    parties' representatives agreed that, in the event of my  remaking  the
    decision, it was appropriate for me to refer to the witness  statements
    of the appellant and her husband, given that  the  FTTJ  made  specific
    reference to incorporating them at [8].  I  have  also  considered  the
    remaining documents in the appellant's bundle.

27. I adjourned the hearing  to  enable  Mr  Youssefian  to  make  detailed
    submissions, which he did.

Submissions - Proportionality

28. Mr Youssefian's detailed submissions can be summarised as  follows.  He
    relied on the "Chikwamba"  principle.  He  submitted  that  the  public
    interest in removal was diminished where  the  applicant  met  all  the
    requirements  for  the  grant  of  entry   clearance   as   a   spouse,
    notwithstanding the maintenance of effective immigration control was in
    the public interest. The question was, he said, whether the appellant's
    removal would "serve any good purpose".


29.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant  spoke  English,  was  financially
    independent (on her husband), she was not a burden on  the  state;  she
    had lived in the UK for 15 years albeit the majority of  her  stay  was
    unlawful or precarious.  He confirmed that the respondent's account  of
    her immigration history, as given in the reasons  for  refusal  letter,
    was accurate.  There was no good reason  for  her  to  be  required  to
    return and make an application; it was  a  mere  procedural  formality.
    The separation would be for an unknown period,  albeit  temporary,  and
    would involve significant disruption to the couple's family  life.  The
    appellant would have difficulty coping on her own, due to  her  history
    of depression  and  the  couple's  need  for  "physical  proximity  and
    affection".  The appellant had no ties to Jamaica.  The respondent  had
    to show a good or sensible reason for requiring her to be  removed  (MA
    (Pakistan) and Hayat).  Chen should not be  followed  for  the  reasons
    submitted earlier.

30. Mr Duffy referred to the  line  of  cases  pre-dating  Chikwamba.   The
    respondent's position was not that the appellant should be expected  to
    return to Jamaica to make an entry clearance application but  that  she
    and her husband could continue their family life in Jamaica.  The  FTTJ
    had  accepted  that  proposition  by  finding  that   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles to their doing so.  He referred  to  paragraph
    27 of Chen which in turn referred to paragraph 30(a) of Hayat. This was
    not, he said,  a  case  where  there  was  some  procedural  deficiency
    requiring the applicant to apply from abroad.  There were no  obstacles
    to the appellant and her husband living in Jamaica; but if they  wanted
    to live in the UK, they must apply from abroad to do so.  In  Chikwamba
    and Hayat there were technical hurdles for the claimants; but for those
    technical hurdles, the applications would have succeeded. That was  not
    the case here. He submitted that Chikwamba would have  succeeded  under
    the Rules had the application been made after the 2012 changes  to  the
    Rules to  incorporate  Article  8  issues:  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to return.  If this  appeal  were  successful,  almost  every
    application would be successful, obviating the Rules in their entirety.
    He submitted that the Rules were now a statement  of  the  respondent's
    policy on Article 8.   Weight  should  be  attached  to  the  fact  the
    appellant did not meet them.


31. If it was not accepted that family life could continue in Jamaica,  the
    degree  of  disruption  caused  by  a  temporary  separation  was   not
    sufficient to outweigh the public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control which must carry significant weight.  There was  no
    basis   for   deciding   that   a   temporary   separation   would   be
    disproportionate.  Chen did not depart  from  earlier  case  law.   The
    earlier  cases  gave  guidance  on  the  approach  under  the  previous
    Immigration Rules whereas Chen gave guidance as to the current approach
    post-2012 and the introduction of s117A-D. The existence of a statutory
    requirement for  consideration  of  the  public  interest  factors  was
    analogous to a good reason for requiring the  appellant  to  return  to
    make her application.

32. In reply, Mr Youssefian reiterated that this was a Chikwamba case:  the
    fact the appellant had to return to Jamaica to make an entry  clearance
    application was a procedural one.  It  was  the  only  barrier  to  her
    remaining in  this  country.  He  submitted  that,  whilst  a  person's
    immigration status was, according to AM (Malawi)  precarious  if  their
    continued presence was dependent on further leave to remain,  this  was
    out of step with s117B. The case law and statute should,  he  said,  be
    "in  harmony".   He  submitted  that,  "to  require  the  appellant  to
    establish exceptional circumstances when  there  is  precarious  family
    life, would be in every circumstance'. It was  his  position  that  the
    meaning of precarious in the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  and  in  s117B
    should be "married", relying on Underhill LJ's comments at paragraph 22
    of R (on the application of Tetteh) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1046.

Findings - Article 8

33. It is not in dispute that Article 8 is engaged in this case or that the
    decision under the Immigration Rules was lawful. I turn  to  the  fifth
    question in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, that of proportionality.


34. I take into account the  findings  of  the  FTTJ  and  the  appellant's
    evidence (as agreed by the parties) and find as follows.

35.  The  appellant  and  her  husband,  who  is  British,  have  a   close
    relationship; the appellant's husband has a permanent  job  as  a  tube
    driver, he owns their home and is able to support  the  appellant;  the
    couple are financially independent, the appellant speaks  English,  she
    is not a burden on the state, they have a settled life in the  UK.  The
    appellant's husband is of an age that he would  find  it  difficult  to
    adjust to life in Jamaica.   He  has  had  some  exposure  to  Jamaican
    culture as a result of their cohabitation.

36. The FTTJ found that the appellant's application for entry clearance  is
    "highly likely" to be  successful  because  she  had  demonstrated  she
    fulfilled the criteria in the Rules apart from the provisions of EX.1.

37. The appellant entered the UK on a visit visa in December 2001. She  was
    granted further leave to remain until March 2003 when  her  Immigration
    Exemption  was  curtailed.   She  made  no  attempts  to  rectify   her
    immigration status until she applied for leave to remain as a spouse in
    July 2012.  Thus her residence in the UK  since  March  2003  has  been
    unlawful.

38. The appellant and  her  husband  met  in  2010  and  married  in  2012.
    Throughout their relationship the appellant's  husband  has  known  the
    appellant has no immigration status.  The appellant has no children and
    there is no evidence to suggest the appellant's  husband  has  children
    either.

39. The appellant has suffered from depression in the past. The appellant's
    own evidence is as follows:

         "I have previously  been  very  depressed  and  have  had  suicidal
         thoughts several times. I took herbal tablets, such as St John Wort
         [sic] which can be bought  from  health  shops  or  local  chemists
         without prescription. [The appellant's husband] has been the one to
         show me the light and lead  me  back  to  sanity.   I  honestly  am
         worried that any forced separation would make me depressed again. I
         do not have family in Jamaica and  I  am  terrified  that  I  would
         become lonely. I need [him] and he needs me."


    Her husband states as follows:


         "When [the appellant's] immigration application  was  refused,  she
         went into deep depression and  pushed  her  into  serious  suicidal
         thoughts that nearly sprang into action. [She] is a fragile woman."

    This is the very limited extent of the appellant's own  evidence  about
    the impact on the appellant's health of a  separation.    There  is  no
    medical evidence.  Nonetheless, this evidence is not challenged  and  I
    adopt it as my findings with regard to the impact of separation on  the
    appellant's health.

40. I turn to the issue of the public interest. The public interest factors
    which I must consider are set out in  s117B.  Of  particular  relevance
    here are s117B(1) (the maintenance of  effective  immigration  control)
    and s117B(4) which provides as follows:


         "(4) Little weight should be given to -
          a) a private life, or
          b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully."


41. The appellant's husband  is  British.  He  is  therefore  a  qualifying
    partner (s117D(1)).


42. Also of relevance is sub-paragraph (5) which deals with  private  life:
    "Little weight should be given to  a  private  life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious."

43. Throughout her stay in the UK, the appellant's immigration  status  has
    been either precarious (2001-3) or unlawful (2003 to  date).   She  met
    and married  her  husband  in  the  full  knowledge  that  she  had  no
    immigration status in this country and could be removed  at  any  time.
    Her husband was also fully aware of her lack of immigration status.  He
    says that he "thought, perhaps naively, that as a British  citizen  [he
    had] the right to live in [his] home country with  [his  wife]  without
    being asked to leave or be separated."  Whilst that  is  his  evidence,
    there is no indication that he or the appellant had sought  to  confirm
    this with the Home Office before embarking  on  their  relationship  or
    their marriage.

44. Since it is not challenged by the respondent before  me,  I  adopt  the
    finding  of  the  FTTJ  that  the  appellant's  application  for  entry
    clearance is highly likely to succeed.  That said, I note  the  primary
    submission of the respondent is that it family life can be continued in
    Jamaica without significant interference with the appellant's  and  her
    husband's protected rights.

45. With the above factual matrix in mind,  I  weigh  in  the  balance  the
    degree of interference with the appellant's and her husband's protected
    rights as against the public interest.  In doing so I bear in mind  the
    guidance in the following cases which I summarise.


46. In MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 953 Sullivan LJ said  the  view
    in Chikwamba that "return should be insisted upon simply  in  order  to
    secure formal compliance with entry clearance rules 'only comparatively
    rarely' is not confined to cases where children are  involved.   Whilst
    the suggested approach in Chikwamba certainly applies in such cases, it
    also applies in family cases more  generally."   In  Hayat  (nature  of
    Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011]  UKUT  00444  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
    confirmed that the Chikwamba principle is not confined to  cases  where
    children are involved or where the person with whom  the  appellant  is
    seeking to remain has settled status in the United Kingdom.

47. In Chikwamba (FC) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40  the House of Lords  said  that
    "In an Article 8 case the  prospective  length  and  degree  of  family
    disruption involved in going abroad for an entry clearance  certificate
    will always be highly relevant".  In R (on  the  application  of  Ajoh)
    [2006] EWHC 1489 (Admin) Collins J noted that  removal  would  only  be
    temporary as the Appellant's application to re-enter from Jamaica  with
    her children could not reasonably be refused and  appeared  to  suggest
    that this was a relevant factor. In SA (Article  8  -burden  of  proof)
    Algeria [2008] UKAIT 00054 the Tribunal held that the European Court of
    Human Rights has not seen a period of delay of limited duration (before
    an applicant can be considered for re-admission to the country where he
    had  established  family  ties)   as   in   itself   giving   rise   to
    disproportionality: see e.g. Kaya v Germany Appn. No. 31753/02 28  June
    2007), [2007] Imm AR 802, para 68.

48. In Sheik Saeed Hussain [2004] EWCA Civ 1190 the appellant came  to  the
    UK as an illegal entrant and had been  here  for  four  years  when  he
    married a British citizen in 1999.  His wife had  four  children  by  a
    previous marriage.  The appellant was said to have become a  father  to
    those children. The Tribunal accepted that the wife and children  could
    not  live  in  Pakistan  but  found  that  the  processing   time   for
    applications as a spouse of 6 months would not  cause  an  unreasonable
    delay.  The Court of Appeal agreed.

49. I have also had regard to Chen where it was held that:

         "(i)     Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question
             whether it would be disproportionate to expect  an  individual
             to return to his home  country  to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application to re-join family members in the U.K.   There  may
             be cases in which there are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
             family life being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where temporary
             separation to enable an individual to make an application  for
             entry clearance may be disproportionate.   In  all  cases,  it
             will be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary  of
             State evidence that such temporary separation  will  interfere
             disproportionately with protected  rights.   It  will  not  be
             enough to rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v
             SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

         (ii)     Lord Brown was not  laying  down  a  legal  test  when  he
             suggested in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant  to  make  an
             application for  entry  clearance  would  only  'comparatively
             rarely' be proportionate in a  case  involving  children  (per
             Burnett J, as he then was, in R (Kotecha and Das v SSHD [2011]
             EWHC 2070 (Admin))."

50. The appellant has overstayed her leave to remain for some 12 years. She
    has done so knowingly and in contravention of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    She has known, throughout her relationship with her husband,  that  she
    could be removed at any time.   She  has  taken  an  informed  risk  in
    failing to rectify  her  immigration  status  and  could  have  had  no
    expectation of being granted leave to remain in circumstances where she
    does not qualify under the Immigration Rules.  Those Rules reflect  the
    public interest in  immigration  control.  Thus  it  follows  that  the
    decision to refuse was taken in pursuit of immigration control.

51. I do not accept that the appellant's failure to qualify under the Rules
    is a mere  procedural  issue.   The  FTTJ  found  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant's  return  to  Jamaica  to
    continue her family  life  there  with  her  husband.  In  making  that
    finding, the FTTJ took into  account  the  impact  on  the  appellant's
    husband.  The failure to meet the requirements of EX.1 does not  amount
    to a failure to meet a mere requirement that she seek  entry  clearance
    from abroad.  It is  more  than  that:  it  is  a  failure  to  meet  a
    substantive criterion in the Rules which  would  have  enabled  her  to
    remain in the UK  without  returning  to  Jamaica  if  they  could  not
    continue their family life  abroad.   There  is  no  challenge  to  the
    criteria taken into account by the FTTJ in making this finding and  the
    FTTJ found that the couple could continue their family life in Jamaica.
    The fact that they wish to remain in the UK as a couple is their choice
    and, having made that choice, they should, as others are,  be  required
    to comply with the Immigration Rules.

52. I find it particularly relevant that there is no  evidence  to  support
    the claim that the appellant's removal would entail a forced separation
    whilst she applied for  entry  clearance.  Whilst  I  accept  that  the
    appellant's husband is working, I find it likely he  has  annual  leave
    which he could utilise to visit Jamaica with his wife whilst she  makes
    her application.  Furthermore, there is no evidence to suggest that  he
    could not afford to stay with his wife in Jamaica on a temporary  basis
    while she makes her application. Even if he had to return to  his  work
    in the UK after a period in Jamaica with her, there is no  evidence  he
    could not afford to pay for her temporary accommodation and maintenance
    in Jamaica.  The FTTJ had before him the evidence  on  the  appellant's
    health; he did  not  find  that  this  amounted  to  an  insurmountable
    obstacle to their continuing family life  in  Jamaica  together.  I  am
    unable to find that the appellant's health is a barrier  to  return  or
    even temporary separation for the following  reasons.  She  could  take
    with her  a  supply  of  herbal  treatment  and  medical  treatment  is
    available in Jamaica. If necessary, her husband could afford to pay for
    such medical treatment.


53. On the appellant's evidence, she would  be  returning  on  a  temporary
    basis. I am satisfied that  her  husband  could  travel  with  her  and
    arrange her accommodation and maintenance for  the  duration  of  their
    stay and any subsequent  temporary  separation.  The  appellant  merely
    states that such a temporary separation would not be  "a  proportionate
    course of action" or a "reasonable course of  action".   She  considers
    that "any forced separation would make [her] depressed  again".   There
    is thus only very limited evidence to support the  claim  that  such  a
    temporary separation would amount to a  significant  interference  with
    the couple's right to  a  family  life.  There  is  no  documentary  or
    independent evidence in support.


54. I bear in mind that in Huang & Kashmiri v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 the House
    of Lords said that in  reaching  a  decision  under  Article  8(2)  the
    decision maker will need to consider and weigh all that told in  favour
    of the refusal of leave  which  was  challenged.   The  decision  maker
    should  bear  in  mind  several   factors,   including:   the   general
    administrative desirability of applying known  rules  if  a  system  of
    immigration control was to be  workable,  predictable,  consistent  and
    fair  as  between  one  claimant  and  another;  the  damage  to   good
    administration and effective control  if  a  system  was  perceived  by
    claimants  internationally  to  be  unduly  porous,  unpredictable   or
    perfunctory; and the need to discourage fraud, deception and deliberate
    breaches of the law.   In the present case, the appellant has  breached
    immigration law for a prolonged period by remaining here for  over  ten
    years after her leave to  remain  was  curtailed.   The  respondent  is
    entitled  to  seek  to  discourage  such  conduct  by   enforcing   the
    Immigration Rules.  Those rules have been drafted to reflect the public
    interest in immigration control.

55. I take  into  account  that  little  weight  is  to  be  given  to  the
    appellant's relationship with her husband because it was established at
    a time  when  the  appellant  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  (s117B(4)).
    Furthermore, her husband  was  aware  she  had  no  immigration  status
    throughout their relationship.  It is also relevant that the  appellant
    has  an  appalling  immigration  history.   She  does  not  fulfil  the
    Immigration Rules in a substantial way and  has  provided  very  little
    evidence to support her claim that a temporary  separation  would  give
    rise to significant interference with her and her  husband's  protected
    rights. I am satisfied that the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
    removal outweighs the limited degree of disruption to  the  appellant's
    and her  husband's  family  and  private  lives  resulting  from  their
    travelling together  to  Jamaica  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance and from the appellant's remaining temporarily in Jamaica for
    a further temporary period until she  receives  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse. I see no reason why the appellant should be given  preferential
    treatment when she has flouted the immigration rules in  the  past  and
    there  is  little  evidence  to  support  her  claim   of   significant
    interference with the couple's protected rights.


56. Even if the appellant were  not  granted  entry  clearance,  I  do  not
    consider that the degree of interference with the appellant's  and  her
    husband's right to a family life is such  as  to  outweigh  the  public
    interest in maintaining  effective  immigration  control,  particularly
    given that little weight should be given to her family life (s117B(4)).
    Her husband is capable of finding employment in Jamaica (albeit not  as
    a tube driver), for example in the tourist industry. He  has  had  some
    exposure to the Jamaican diaspora in  the  UK  and  would  receive  the
    support and assistance of his wife in  adapting  to  Jamaican  culture.
    English is the national language of Jamaica.   The  appellant  has  not
    lost her cultural links to her country of origin where she was educated
    and brought up.  The  couple  have  sufficient  funds  to  cover  their
    initial costs of moving to Jamaica whilst the appellant  and  his  wife
    find employment. There is no evidence to  suggest  that  the  appellant
    would be unable to work there.

57. I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds

Decision

58. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  a
    material error of law, as set out above.


59. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules. That decision stands.

60. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal
    on human rights grounds and remake it, dismissing the appeal.



Signed           A M Black                         Date       1 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award
The FTTJ did not make a fee award and,  the  appeal  having  been  dismissed
there can be no fee award now.




Signed           A M Black                         Date       1 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

