


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number:     IA/05263/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 23 October 2013                            |On 6 November 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                     KD
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          Determination and Reasons

1. I am allowing this appeal  under  paragraph  391  of  HC395  against  the
   refusal to revoke a deportation  order  because  of  several  substantial
   failings by the Secretary of State whereby her  decisions  were  made  on
   incomplete and erroneous  facts  after  prolonged  delays  and  then  not
   properly served on the appellant. These delays and  errors  suggest  that
   the  Secretary  of  State  and  her  predecessors  cannot  have   thought
   deportation was necessary  to  protect  the  public  from  the  appellant
   because there was no attempt to deport him when he was convicted  of  his
   most serious crime in 2003. The ensuing delays have served  to  give  the
   appellant the opportunity to prove he is not a danger to  the  public  by
   remaining drug free for some six or seven years and have allowed  him  to
   strengthen the particularly close family life he has had since 2001  with
   his British born partner and with their three children.
Background

2. On 26 September 2012 the Upper Tribunal set aside  the  determination  of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Ruth allowing the appeal against the  Secretary
   of State's refusal to revoke a deportation order. There have been several
   attempts thereafter to determine the appeal but they have been  adjourned
   due to the appellant's lack of representation and his  failure  to  serve
   all the relevant documents he wished to rely on. On 23 October 2013,  the
   appeal finally proceeded.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  born  in  1968.  He  was  somewhat
   confused about his immigration status and  various  applications  in  his
   evidence. I am not surprised because the  summary  in  the  Secretary  of
   State's letter of 9  January  2012  is  not  entirely  supported  by  the
   documentary evidence in  her  bundle.  It  is  said  that  the  appellant
   initially entered the UK as a visitor on 21 November  1999,  was  granted
   leave to enter until 20 December 1999, left on an unspecified  date,  re-
   entered on 7 January 2000 and was granted leave to  enter  until  20  May
   2000. He then overstayed. However in the bundle  is  an  application  for
   leave to remain made by the appellant on 5 December 1999 and received  by
   the Secretary of State on 5 January 2000 (Annex A1). Plainly he could not
   therefore have left and re-entered as  stated  above.  The  copy  of  his
   passport (at  Annex  E1-5)  does  not  show  any  departure  or  re-entry
   endorsements. The Secretary of State's letter of 4 September 2007  (H1-3)
   suggests that an application for extension was granted after his  initial
   arrival, taking him to 20 May 2000.

4. The appellant has a son, R, born in Jamaica who has been  living  in  the
   UK with his mother for a number of years. Their status is not known. R is
   the appellant's oldest child.

5. On 22 December 2000  (according  to  the  application  form  and  not  12
   January 2001 as stated in the Secretary of State's letter), the appellant
   applied for leave to remain as the spouse of HC, a British citizen.  This
   was marked as received by the Secretary of State on 31 January  2001  and
   refused on 26 November 2001. It appears that by  then  the  marriage  had
   broken down (although they are still  legally  married).   There  are  no
   children of that marriage. Further representations made in December  2001
   (the basis of these is unknown as a copy has not  been  included  in  the
   respondent's bundle) were rejected on  17  April  2003  and  the  earlier
   refusal was maintained.

6. The appellant commenced a relationship with AT,  a  British  citizen,  in
   2001.

7. In 2002 their son, B, was born.

8.   On 1 January 2003 the appellant  was  convicted  at  Snaresbrook  Crown
   Court on seven counts of supplying  Class  A  drugs  and  two  counts  of
   possession with intent and on 25 July 2003 he was sentenced to five years
   in prison.  There is no record of any appeal made at  that  time  against
   the conviction or  the  sentence.   The  appellant  did  commence  appeal
   proceedings last year and I shall come to that later. On  14  April  2005
   the appellant was released from HMP Wayland.

9.    In 2006  (10  days  before  stated  in  the  Solicitor's  letter)  the
   appellant's daughter, D, was born.

10.    On  2  January  2007  the  appellant  was  convicted   at   Redbridge
   Magistrates Court of possession of class A drugs on 18 October  2006.  He
   received a 150 hours unpaid community order  and  12  months  supervision
   requirement. I should point out that the reference  to  an  intention  to
   supply contained in the Upper Tribunal's  Error  of  Law  decision  is  a
   mistake.

11.   On 4  September  2007  the  Secretary  of  State  maintains  that  the
   appellant was notified of a decision to make  a  deportation  order.  The
   letter was sent to the appellant at Stanfield Road in Dagenham  with  the
   postcode of E3 5QH. The appellant and AT maintain they never lived  there
   and that E3 is the Bow postal area, not Dagenham at all.  It  is  unclear
   where this address emanated from. It does not appear on any of the  other
   evidence I have on file.

12.   On 5 December 2007 a deportation order  was  signed.  The  refusal  to
   revoke the order asserts it was made under section 5(1) of the 1971  Act.
   The decision to make a deportation order refers to section  3(5)(a).  The
   summary to the respondent's appeal bundle maintains it was under  section
   5(2). Regrettably, a copy of  that  document  is  not  contained  in  the
   respondent's bundle and has not been  placed  before  the  Tribunal.  It.
   There is no evidence of service of that order and it is not  known  which
   address it was sent to. The appellant maintains he did not receive it.

13.    On  1  February  2008  the  appellant  was  convicted  at   Haverings
   Magistrates Court of using a vehicle whilst uninsured on 23 January 2008.
   He received a �200 fine.  His  licence  was  endorsed  with  six  penalty
   points.

14.   In 2008 the appellant's daughter, L, was born. AT is the mother of  B,
   D and L.

15.   On 29 September 2008 the appellant applied for leave to remain  as  an
   unmarried partner. That application was accompanied by a letter from  the
   appellant's representatives dated 1 October 2008 and a withdrawal by  the
   appellant of his earlier marriage application and  was  received  by  the
   Secretary of State on 3 October.  In  that  letter,  the  representatives
   point out that the appellant was seeking to have the criminal  conviction
   of 2003 quashed.

16.   On 11 December 2011 further information was sought by  the  respondent
   as to the appellant's family life. This was provided  by  the  appellant.
   The application was treated as an application  to  revoke  a  deportation
   order and was refused on 9 January 2012. No appeal was lodged. It appears
   that the appellant's representatives'  office  closed  down  around  this
   time.

17.   On 8 March 2012 the appellant was detained  under  immigration  powers
   with a view to deportation. On learning of the  order,  an  out  of  time
   appeal was lodged on 9 March, on the basis that  the  appellant  had  not
   been informed of the  decision  given  the  closure  of  his  solicitors'
   office. On 14 March 2012 the Tribunal extended time.

18.   On 14 May 2012 the appeal was heard  at  Taylor  House  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Ruth and allowed. The determination was promulgated on  30
   May 2012. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant. AT  and  from
   AT's mother.

19.   On 6 June 2012 the respondent sought permission to  appeal.  This  was
   granted on 18 June 2012.

20.   On 26 September 2012 the  matter  came  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Rintoul and myself and we found an error of law in the  determination  of
   the First-tier Judge.  The reasons are given in the determination  of  10
   October 2012.

21.   Several adjournments followed as the appellant was pursuing an  appeal
   against his 2003 conviction. He was also given  time  to  try  to  obtain
   legal representation.

22.         The matter then came before me on 23 October 2013.

Appeal Hearing

23.   The appellant attended  the  hearing  with  his  wife  and  their  two
   daughters.  The  bundle  the  appellant  recently  submitted  (after  the
   directions deadline) had not been served upon the respondent.  Copies  of
   the documents were therefore made available for Ms Holmes.

24.   The appellant then gave oral evidence. He stated that he  had  arrived
   here as a visitor and had then married. They separated in  2000-2001  but
   were still legally  married  as  he  could  not  afford  a  divorce.  His
   relationship with AT commenced in 2001 and they started to  cohabit  from
   December 2001. They had three children, B, D and L born in 2002, 2006 and
   2008.

25.   The appellant confirmed that he  was  aware  of  the  reason  for  the
   attempt to deport him. He stated that his first conviction in 2002 was  a
   miscarriage of justice. His barrister had entered a guilty  plea  and  he
   had been sentenced to five years in prison. He had appealed against  that
   sentence or, at least he thought he had in that he had completed  a  form
   whilst in prison but nothing came of it.  Last  year,  he  had  begun  to
   pursue the matter with the courts. He said that  he  had  never  supplied
   drugs; he had only smoked them. His second conviction occurred in October
   2006; on that occasion he received a community  order.  In  2008  he  was
   convicted of driving without insurance.

26.   The appellant said that he  had  not  received  any  response  to  the
   marriage application he had made. He explained that  his  Solicitors  had
   closed down and he had to take the matter to the Law Society  as  he  had
   paid money. He had not seen his passport since it was submitted for  that
   application.

27.   When asked why he should not be deported in light of his  convictions,
   the appellant stated that he was a commonwealth  citizen,  he  had  lived
   here for 14 years, he had no life elsewhere, he had family ties here  and
   he had been convicted unlawfully.

28.   In response to Ms Holmes' questions, the appellant said  that  he  had
   tried to appeal his 2002 sentence. He had signed the  form  but  was  not
   aware of the procedure and so just waited. He said he had  sent  evidence
   of that to the Court of Appeal but did not have it with him.

29.   With regard to his life with his family, he  explained  that  he  took
   the children to and from school and looked after them as AT  worked  long
   hours. He made meals for them. He also cooked for their restaurant.

30.   The appellant said that he had an  older  child.  He  lived  with  his
   mother in Birmingham but visited during school holidays. He had  recently
   started college.

31.   The appellant said he would not re-offend. He was  now  45  years  old
   and a Christian. He insisted he had rights as a Commonwealth citizen.  He
   maintained his partner and children could not be expected to relocate  to
   Jamaica. That completed his evidence.

32.   AT then gave evidence. She confirmed her date of birth  and  said  she
   was a British national since her birth here. She  had  family  here;  her
   mother, sister,  uncles  and  cousins.  She  had  been  living  with  the
   appellant since 2001 and they had three children.  She  stated  that  the
   appellant was now a responsible man. They were settled here and  had  two
   businesses. The appellant had changed since the days when he was involved
   in drugs. He was no longer that man. His deportation would affect five of
   them. She would become a single parent and did not  know  how  she  would
   cope. Her mother was unwell and her sister was disabled. She had to  help
   them. She knew no other home. The stress and worry from  the  deportation
   proceedings had taken its toll on them all.

33.   AT admitted that when the appellant was convicted in 2002 he had  been
   irresponsible. She said that since then he had changed. She did not  know
   what would happen if the appellant were to be deported.

34.   In response to Ms Holmes the witness  explained  that  she  had  never
   envisaged being a single parent. She had never had  to  deal  with  three
   children on her own except for when the appellant was detained last year.
   She had almost had a breakdown and the children were ill and  had  played
   up. She would be unable to relocate  to  Jamaica.  Her  mother  would  be
   unable to cope without her. She suffered from rheumatism.  AT's  28  year
   old sister had Down's Syndrome  and  she  helped  with  her  care.  Other
   relatives would not help. They did not even help with babysitting.

35.   AT stated that the appellant's first  son,  R,  had  recently  started
   college so would be spending more time with them. He got on well with the
   other children and they loved him. She asked for the Tribunal to look  at
   the case with an open mind and an open heart. The appellant  had  matured
   and was now a helpful and responsible man. Five of them, or six including
   the oldest child, would be affected by the deportation. AT left  home  at
   17 and had worked hard to make a life for her children.  They  had  three
   properties and let two of them. They were settled.

36.   When asked why the appellant had not appealed against the  deportation
   order, AT said that they had never received it. It had been  sent  to  an
   address which did not exist and where they had never lived.

37.   AT said that the appellant no longer  smoked  drugs.  He  had  stopped
   around the time of the birth of their second child.  He  had  attended  a
   drugs rehabilitation course following his second conviction and that  had
   changed  him.  After  that,  he  changed  his  ways   and   assumed   his
   responsibilities. AT admitted that prior to that he was irresponsible and
   took drugs. She was in denial about it because she  had  fallen  in  love
   with him. After his first conviction, she and their son had gone to  live
   with her mother as AT could not cope on her own. It was a hard time and B
   had grown up without having his father around.

38.   With regard to the last offence, AT said that the appellant  had  been
   working on a friend's car and it was time  to  collect  D  from  nursery.
   Although he could have walked, he took the car and was stopped. He made a
   mistake and had been punished.

39.   When asked why the court should accept that the  appellant  would  not
   re-offend, AT stated that if this had been 2006, she would  have  agreed.
   She emphasised, however, that he was now grounded and a changed  man.  He
   would not re-offend. He was now a responsible man.

40.   AT described an average week  in  their  lives.  She  said  she  slept
   through the alarm so the appellant would wake her up. She made  breakfast
   and then the appellant took the children to school. He also  walked  them
   home again. She worked in  a  hairdresser's  and  also  in  maternity  at
   Queen's Hospital. She worked long hours in the salon  and  on  Thursdays,
   Fridays and Saturdays  did  not  get  home  until  very  late,  sometimes
   midnight. She had Wednesdays and Sundays off. On Wednesday  she  did  the
   laundry and checked up on her mother and sister. Sunday  was  spent  with
   the appellant and children.

41.   That completed the oral evidence.

42.   I then heard submissions from Ms Holmes. She submitted that  the  only
   way the appellant could succeed under the current rules would  be  if  he
   showed there were exceptional circumstances in his  case.  She  submitted
   that there were none. She referred to OH (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ 694, DS
   (India) [2009] EWCA Civ 544, A D Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348 and SS (Nigeria)
   [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and took me through the paragraphs relied  upon.  She
   submitted that deportation could only be averted by a  very  strong  case
   and this was not such a case even though she did not dispute  that  there
   were close family ties. She submitted that even though the appellant  had
   children, he continued to re-offend and had never had any right to be  in
   the UK. He had committed serious offences and it would  be  irresponsible
   of the Secretary of State if she did not make a  deportation  order.  The
   appellant  had  not  accepted  responsibility  for  his  crimes  and  was
   attempting to evade responsibility  for  a  crime  to  which  he  pleaded
   guilty. If he had not taken responsibility, how could it be said he was a
   reformed character. There was little evidence from other  relatives.  The
   appeal should be dismissed.

43.   The appellant and AT both  responded.  The  appellant  relied  on  the
   transcript of the proceedings in 2003. He stated that he lived  with  his
   family whom he loved. He looked after the children. He cooked  for  their
   restaurant. They paid  their  taxes.  They  also  had  a  barber's  shop.
   Deportation would destroy the family.

44.    AT  emphasised  that  the  appellant  had  changed  since  his  drugs
   awareness counselling in 2007. He had made mistakes in the  past  but  he
   had changed. He was now the man he should have been years ago. Theirs was
   an exceptional case. They worked hard together and his removal would have
   devastating effects on all of them. The deportation order had  been  sent
   to a bogus address so they had not known about  it  and  could  not  have
   appealed. They had been advised at the last hearing  that  there  was  no
   need for other witnesses as they had attended previously. It  was  unfair
   that the UKBA had taken  no  action  for  so  long.  In  that  time,  the
   appellant had changed his ways. He was a non violent person and the drugs
   course had opened his eyes to the damage that they cause.

45.   That completed the submissions and I reserved my  determination  which
   I now give.

 Findings and conclusions

46.      The appellant has not technically sought to make an application  to
   revoke a deportation order. I find, for reasons I  shall  explain  later,
   that he had not been served with the order and had  no  knowledge  of  it
   when he made the application on 29 September 2008 to remain on the  basis
   of his relationship with AT. It was that application which the  Secretary
   of State treated as an application for revocation and which  she  refused
   on 9 January 2012, 3 years and 3 months later.

47.      Although Ms Holmes' submissions focused on the current  Immigration
   Rules, they were not in force at the date of the refusal in January  2012
   and so cannot apply to this appeal. The  application  was  refused  under
   paragraphs 390 and 391 of HC395 and on Article 8 grounds. At the error of
   law hearing, Mr Wilding, for  the  Secretary  of  State,  confirmed  that
   paragraph 390 was the applicable rule. I have, therefore, considered that
   and Article 8. I have also, had regard to the fact that the current rules
   are an expression of the Secretary of State's interpretation  of  Article
   8.

48. At the  date  of  the  decision,  paragraphs  390  and  391  stated  the
   following:
390.  An  application  for  revocation  of  a  deportation  order  will   be
considered in the light of all the circumstances including the following:
(i) the grounds on which the order was made;
(ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
(iii) the interests of  the  community,  including  the  maintenance  of  an
effective immigration control;
(iv)  the  interests  of  the   applicant,   including   any   compassionate
circumstances.
391. In the case of an applicant who has been deported following  conviction
for a criminal offence, continued exclusion
(i) in the case of a conviction which is capable of being  spent  under  the
Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, unless the conviction is spent  within
the meaning of that Act or, if the conviction  is  spent  in  less  than  10
years, 10 years have elapsed since the making of the deportation order; or
(ii) in the case of a conviction not capable of being spent under that  Act,
at any time, unless  refusal  to  revoke  the  deportation  order  would  be
contrary to the Human Rights  Convention  or  the  Convention  and  Protocol
Relating to the Status of Refugees

will normally be the proper course. In other cases revocation of  the  order
will not normally be authorised unless the  situation  has  been  materially
altered, either by a change of circumstances since the order  was  made,  or
by fresh information coming to light which  was  not  before  the  appellate
authorities or the Secretary of State  .  The  passage  of  time  since  the
appellant  was  deported  may  also  in  itself  amount  to  a   change   of
circumstances as to warrant revocation of the order.

49.  Although the appellant has not yet been deported, paragraph  391  is  a
   helpful indicator of the kind of factors  that  the  Secretary  of  State
   would expect to see before agreeing to revocation of a deportation order.
   I note that the appellant's conviction in 2003 can never be  spent  under
   the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act.

50. I have had regard to the judgments to which I was referred by Ms  Holmes
   and, additionally, I have  considered  the  principles  enunciated  in  N
   (Kenya) [2004] EWCA Civ 1094 which Mr Wilding relied on at the  error  of
   law hearing.

51.  The  gist  of  the  court's  decision  in  N  (Kenya)  was   that   the
   Adjudicator's analysis  of  the  public  interest  had  been  inadequate.
   Discussing the Adjudicator's discretion under paragraph 21(1) of Schedule
   4 of the 1999 Act, May LJ said:

      64. ...The discretion is to balance the public  interest  against  the
      compassionate circumstances of the case taking account of all relevant
      factors including those specifically referred to in paragraph  364  of
      HC 395.  Essentially the same balance is expressed as that between the
      appellant's right to respect for his private and family  life  on  the
      one hand and the prevention of disorder or crime on the other.   Where
      a person who is not a British citizen commits a number of very serious
      crimes,  the  public  interest  side  of  the  balance  will   include
      importantly, although not exclusively, the public policy need to deter
      and  to  express  society's  revulsion  at  the  seriousness  of   the
      criminality.  It is  for  the  adjudicator  in  the  exercise  of  his
      discretion  to  weigh  all  relevant  factors,   but   an   individual
      adjudicator is no better able to judge the  critical  public  interest
      factor than is the court.  In the first instance, that is a matter for
      the Secretary of State.   The  adjudicator  should  then  take  proper
      account of the Secretary of State's public interest view.

      65. The risk of re-offending is a factor in the balance, but, for very
      serious crimes, a low risk of re-offending is not the  most  important
      public interest factor.


52. Later in the judgment, Judge L J said:
      83. The "public good" and the "public interest" are  wide-ranging  but
      undefined concepts.  In my judgment (whether expressly referred to  in
      any decision letter or not) broad issues of social cohesion and public
      confidence in the administration of the system  by  which  control  is
      exercised over non-British citizens who enter and remain in the United
      Kingdom are engaged.  They include an element of deterrence,  to  non-
      British citizens who are  already  here,  even  if  they  are  genuine
      refugees and to those minded to  come,  so  as  to  ensure  that  they
      clearly understand  that,  whatever  the  circumstances,  one  of  the
      consequences of serious crime may well be deportation.  The  Secretary
      of State has a primary responsibility for this system.  His  decisions
      have a public importance beyond the personal impact on the  individual
      or  individuals  who  would  be  directly  affected  by   them.    The
      adjudicator must form his own independent judgment.   Provided  he  is
      satisfied that he would exercise the discretion "differently"  to  the
      Secretary of State, he must say so.  Nevertheless, in every  case,  he
      should at least address the Secretary of State's prime  responsibility
      for the public interest and the public good, and the impact that these
      matters will properly have had on the exercise of his discretion.  The
      adjudicator cannot decide that the  discretion  of  the  Secretary  of
      State "should have been exercised differently"  without  understanding
      and giving weight to matters which the Secretary of State was entitled
      or required to take into account when considering the public good.
      And:
      87. ...the risk of further offending or potential danger was  relevant
      to the deportation decision.  In simple terms, the  greater  the  risk
      represented by the offender, the greater the public  interest  in  his
      deportation.
53.       The  importance  of  the  public  interest  is  reiterated  in  OH
   (Serbia). OH was a 25 year old man from Kosovo who had  been  in  the  UK
   about nine years at the date of the hearing of his appeal.  He  had  been
   convicted of wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm, having come
   close to killing his victim, and was sentenced to four years.  The  court
   drew the following propositions from N (Kenya)  summarised  at  paragraph
   15:
      (a) The risk of reoffending is one facet of the public  interest  but,
      in the case of very serious crimes, not the most important facet.
      (b) Another important facet is the need  to  deter  foreign  nationals
      from committing serious crimes by leading  them  to  understand  that,
      whatever the other circumstances, one consequence of them may well  be
      deportation.
      (c) A further important facet is the role of a deportation order as an
      expression of society's revulsion at serious crimes  and  in  building
      public confidence in  the  treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
      committed serious crimes.
      (d) Primary responsibility for the public interest, whose view  of  it
      is likely to be wider and better informed than  that  of  a  tribunal,
      resides in the respondent and accordingly a tribunal hearing an appeal
      against a decision to deport should not only consider for  itself  all
      the facets of the public interest but should weigh, as  a  linked  but
      independent feature, the approach to them adopted by the respondent in
      the context of the facts of the case.
54.   Despite sympathy for the appellant who had his  parents  and  siblings
   here and who had sought to rehabilitate himself, the court  found  itself
   unable to allow the appeal.

55.    In DS (India) the court considered the appeal of DS who had  come  to
   the UK as a spouse and attempted to rob a betting shop whilst armed  with
   a knife seven years later. He was sentenced to a term of imprisonment  of
   4 years 3 months. He also had seven further  convictions  for  dishonesty
   prior to the robbery. His wife (who had come to the UK from India some 10
   years before him) had divorced him, but they were reconciled at the  time
   of his hearing. They were seeking to formally adopt the five year old son
   of the wife's brother. The court considered the issue of  relocation  for
   the wife and child. It found that:

   If it would be reasonable for a wife to accompany her husband,  then  the
   interference in family life is  that  much  the  less.  If  it  would  be
   unreasonable, then the interference would be that much the more. However,
   where the scales ultimately fall will depend on the overall evaluation of
   every factor in the balance. In the present case, a  critical  factor  is
   the serious offence of which DS was convicted (at paragraph 30).

It also found that:

   The public interest in deportation of those  who  commit  serious  crimes
   goes well beyond depriving the offender in question from the chance to re-
   offend in this country: it extends to deterring  and  preventing  serious
   crime generally and to upholding public abhorrence of such offending  (at
   paragraph 37).

56. A D Lee was a 32 year old Jamaican national who had  been  deported  and
   who had appealed from Jamaica against the refusal of the  Home  Secretary
   to revoke the deportation order. He initially entered the United  Kingdom
   as a visitor in 1996 but was granted a variation to enable him to  remain
   as a student. When this leave expired at  the  end  of  October  1999  he
   overstayed, but at some point thereafter left the country,  returning  in
   April 2002 and absconding after  securing  temporary  admission.  He  was
   however arrested within  three  months  for  having  a  forged  insurance
   certificate. In January 2003, having been  removed  to  Jamaica,  he  re-
   entered the United Kingdom on a false passport and within  a  few  months
   had again been arrested, this time for possession of class A  drugs  with
   intent to supply. On pleas of guilty to ten counts he was sentenced on  3
   October 2003 to 7 years' imprisonment. In  April  2006,  while  still  in
   prison, the appellant was served with notice of intention to deport  him.
   He completed his sentence and following the final dismissal of his appeal
   he was deported in November 2008. Whilst in prison he married Rachel  Lee
   with whom he had two daughters. It appears from  the  evidence  that  his
   relationship with his first daughter only took  root  after  his  release
   from prison. The younger child was unaffected by his departure. The  wife
   established a small cleaning business when the appellant  was  in  prison
   and his presence as a child-minder upon release enabled her  to  keep  it
   going. The issue before the Tribunal was whether it was proportionate  to
   break the family up. The  judge  considered  that  despite  the  distress
   deportation would cause the family, it was  appropriate  because  of  the
   appellant's bad immigration history and his criminality and  because  his
   wife  was  aware  of  both  when  she  married  him.  In  upholding   his
   determination, the court found:

   27. The tragic consequence is that this family,  short-lived  as  it  has
   been, will  be  broken  up  for  ever  because  of  the  appellant's  bad
   behaviour. That is what deportation does. Sometimes the  balance  between
   its justification and its consequences falls the other way,  but  whether
   it does so is a question for an immigration judge.


57.   In  SS  (Nigeria)  the  court  had  to  consider  the  appeal  against
   deportation of an  appellant  who  had  a  relationship  with  a  British
   national and a young son. SS was convicted on three counts  of  supplying
   crack  cocaine  sentenced  to  three  concurrent  terms  of  three  years
   imprisonment. He had been a street dealer. An antisocial behaviour  order
   was imposed  prohibiting  him  from  entering  Walsall  Town  centre.  In
   dismissing his case, the court took note of Parliamentary endorsement  of
   the new  rules  on  deportation  with  the  result  that  this  gave  the
   proportionality scales a markedly greater weight than in other cases  and
   meant that only a very strong claim indeed could  override  the  pressing
   nature of the public interest in the criminal's deportation.

58.   In making my findings I have had full regard to  the  evidence  before
   me, the submissions made, the  applicable  rules  and  the  law  and  the
   relevant jurisprudence.

59.   I start with the appellant's criminal history and  the  importance  to
   be given to  the  public  interest  in  effecting  his  deportation.  The
   appellant has three convictions; the most  serious  occurred  in  January
   2003 for which, in July 2003, he received a five year prison sentence for
   possession and intent to supply Class A drugs. This is  without  doubt  a
   very serious offence. As stated by the sentencing judge,  drugs  lead  to
   addiction,  destitution,  physical  and  mental  ill  health   and   evil
   consequences for society. It is right that society  should  be  protected
   against individuals who pose such a risk.

60.   The appellant continues to maintain that he was framed by  the  police
   and that he never intended to supply drugs only to smoke them himself and
   that he has been seeking to clear his name. I accept that  he  was  under
   the impression that a form he had signed whilst in  prison  was  for  the
   purpose of challenging the conviction. However nothing  appears  to  have
   come of that. I also accept that in 2008 his representatives informed the
   Secretary of State that the appellant was seeking to have his  conviction
   quashed. Again, nothing seems to have come of  that.  In  June  2012  the
   appellant did commence proceedings against his conviction but so  far  he
   has not been successful. I have had regard to the trial transcript  which
   he had adduced, and I see that there were lengthy submissions by  Counsel
   seeking a change of his guilty plea made, it is said, when he  was  under
   pressure. However, in spite of that the plea stood and the appellant  was
   convicted. I am unable to go behind that conviction.

61.   The sentencing judge observed  that  the  appellant  was  storing  and
   bagging heroin for others to sell. He  took  account  of  the  mitigating
   circumstances and noted that the appellant had  young  children  whom  he
   clearly cared for. He also noted  the  domination  and  violence  he  had
   suffered at the hands of his co-defendant. Despite  this  he  received  a
   heavy prison sentence.

62.   The appellant was released from  prison  in  2005.  Surprisingly,  the
   Secretary of State took no action against him at this stage. It was  only
   in September 2007, four and a half years after that conviction, that  she
   took steps against the appellant and made a decision to deport him.  This
   came nine months after his second conviction for possession for which  he
   received a  non  custodial  sentence  at  a  Magistrates  Court.  I  have
   considered the pre sentencing report in respect of  that  conviction  and
   note that a community order was recommended,  it  being  noted  that  the
   appellant was willing to undergo a rehabilitation programme.

63.   The first point I would therefore make, in the light of these  events,
   is that the Secretary of State's failure to act during  the  four  and  a
   half years after the appellant's serious drugs  conviction  and,  indeed,
   the fact that it took nine months after  the  second  conviction  (for  a
   lesser offence and when there was  no  custodial  sentence)  for  her  to
   actually take action, does not suggest that she considered the public  to
   be at great risk from the appellant's presence  or  that  there  was  any
   pressing need to remove him expeditiously. In spite of the importance  to
   be attached to the three main 'public interest' factors, namely  (a)  the
   risk of re-offending, (b) the need for possible deportation to be seen as
   a means of deterrence, and (c) the role of using deportation orders as an
   expression of the public's revulsion at serious crimes and  the  need  to
   build public confidence in the treatment of  foreign  citizens  who  have
   committed  serious  crimes,  the  appellant  was  left  to  continue   to
   strengthen his life and ties here. Had he been  removed  then,  when  his
   rehabilitation had not commenced and when his ties here were  weaker,  he
   would not have had much of a case to argue about. Instead he remained and
   fathered two more children with AT.

64.   The second difficulty with the Secretary of  State's  action  is  that
   when she did made a decision to deport the appellant, she sent her letter
   of notification to an address where he has never lived.  Not  only  that,
   she sent it a street in the town of Dagenham but with a Bow post code (as
   confirmed by the Royal Mail website). Not surprisingly, he never received
   it. The notification of a decision to deport was therefore not served  on
   the appellant. That had the effect of allowing him to continue  with  his
   life with his partner and their three children.

65.   The third problem is that the facts on which the  Secretary  of  State
   based her decision under paragraph 364 were incorrect.  It  appears  that
   she considered the facts as  at  the  time  of  the  appellant's  earlier
   application for leave to remain (in 2001) and without seeking any  update
   from him as to any changes which may have occurred since  then.  So,  the
   Secretary of State only considered the appellant's first child, R.  There
   was no consideration at all of the two children born thereafter (at  that
   date) who lived with the appellant and no consideration of his long  term
   partner, AT. The Secretary of State did not consider other  matters  such
   as the appellant's contribution to the household  and  his  role  as  the
   primary carer of the children which allowed AT  to  work,  establish  two
   businesses and contribute in  taxes  to  the  economy  of  the  UK.  And,
   importantly, there was no consideration of the  drugs  awareness  courses
   and counselling the appellant attended following  his  second  conviction
   which helped him to turn his life around. The erroneous factual basis  on
   which the decision making was carried out could not be put right  by  the
   appellant because the letter of 4 September 2007 from the respondent  was
   sent to the wrong address.

66.   The disastrous effect of this error by  the  Secretary  of  State  was
   compounded by the signing of the deportation order in  December  2007  on
   the premise that the appellant had not sought  to  appeal  the  decision.
   Plainly he could not do so  as  it  had  not  been  served  on  him.  The
   deportation order itself has never been produced  to  the  Tribunal.  Its
   date and place of service is not known. The appellant  maintains  he  was
   not aware of it and that is borne out by the  representations/application
   made by his solicitors in October 2008. No reference to  deportation  was
   made in that letter in which the appellant seeks  to  amend  his  initial
   application made following his marriage so as to remain with AT and their
   children.

67.   The Secretary of State then took until 13 December 2011 to respond  to
   that application. Even in that letter, sent to the correct  address  this
   time, there was no reference at all to the deportation order and so there
   was nothing to alert the appellant at that stage that one had  been  made
   against him. Three years and three  months  after  his  application,  the
   Secretary of State finally refused it, having decided to treat it  as  an
   application for revocation of the  deportation  order.  Once  again,  her
   inaction for many years does not show any pressing  need  to  remove  the
   appellant as a threat to the public. Once again, the long delay led to  a
   further strengthening of the appellant's position and ties here. It  also
   provided time during which the appellant has been able to  show  that  he
   has stayed clear of drugs and  that  his  rehabilitation,  following  the
   drugs awareness courses he attended following his community order, was  a
   success. The investment of public  resources  in  the  rehabilitation  of
   foreign prisoners is certainly pointless if the intention  is  always  to
   remove them. Where the system has worked, as it has  in  this  case,  the
   public interest in removal must have lessened.

68.   It can be seen, therefore, that by her own actions, the  Secretary  of
   State has not demonstrated that there is an urgent need  to  protect  the
   public from the appellant or indeed to use his deportation as a deterrent
   to others and as an expression of society's disapproval of  his  conduct.
   Moreover, the lack of service of both the  decision  to  deport  and  the
   deportation order itself, and  the  factual  inaccuracies  on  which  the
   decision was based, have placed the appellant at an unfair  disadvantage.
   The failure to serve the decision to deport on the appellant is not  just
   a technical point. It means that the weight the Secretary of  State  gave
   to the public interest as expressed in the decision is undermined by  the
   faulty premise on which the decision was made. In  other  words,  as  the
   Secretary of  State  deprived  herself  of  making  a  properly  informed
   decision, the weight that would normally be given to the public  interest
   view as expressed therein. It  should  also  be  pointed  out  that  when
   considering whether to revoke the deportation  order,  the  Secretary  of
   State wrongly considered the appellant's length of  stay  here  to  be  8
   years (at paragraph 24); in fact at the date of  the  letter  in  January
   2012, the appellant had been here for over 12 years.

69.   For these reasons, I  find  that  the  appellant  has  come  to  these
   proceedings from a  disadvantaged  standpoint.  Not  only  was  he  never
   informed of the decision to make a deportation order, but  the  basis  on
   which it was made was factually incorrect. Further, he  was  deprived  of
   his right of appeal against it as it was not sent to  him  at  the  right
   address and there is no evidence from the Secretary of State to show that
   the signed deportation order was sent to him at the  correct  address  in
   December 2007. Additionally, when the Secretary of State decided to treat
   the appellant's application for leave to  remain  as  an  application  to
   revoke the deportation order, she did not notify him that that  was  what
   she was doing, nor did she make any reference to the order in her request
   for further information sent to the appellant  in  2011.  What  all  this
   means is that the appellant had no opportunity to make representations in
   connection with the decision to deport, or the deportation  order  itself
   or even the refusal to revoke it. The first he knew  of  the  deportation
   process was when he was detained under immigration powers in March  2012.
   Whilst I do not seek to condone the appellant's convictions in any way at
   all, I do find that his rights under the law  and  the  rules  have  been
   disregarded to a significant degree by the Secretary of State.

70. Paragraph 390 sets out the factors the Secretary of State must  consider
   when deciding whether to revoke a deportation order.  The  first  is  the
   grounds on which the order was made. It can be seen from what I have  set
   out above, that the grounds on which the order were made were  incomplete
   and  significantly  lacking  in  substance.  The  second  factor  to   be
   considered is "any representations made in support of  revocation".  None
   were made as the appellant did not even know he  was  the  subject  of  a
   deportation order. His application was for leave to remain as  a  partner
   and not for revocation. The third factor requiring consideration  is  the
   interests of the community. Whilst the Secretary of State did take  these
   into account, she did so without a full factual appraisal and without any
   knowledge of the appellant's programme of rehabilitation, the success  of
   that programme and the appellant's six drug free years.  The  maintenance
   of effective  immigration  control  must  also  be  considered.  Had  the
   appellant been removed after his first application for  leave  to  remain
   was refused or as soon as his first prison sentence had  been  completed,
   immigration control would have bee effectively maintained.  However,  the
   fact that he was allowed to remain for several years, despite his address
   being known to the authorities and even after the deportation  order  was
   signed, does not suggest that his removal was imperative for  immigration
   control. The last factor  to  be  considered  is  the  interests  of  the
   appellant  including  any  compassionate  circumstances.   Although   the
   Secretary of State did by this time know of the appellant's  family  life
   with AT and their children, she did not take any account of the fact that
   the deportation order was signed on an erroneous factual  basis  and  the
   appellant's length of residence  was  wrongly  stated.  Moreover  as  the
   appellant was not aware that he was facing deportation, he never had  the
   opportunity to make the points he could be expected to have made had  the
   procedure been properly followed.  It is for all  these  reasons  that  I
   find that the Secretary of State has not correctly followed the  law  and
   the rules. such a failing is all the more  significant  when  deportation
   means the break up of a close family and long lasting and severe  adverse
   consequences on a British born woman and three British born children, all
   of whom have rights themselves.

71.   I now deal further with the  appellant's  criminality.  The  appellant
   accepts that he was involved  in  drugs  (although  he  disputes  he  was
   supplying them). He accepts he acted irresponsibly in the past.  Both  he
   and AT gave compelling evidence  that  he  had  turned  his  life  around
   following the drugs courses and counselling he received in January  2007.
   Letters showing  his  various  appointments  for  counselling  have  been
   adduced. AT was candid in her evidence and admitted  that  the  appellant
   had been immature and irresponsible during their  early  years  together.
   However she described the courses as a turning point;  a  time  when  the
   appellant realised the error of his ways, took steps to change  them  and
   became a mature and responsible father and  partner.  The  appellant  has
   remained drug free since then and it accepted that he is a very good  and
   hands on father.

72.   In 2008 the  appellant  was  caught  and  fined  for  driving  without
   insurance. The circumstances of that  incident  were  that  he  had  been
   fixing his friend's car and the time came for him to collect his daughter
   from nursery. Instead of just walking there, he foolishly opted to  drive
   and got caught. Whilst it  may  be  said  that  this  behaviour  shows  a
   disregard for the law, I am prepared to accept it was a  one  off  lapse,
   that he acted foolishly without thought rather than  maliciously  seeking
   to flout the law and that he has learnt his lesson. There  have  been  no
   further incidents in the ensuing five years.

73.   I have considered the case law very carefully. There  are  significant
   differences in the facts between the cases Ms Holmes relied  on  and  the
   appellant's case. N had never lived with his partner and  children  as  a
   family due to his lengthy prison sentence. She was from Dominica and  had
   come here as an adolescent and he married  her  in  a  bigamous  ceremony
   whilst serving his prison sentence.  N's crime involved appalling cruelty
   and violence. He abducted and imprisoned a woman who was  a  stranger  to
   him and  subjected  her  to  a  horrific  ordeal  during  which  she  was
   threatened with violence from a knife and scissors and raped three times.
    He was convicted by the jury and sentenced to  11  years'  imprisonment.
   His victim, who had given evidence, had sustained serious mental  injury.
   She had undergone a change of  personality  and  was  on  medication  and
   obtaining regular treatment from a  psychologist.   The  judge  concluded
   that the appellant was a danger to the public.  After  his  release  from
   prison he was on immigration bail but breached his conditions.  His  case
   can be distinguished from the appellant's on the basis  that  the  latter
   was not involved in violence, has a long term relationship with a British
   citizen who has lived  here  since  birth  and  has  three  British  born
   children.

74. OH was also involved in a violent  crime  where  his  victim  only  just
   escaped death. He had no partner and no children, was a young man in  his
   20s and had been here less than ten years. The appellant has been here 14
   years, is now 45 years old and has a long term partner and children.

75. DS had been here for about ten years at the date  of  his  hearing.  His
   wife had come here from India and they were divorced although said to  be
   reconciled at the hearing. They were seeking to adopt a  relative's  son.
   DS's offence also involved violence and a weapon. He also had seven other
   convictions for dishonesty.

76. A D Lee  had  been  both  an  overstayer  and  subsequently  an  illegal
   entrant. He absconded and  evaded  immigration  control.  He  used  false
   documents. After his deportation  he  re-entered  illegally  on  a  false
   passport and was  arrested  shortly  thereafter  on  drugs  offences.  He
   received a seven year sentence. He married his partner whilst  in  prison
   and when she knew  he  had  re-entered  illegally  and  in  breach  of  a
   deportation order.  Although he had two children, the younger one was not
   affected by his removal and the older one, with whom he had bonded for  a
   relatively short period after his release from prison,  had  adjusted  to
   his departure after initial difficulties.  The appellant in our case  had
   not entered illegally and although he had overstayed for a  short  period
   after his leave expired  in  2000,  he  subsequently  made  attempts  for
   regularise his stay and did not seek to evade  immigration  control.  His
   relationship with AT has lasted 12 years and he has  close  relationships
   with all their three children. He has not used false documents.

77. Although the factual bases of these cases differ substantially from  the
   circumstances of this appellant,  the  principles  set  out  therein  are
   relevant to my assessment and I fully apply them.

78.   It could be said that despite the  Secretary  of  State's  errors  and
   failings, listed  above,  the  appellant  should  be  removed  given  his
   previous  involvement  in  drugs.  However  that  would  mean   that   no
   consideration was given to  the  appellant's  successful  rehabilitation,
   unchallenged by the respondent in her  submissions,  to  his  very  close
   family ties, fully accepted by the respondent, and to the unfairness that
   deportation would lead to, where it was ordered without an assessment  of
   the full circumstances.  It is also the case that when the  Secretary  of
   State considered whether to revoke the deportation order  she  considered
   representations that were not made for that purpose and which  were  made
   without any knowledge  of  the  deportation  order.  Plainly  there  were
   matters which the appellant would have sought  to  address  had  he  been
   aware of the fact that his application for leave to remain as  a  partner
   was in fact being treated as an application  to  revoke  the  deportation
   order he did not know existed. He could have addressed  matters  such  as
   his convictions, his re-offending and his rehabilitation.  However he was
   not given any chance to do so before the decision was  made.  As  I  have
   made clear at paragraph 70, the factors to be considered by the Secretary
   of State, as set out in paragraph 390 of the rules, were not  taken  into
   account.

79.   I am required to consider the rights of those who  will  be  adversely
   affected by the appellant's deportation, that is to say, AT and the three
   children. This principle was set  out  by  the  House  of  Lords  in  the
   judgment of Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39. I am also  required  to  consider
   the best interests of the children under section  55.   When  considering
   the family ties described by the appellant, AT  and  AT's  mother  (whose
   unchallenged oral evidence and written  evidence  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal supports that given by the appellant and AT before me),  I  find
   them to be strong and secure. The appellant is plainly the primary  carer
   for the three children aged 11, 7 and 5. As such he  has  a  particularly
   close relationship with them. This is not the run of  the  mill  type  of
   case where the  appellant  helps  out  with  some  household  chores  and
   childcare; he is the primary carer of the three young children given AT's
   lengthy working hours. I accept that  she  is  motivated  by  wanting  to
   establish a secure future for the children and  by  the  need  to  do  it
   herself given the restrictions against the appellant taking employment.

80.   I have taken account of the oral evidence and the  written  statements
   and in particular the statements written by the children  themselves  (in
   the respondent's bundle). I am mindful of the principles  established  in
   ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 with regard to the welfare  of  children  who
   are innocent victims  of  their  parent's/parents'  choices  and  to  the
   primary consideration that must be given to a child's best interests.  An
   important part of assessing where these interests lie, is discovering the
   child's own views, hence the importance of the  letters  written  by  the
   children.

81. I also take note of the severe adverse effect the appellant's  detention
   last year had on two of the children. Letters from the school  have  been
   adduced and show that B became  uncommunicative,  developed  boils  as  a
   result of stress and refused to attend school and L became emotional  and
   withdrawn with a lack of interest in her environment, more noticeably  so
   when other parents came to collect  children  from  school/nursery.  Both
   conditions were considered sufficiently serious to  warrant  intervention
   by the local NHS Mental Health Team.

82.   Whilst it may be said that the appellant's own  bad  behaviour  caused
   the distress to his  children,  it  must  be  remembered  that  they  are
   innocent victims and that his realisation of the suffering he caused  led
   to the turnaround in his conduct, along with the support  and  assistance
   he received from attending drugs counselling. When  he  was  detained  in
   2012, he had been free of drugs and  had  remained  out  of  trouble  for
   several years.

83.   It is because of  the  particularly  close  relationship  between  the
   appellant and the children, the vital role he plays in their  upkeep  and
   their own heavy reliance on and love for him,  that  I  find  their  best
   interests are for him to remain with them and for their  family  life  to
   continue as it is. This is not a paramount interest but it is  a  primary
   one. The children are of an age when they need their parents around them.
   The exchange of letters, emails and telephone calls at their age would be
   a wholly inadequate alternative to having their  father  there  for  them
   every day.

84. The appellant's partner and children are all British nationals and  have
   lived here all their lives. AT is not someone who came here from  another
   country and who could be expected to leave with  the  appellant.  It  was
   conceded by Mr Wilding at the error  of  law  hearing  before  the  Upper
   Tribunal that relocation by the appellant's partner and children was  not
   a suggested option. Despite Ms Holmes' questions on why the family  could
   not live in Jamaica, she did not submit that as a  realistic  choice  and
   quite rightly so. The appellant's deportation would therefore effectively
   destroy family life as it now exists. The question is would that be right
   in all the circumstances?

85.   In many deportation cases, that  is  what  happens.  Where  a  foreign
   national has offended, he has to accept that the result of his  offending
   may be to end family life as he knows it. However, for  the  reasons  set
   out in this determination, this is  not  such  a  case.  The  deportation
   procedure was not properly carried out, resulting in  great  disadvantage
   to the appellant and there have been prolonged delays by the Secretary of
   State in taking steps to remove the  appellant.  These  delays  have  the
   effect of reducing the weight that can be given to the imperative need to
   remove this particular appellant and of course of using him as an example
   to others for the purpose  of  deterrence.  The  lengthy  period  he  has
   remained out of trouble and clean of drugs since his offences demonstrate
   the success of the rehabilitation programme he undertook and the  absence
   of any risk to the public.

86.   Under paragraph 391, a deportation order in respect of  an  individual
   whose sentence can never be spent, as in the appellant's case,  can  only
   be revoked if refusal to revoke it would be contrary to the human  rights
   convention of the Refugee Convention. The latter does not apply.  However
   the former does. I have taken account of the steps in Razgar [2004]  UKHL
   27 and apply the findings I have made to the principles set out therein.

87. Turning to the first of Lord Bingham's questions, it  is  accepted  that
   the appellant has established family life in the  UK.  As  found  by  the
   First-tier Tribunal Judge, that life is particularly deep and  rich.  The
   relationship between the appellant and AT had lasted 12 years to date and
   the appellant is the primary carer of their three children. He is the one
   who is responsible for the day to day parenting and  activities.  Details
   are set out earlier in this determination.

88. With respect to the second  question,  I  find  that  deportation  would
   either sever the appellant's life with his family or result in the severe
   disruption of it if the family uprooted ad moved to Jamaica. As it is not
   suggested by the respondent that the latter is an option,  removal  would
   end life as it is for this family. It would therefore  have  consequences
   of such gravity as to engage Article 8.

89.   The appellant's deportation  would  be  in  accordance  with  the  law
   although there are concerns about the manner  in  which  the  deportation
   proceedings have been conducted so far (as I have explained above). There
   is the strong view taken by the respondent that  deportation  of  such  a
   person is conducive to the public good and the Secretary of State  has  a
   clear right and interest in deporting a convicted criminal.  It  is  also
   important to recognise the need to deter other foreign nationals who  may
   otherwise enter the UK and  commit  crimes.  I  have  given  considerable
   weight to these matters.

90. That brings me to the balancing exercise. I  have  endeavoured  in  this
   determination to set out all the factors for the Secretary of  State  and
   for the appellant and to reach a balanced and fair judgment. This is  not
   the usual ordinary case of a convicted non national who flouts  the  laws
   of this country, has contributed little to it and  who  has  had  several
   opportunities to put his case to the authorities.  This is  a  man  whose
   case has not been properly dealt with by the Secretary  of  State,  whose
   deportation was made without his knowledge and who never had  the  chance
   to put all the representations one would have expected him to  have  made
   to the Secretary of State before she took steps against him.   It is also
   a case where the appellant  has  made  good  use  of  the  rehabilitation
   programme offered to him, has mended his ways and stayed  drug  free  for
   several years. Importantly it is a case where the appellant's deportation
   would severely affect the lives of four British born nationals. It is for
   all these reasons that I conclude that the deportation  order  should  be
   revoked under paragraph 391.

91.   The facts of this particular  case,  notwithstanding  the  appellant's
   convictions, do not support  the  conclusion  that  it  would  indeed  be
   conducive to the public interest  for  this  appellant  to  be  deported.
   Plainly it was envisaged that some  offenders  would  succeed  under  the
   immigration rules (as they were) otherwise there would have  been  be  no
   point in having an appeal to a Tribunal.


92.  The appellant's situation is now very different from  what  it  was  in
   2003. The rules themselves acknowledge that circumstances can change  and
   that the passage of time itself is a significant factor. When  the  order
   was signed, his life had already transformed but, as explained above,  no
   consideration was given to that. Whilst I fully accept  that  there  will
   continue to be  cases  where  families  will  have  to  accept  continued
   separation, I am satisfied that the appellant does not pose any  risk  to
   the society of this country and that the continuation of the  deportation
   order would be unjustified in this case. The appellant has  realised  the
   detrimental effect of misconduct on his family and has, over the last six
   or seven years, tried his best to make amends.  Undoubtedly  AT  and  the
   children have had a tremendous effect on him and I hope  that  that  good
   influence will continue in the future. The time that  has  elapsed  since
   the  offence  and  an  appellant's  conduct  during  that   period,   the
   nationalities of the various persons concerned,  the  appellant's  family
   situation and the well being of  any  children  are  also  recognised  as
   important criteria for assessing expulsion and continued exclusion by the
   European Court (Boultif criteria cited in Onur at paragraph 57).

93.  The appellant also has another son here by the name of  R  who  is  the
   child of a previous relationship. However there is little evidence before
   me in relation to this child and he does not factor in my assessment.

94.  This decision gives the appellant another opportunity to  make  a  life
   with his family but he should be under no  illusions  that  he  would  be
   treated in the same way if he misbehaves in the future.

95. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. However as
   this determination refers to young children and the appellant's  partner,
   I make an order for anonymity,  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.









DECISION

96. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error  of  law.   I  now
   remake the decision. The appeal is allowed under the rules and on article
   8 grounds.

Signed:



Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge
3 November 2013
