
[pic]
IAC-HW-am-V1



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/05405/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 21st April 2016                       |on 25th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 umar farooq

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    IMMIGRATION OFFICER, glasgow airport

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate; Maguire Solicitors (Scotland)
                    Limited

For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This decision should be read along with my decision  dated  16th  March
    2016.

 2. This decision should  be  read  also  along  with  Mr  Bryce's  written
    submissions  dated  18th  April  2016  regarding  the   making   of   a
    recommendation.

 3. It was common ground that Mr Bryce had correctly  identified  that  the
    Upper Tribunal has no statutory power to make a recommendation.

 4. Mr Matthews submitted that it was unnecessary for the Upper Tribunal to
    make an informal recommendation.  There was no reason to think that the
    respondent would not give effect  lawfully  and  fairly  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision (as it stands at present, and  assuming  it  survives
    any further challenge which may be taken).

 5. I go no further than to record my broad sympathy with the position  set
    out in the written submission for Mr Farooq: having  succeeded  in  his
    appeal, the respondent  should  offer  a  remedy  which  as  nearly  as
    possible returns him to the position he would have been  in  otherwise.
    It would be difficult and is in any event not appropriate to try to  be
    any more prescriptive than that.

 6. The Immigration Officer's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, allowing Mr  Farooq's  appeal,
    is to stand.


                           [pic]


                           22 April 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05405/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 14 March 2016                              |on 18 March 2016             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 UMAR FAROOQ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    IMMIGRATION OFFICER, GLASGOW AIRPORT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate; Maguire Solicitors (Scotland)
Ltd

For the Respondent:    Ms S Aitken, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 7. The Immigration Officer is the appellant in the Upper Tribunal, but for
    continuity and ease of reference this decision describes the parties as
    they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 8 August 1989.  He  has
    not asked for an anonymity order.  He arrived at Glasgow Airport on  24
    January 2015, returning from abroad.  The respondent  served  him  with
    notice of refusal of leave to enter and cancellation of leave, based on
    information from English Testing Services (ETS)  that  he  had  used  a
    false ETS certificate in an application which had resulted  in  Tier  1
    leave being issued to him on 15 June 2012.

 9. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    decision promulgated on 5 August 2015.

10. At paragraphs 9 - 11, the judge found that the  respondent  adduced  no
    evidence which implicated  the  appellant  directly  or  indirectly  in
    fraudulently obtaining a certificate; that the affidavits  provided  by
    the respondent were generalised; and that there was  no  evidence  that
    the appellant had not himself attended the testing centre and taken the
    test, as he said in evidence he had done.

11. I note that at paragraph 13 the judge allowed the appeal under  Article
    8 of the ECHR because there would be disproportionate interference with
    private life.  The respondent has not challenged that  conclusion,  and
    having passed without notice until now, there would  be  no  basis  for
    altering it.

12. The respondent applied to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The  grounds  maintain  that  the  usual
    evidence supplied by the respondent in ETS cases (of which  there  have
    been many in the last two years) clearly shows  the  processes  a  test
    result has to go through in order to be  categorised  as  invalid,  and
    that the judge failed to provide reasons for his finding that there was
    not evidence that the appellant had not himself attended and taken  the
    test.  The grounds say that had the judge properly taken  the  evidence
    into account, he would have found to the contrary.

13. The respondent's application to the First-tier Tribunal was late by  22
    days.  The reason given for seeking an extension is that  it  would  be
    unfair not to admit a late application when permission has been granted
    in numerous other cases on the same arguments.  Nothing is  said  about
    how the delay came about.

14. On 29 December 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  refused  the
    application, finding no circumstances to explain or excuse  the  delay,
    and also opining that the grounds disclosed no arguable error of law.

15. The respondent sought permission to appeal  from  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The application duplicates the request for an extension  of  time.   It
    then says that Judge Grimmett failed to engage fully with  the  grounds
    of appeal, and that the witness statements produced by  the  respondent
    outlined the investigation process which identified the appellant as an
    individual who had practised deception, being specifically referred  to
    in an extract from an ETS spreadsheet.







16. A decision by an Upper Tribunal Judge dated 2 February 2016 states:

      This is an ETS case.  The grounds are 22 days out of time ... I accept
      the explanation given by the respondent and extend time.  There is  an
      arguable error of law.

      ... A judge is entitled to prefer the evidence of  an  appellant  over
      that of the respondent in ETS cases.  However, in this case the  judge
      having done this arguably fails to properly reason the decision and it
      is arguably unclear why he reached the conclusion he did.

      I admit the appeal and grant permission.

17. (The grant should have read, "I admit the application".)

18. It might be doubted whether in terms of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 Rule 21(7) the respondent had advanced any  reason
    why the application to the First-tier Tribunal was not made in time.  I
    raised the matter with Mr Bryce, who had not dealt with the  timeliness
    of the application for permission in his rule 24 reply  to  the  grant.
    He advised me that he did not consider that this was a matter which the
    Upper Tribunal was in a position to revisit.   No  further  submissions
    for either side were made on the point.  Mr  Bryce  was  right,  but  I
    think it is as well to place the matter on record.

19. The respondent had provided in the First-tier  Tribunal  (at  a  rather
    late stage, and after being pressed for disclosure by the appellant)  a
    second spreadsheet which contained an identification number which could
    in part at least be related to the identification  number  on  the  ETS
    certificate on which the appellant appeared to have relied.  Ms  Aitken
    submitted that the general evidence provided by the respondent  in  ETS
    cases was in principle sufficient, and that second  spreadsheet  forged
    the last link in the  chain  to  establish  that  the  certificate  was
    invalid, that is to say, obtained by fraud; that  the  judge  had  gone
    wrong by thinking that the evidence in front of him was  only  generic;
    and that the decision should be set aside and reversed.

20. Mr Bryce sought  to  show  various  deficiencies  in  the  respondent's
    evidence.  He pointed out that even the apparently more accurate second
    spreadsheet contained 10 digits which  matched  the  reference  on  the
    appellant's certificate, but the last 5 digits of that  reference  were
    absent.  He stressed that the respondent had been constantly on  notice
    from the appellant throughout the proceedings to produce  the  evidence
    on which she relied.  He argued that although the reasons given by  the
    judge were brief, they were sufficient.  If there was no  evidence,  it
    was enough simply to say so.  The appellant  had  given  oral  evidence
    that he did take the test and although the judge did not explicitly say
    so, the only inference to be drawn was that he had found the  appellant
    to be a reliable witness.  There was nothing in the grounds to  justify
    the decision being set aside, but even if it were to  be  remade,  that
    should be in the appellant's favour.

21. In reply, Ms Aitken said that the evidence  was  not  that  the  record
    produced (the second spreadsheet) did not match the certificate.  There
    was a match in respect of the appellant's name, date of birth, date  of
    test, and so on.  It was not that the references  did  not  correspond,
    but that the reference on the spreadsheet  was  incomplete,  because  a
    computer "drop down box" had not been fully expanded.  The full form of
    the  evidence  was  available  to  the  respondent,  although  not  yet
    produced.  She asked for it to be  admitted  in  any  remaking  of  the
    decision.

22. On that last point, I upheld the submission for the respondent that the
    application  came  far  too   late.    The   appellant,   through   his
    representatives, has been pressing throughout  for  production  of  the
    full evidence against him.  The usual directions for prompt  production
    of evidence apply.  It was far too late for the respondent  to  try  to
    improve her case.  In any  event,  the  case  did  not  progress  to  a
    rehearing.

23. Mr Bryce drew my attention to the record of a "Border Force credibility
    interview" with the appellant  on  24  January  2015  at  the  airport,
    Appendix B of the respondent's bundle in the First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    pointed out that the appellant's account then was consistent with  what
    he has said since, and that the interviewing officer  recorded  him  as
    having  "answered  in  a  fluent  manner",  having  been  "credible  at
    interview" and as being fluent in English.   Mr  Bryce  suggested  that
    this record  had  not  been  noticed  in  the  respondent's  subsequent
    decision-making and if it had, matters might not have proceeded as they
    have.  That point may go rather far, but the item was not mentioned  by
    the judge, and it would have been a factor in the  appellant's  favour,
    had the case gone to a remaking.

24. I reserved my decision.

25. Mr Bryce was ready to try  to  persuade  me  that  the  usual  evidence
    produced by  the  respondent  is  insufficient  to  prove  the  use  of
    deception in obtaining  ETS  certificates  in  cases  of  this  general
    nature.  It is unnecessary to go into  that  issue  in  detail  in  the
    present case.  In my  opinion,  although  of  course  the  respondent's
    evidence is not necessarily always decisive, it is capable  of  proving
    the use of deception and of attaching  that  to  particular  instances.
    The evidence may sometimes fail to attach to the individual  case,  and
    any evidence an appellant offers has also to be weighed.  That is  what
    the judge did here.  Although his reasons are as terse  as  they  could
    be, I think they are sufficient to the case, if only just.  He did  not
    find the match  to  be  proved,  and  at  best  the  evidence  for  the
    respondent was incomplete.  He must have found the appellant a credible
    witness.

26. I am not persuaded by the respondent that the  decision  of  the  judge
    errs in law, so as to require it to be set aside.

27. The judge's decision, allowing the appellant's appeal, shall stand.

28. Mr Bryce embarked upon submissions with a view to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    making a direction.  The points raised were  somewhat  complicated  and
    depended on the whole immigration history, on the appellant's  business
    history, on certain transitional provisions, and on the outcome of this
    appeal.  Ms Aitken was not fully prepared to deal with the  point,  and
    reasonably sought time to deal with it.

29. It is possible, in light of my decision above, that the respondent will
    approach the case in such a way that directions will be unnecessary.

30. The case will be relisted for submissions, if necessary,  only  on  the
    question of whether a direction should be made  and,  if  so,  in  what
    terms.  If a direction is to be sought, a draft of  what  is  proposed,
    and an outline of its rationale, must be provided  not  less  than  two
    working days prior to the hearing. That hearing will take place  on  21
    April 2016 or on the next available date.  The date may be fixed so  as
    to accommodate the  availability  of  Mr  Bryce,  if  matters  are  not
    resolved in advance between the parties.  If matters are  so  resolved,
    the Upper Tribunal should be advised immediately.


         [pic]


         16 March 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman





