
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05361/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 December 2014                           |On 6 January 2015            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CARR DBE
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MADHOORANI GONOWRY
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Ahmad, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   The respondent  to  this  appeal,  Mrs  Gonowry,  is  a  citizen  of
      Mauritius born on 24 February 1967. The appellant is the Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department, who has appealed with the permission of
      the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal M J Gillespie, who allowed Mrs Gonowry's appeal  against  the
      decision, dated 9 January 2014, to refuse to vary her leave  to  enter
      on article 8 grounds.


   2.   It is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before
      the First-tier Tribunal. We shall therefore refer to Mrs Gonowry  from
      now on  as  "the  appellant"  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
      respondent".


   3.   We were not asked and saw no reason to make an anonymity direction.


   4.   On 12 November 2012 the appellant married Mr Gawtun Unuth, a British
      citizen born on 10 September 1946 ("the sponsor"). After  the  wedding
      the appellant returned to Mauritius but,  having  failed  the  English
      test and realising she could not obtain a spouse visa, she took advice
      to the effect she should return to the UK as a visitor, which she  did
      on 1 June 2013. She submitted form FLR(O) on  27  November  2013.  The
      respondent gave reasons for refusal in a letter dated 9 January  2014.
      In short, the appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM
      of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") or paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the
      Rules. There were no exceptional  circumstances  which  might  warrant
      consideration of a grant of leave.


   5.    Judge Gillespie allowed the appeal after a  hearing  on  27  August
      2014. He found that the  Rules  were  not  met  with  respect  to  the
      immigration status  requirement,  the  financial  requirement  or  the
      English  language  requirement,   although   he   found   there   were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  abroad.  He  then
      looked at the proportionality of  the  decision  and  found,  applying
      Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40, that there was little public interest
      in insisting the appellant return to  Mauritius  to  apply  for  entry
      clearance.


   6.    The grounds seeking permission to appeal make three points: (1) the
      judge erred by treating paragraph EX.1 as  a  freestanding  provision;
      (2) the judge failed to give sufficient weight to the public  interest
      as revealed by section 117C  of  the  2002  Act;  and  (3)  the  judge
      misdirected himself by applying Chikwamba (supra).


   7.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P M J Hollingworth on  all
      grounds.


   8.   The appellant has not filed a response opposing the appeal.

   9.   We heard submissions as to whether the judge  had  made  a  material
      error of law in his decision. Ms Isherwood  said  it  was  clear  that
      paragraph EX.1 was  not  a  freestanding  provision,  following  Sabir
      (Appendix FM - EX.1  not  free  standing)  [2014]  UKUT  00063  (IAC).
      Rather, it is "parasitic" on the main rules in Appendix FM. The  judge
      had erred in applying paragraph  EX.1  and  this  error  infected  the
      remainder of his decision. The judge had  made  further  reference  to
      paragraph EX.1 when he found there  were  arguably  good  grounds  for
      making further investigation of the appellant's potential rights under
      article 8 in paragraph 15 of his decision. Ms  Isherwood  then  argued
      the judge had failed  to  give  sufficient  attention  to  the  public
      interest as defined in section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  Act").  In  particular,  his  findings  on
      maintenance and language were not based on proper evidence. She argued
      that the evidence was lacking. The judge had given too much importance
      to his view that paragraph EX.1 was met. Ms Isherwood's  arguments  in
      respect of the third ground were that, since Chikwamba (supra)had been
      decided, there had been a change  in  that  the  rules  now  contained
      provisions which were designed to apply article 8. The judge had erred
      by identifying the major public interest consideration  as  being  the
      formal requirement  to  make  a  fresh  application.  All  the  public
      interest factors set out in section 117B of the Act had  to  be  taken
      into account.


  10. In reply Ms Ahmad argued the judge's decision did not contain an error
      of law. She made her points essentially by reference  to  the  judge's
      factual findings, which she argued were sound. Ms  Isherwood  replied,
      highlighting what she regarded as a paucity of evidence supporting the
      judge's findings on such matters  as  maintenance  and  the  sponsor's
      medical conditions.


  11. We reserved our decision as to whether the judge's decision  contained
      a material error of law. Having carefully considered  the  submissions
      made by the representatives, we find no material error of law  in  the
      judge's decision. Our reasons are as follows.

  12. The judge structured his decision correctly. In paragraphs 9 and 10 of
      his decision the judge set out his approach to Appendix  FM  and  gave
      reasons for finding the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  eligibility
      requirements of the rules.  He  found  (1)  she  could  not  meet  the
      immigration requirement because she was a visitor when  she  made  her
      application; (2)  she  could  not  meet  the  maintenance  requirement
      because of the lack of specified evidence; and (3) she could not  meet
      the English language requirement because she had failed the test.


  13. The judge then turned to the "exception" provided by  paragraph  EX.1.
      He set out the rule and, in paragraph 12, set  out  his  findings  and
      reasons which led him to find that there "insurmountable obstacles" to
      family life continuing outside the UK.  He  concluded  that  paragraph
      EX.1 applied. However, the judge did not  allow  the  appeal  on  that
      basis.  He would clearly have erred if he had done so, for the reasons
      set out in Sabir (supra). In paragraph 13 the  judge  reiterated  that
      the appellant could not meet the immigration requirement of the Rules.
      There was no error of the kind identified in Sabir (supra).


  14. The respondent considers the judge erred  in  what  he  did  next.  In
      identifying the public interest in  maintaining  refusal  under  these
      circumstances, the judge noted that the Rules exempted those in the UK
      unlawfully but not those, like the  appellant,  who  were  in  the  UK
      lawfully but with less than six months' leave. The judge  set  out  at
      length his understanding of the correct approach to article 8  appeals
      where it was found the Rules could not  be  met.  We  see  nothing  in
      paragraph 14 which contains any error in the judge's self-direction.


  15. In R (Oludoyi & Ors) v SSHD (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and  Nagre)  IJR
      [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC), the Tribunal explained there is no 'threshold
      test':


         "20. There is nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or  Shahzad  that  suggests
         that a threshold test was being suggested as opposed to  making  it
         clear that there was a need to look at the evidence to see if there
         was anything which has not already been  adequately  considered  in
         the context of the IRs and which could lead to a successful Article
         8 claim. If, for example, there is some feature which has not  been
         adequately considered under the IRs but which cannot  on  any  view
         lead to the Article  8  claim  succeeding  (when  the  individual's
         circumstances are considered cumulatively), there is no need to  go
         any further. This does not mean that a  threshold  or  intermediate
         test is being applied.  These  authorities  must  not  be  read  as
         seeking to qualify or fetter  the  assessment  of  Article  8.  The
         guidance given must be read in context and not construed as if  the
         judgments are pieces of legislation."


  16. If the judge did apply a 'threshold test' in paragraph  15,  then  his
      error was not material. In any event, we incline to the view that  all
      the judge was saying in that paragraph is that there were good reasons
      to consider article 8 outside the Rules and this was  not  a  case  in
      which the Rules provided a complete answer to the article 8 claim.


  17. We do not agree that the judge failed to give  adequate  consideration
      to the public interest factors in section 117B of the Act. For ease of
      reference we set out the relevant sections here:


      "117A   Application of this Part


         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
         117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).



      117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases



         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."



  18. We did not receive full submissions  on  the  interpretation  of  this
      section which has only recently been enacted. However, it is right  to
      note that the list of considerations contained in section 117B is  not
      exhaustive and therefore the 'public interest' is not  comprehensively
      defined by the section. On  the  other  hand,  by  virtue  of  section
      117A(2), it  would  be  an  error  of  law  not  to  have  regard  (in
      particular) to the considerations set out in section 117B.


  19. It would be a hopeless argument to suggest  the  judge  did  not  have
      regard to subsections (1) to (4), which are applicable to  this  case.
      Paragraph 16 of his decision expressly  refers  to  the  substance  of
      those considerations and the judge gives reasons for his assessment of
      the public interest. At the heart of this case lies a disagreement  as
      to the appropriate weight to be given to the first consideration:  the
      maintenance of effective immigration controls.


  20. Ms Isherwood argued that the judge's assessment was flawed because  of
      his application of paragraph EX.1. However, as we have already stated,
      we regard the judge as having dealt with the Rules correctly.  He  was
      also right to regard the outcome under the rules as his starting-point
      for his consideration outside the Rules.


  21. We turn next to the criticisms made of the judge's  factual  findings.
      We regard the judge's findings as generous.  But that  does  not  mean
      they were not open to him to make on the  evidence.  The  sponsor  had
      made a witness statement explaining his sources of  income  which  the
      judge was satisfied would bring the couple above the �18,600 threshold
      prescribed by Appendix FM. Implicitly  the  judge  accepted  that  the
      requisite specified  evidence  would  be  available.  Some  supporting
      evidence was provided in the bundle.  In  relation  to  language,  the
      judge reasoned the appellant would be able to learn  it  if  she  were
      allowed to live with her English-speaking husband. We  note  the  test
      level is not a high one in any event. The judge appears also  to  have
      accepted that the sponsor suffers from depression even though this  is
      not recorded in the GP's letter provided, which only confirms that  he
      has type II diabetes.


  22. An error of law has not been shown. The judge heard oral evidence from
      the appellant and the sponsor and he was entitled to make findings  on
      the evidence he heard. His findings  are  not  inconsistent  with  the
      evidence which was before him. It is an arid exercise to seek  to  re-
      open those matters now in the context of  an  article  8  appeal.  The
      judge's decision, read as a whole, is replete with positive  findings.
      In paragraph 12 he set out the matters which showed that  family  life
      could not continue in Mauritius, even  though  the  sponsor  was  born
      there. In paragraph 16 he set out the matters which showed  there  was
      little utility in requiring the appellant to go back.


  23. In terms of the judge's application of Chikwamba (supra), the test  is
      plainly fact-sensitive.  We regard the judge as having given  adequate
      reasons for concluding the public interest in  maintaining  consistent
      immigration controls did  not  require  the  appellant  to  return  to
      Mauritius to make an application for entry clearance.  Lord  Brown  of
      Eaton-under-Heywood said that "the prospective length  and  degree  of
      family disruption involved in going  abroad  for  an  entry  clearance
      certificate will always be highly relevant." The factors described  in
      paragraph 16 of his decision show the judge had this test  clearly  in
      mind. We see no error in his approach.


  24. The respondent argues that section 117B has now altered  the  position
      and the Chikwamba principle should not carry the same weight.   We  do
      not  understand  why  that  should  be  the  case  provided,  all  the
      considerations which had to be addressed were addressed,  as  happened
      here. The judge considered the issue of language but found the  couple
      would be able to maintain themselves in any event.  He  did  not  give
      weight to a relationship formed while the  appellant  was  in  the  UK
      unlawfully. He found the appellant had not used deception by  entering
      as a visitor. He was entitled to find  there  was  little  utility  in
      requiring the appellant to return given the likelihood  she  would  be
      able to fulfill the entry clearance  requirements  in  any  event  and
      given the disruption to current family life which  that  course  would
      engender.


  25. Ultimately, the judge was required to carry out a  balancing  exercise
      in order  to  ascertain  whether  the  decision  was  a  proportionate
      measure. To an extent that task has been dictated by section 117B, but
      we do not find the judge failed to make that adjustment. We recall the
      words of Carnwath LJ, as he then was, in Mukarkar v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA
      Civ 1045 that,


         "40. Factual judgments of this kind are often not  easy,  but  they
         are not made easier or better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis. It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
         tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same  case  (as  is  indeed  illustrated  by  Mr
         Fountain's decision after the second hearing). The mere  fact  that
         one tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view
         of the facts of a particular case does not mean that it has made an
         error of law, so as to justify an appeal under the old  system,  or
         an order for reconsideration under the new. Nor does it create  any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the  future.
         However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of  the
         specialist tribunal should be respected."


  26. The judge did not make a  material  error  of  law  and  his  decision
      allowing the appeal on article 8 grounds shall stand. We  dismiss  the
      appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error  on
    a point of law and his  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  article  8
    principles shall stand.


    No anonymity direction has been made.


                               Signed                 Date 16 December 2014






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal
