
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/05060/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 October 2017                    |       On 24 October 2017            |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                     NM
                         [Anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr B Bundock, instructed by Bail for Immigration
Detainees
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lloyd promulgated 17.1.17, dismissing his appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 28.1.15,  to  refuse  his
    protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 5.1.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    12.7.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 23.10.17 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Lloyd should be set aside.

 6. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Gillespie considered  that  the
    first ground of appeal was arguable, namely that the judge erred in law
    in considering and addressing evidence of the appellant's  mental  ill-
    health. However, permission was not restricted and the second ground is
    that the article 8 assessment was flawed.

 7. The Rule 24 response, date 3.8.17, submits that the grounds amount to a
    mere disagreement with the weight given to the medical evidence. Whilst
    the judge accepted at  [49]  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his children, at [60]  he  found  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh for  the  children  to  continue  in  the  UK
    without the appellant.

 8. The main focus of the grounds is the treatment of the medical evidence.
    However, this has to be seen in the context of the evidence as a  whole
    and the fact that the appellant was  appealing  against  a  deportation
    decision, made after his sentence of 7 years' imprisonment for wounding
    with intent to do  grievous  bodily  harm.  There  were  strong  public
    interest factors in favour of deportation. For his part, the  appellant
    complained that he would lose contact with his three children, resident
    in the UK.

 9. The judge properly had regard to the Immigration  Rules  and  that  the
    appellant's removal is  conducive  to  the  public  good.  Outwith  the
    considerations under paragraph 398 and 399, deportation  will  only  be
    outweighed where there are very compelling circumstances.  Within  399,
    the judge considered whether it would be unduly harsh for the  children
    to live in the UK without their father.  As  far  as  private  life  is
    concerned the issue was whether there were very  significant  obstacles
    to his integration in the country of return. The judge also  considered
    s117C of the 2002 Act, when applying the public interest.

10. The judge addressed the medical evidence from [71] onwards. The fact is
    that the appellant was in remission and doing well, was not  under  the
    care of a psychiatrist and was being treated by his GP with a low  dose
    of anti-psychotic medication, so that  his  mental  disorder  is  well-
    controlled. The  judge  took  into  account  Dr  Bell's  evidence,  but
    regarded some of the evidence speculative as to what  might  happen  on
    return. Even if the precise medication is not available, the  appellant
    had failed to show that other treatment  would  not  be  available  and
    effective; there was no evidence to that effect.  The  Judge  concluded
    that the appellant failed to show that his mental health problems could
    not be treated in the DRC, and thus that there are no very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in the DRC. Those were all  findings  open
    to the judge.

11. Of the appellant's three children, one is in foster care and the  other
    two are with their mother, with whom he is no longer in a relationship.
    The appellant has only supervised access to the children for 12 hours a
    year and they had already been without his involvement for a number  of
    years. His contact is primarily by social media, which could be pursued
    outside the UK. The judge also accepted that  having  been  in  the  UK
    since the age of 14, and agreed that he had  both  private  and  family
    life which would be interfered with by his deportation. However,  their
    best interests would be to remain in the UK.  Given  the  very  limited
    contact, the judge found that it would not be unduly harsh for them  to
    remain in the UK without his very limited involvement in their lives.

12. Mr Bundock complained that there was no  consideration  of  the  mental
    health issues when considering the appellant's article 8 private  life.
    He submitted that it should have been considered not under the head  of
    very compelling circumstances, but in relation to article 3 and 8 ECHR.
    However, I am not satisfied that the order in which it  was  considered
    is material. Taken as a whole and looking at the circumstances  of  the
    appellant in the round, it is obvious that these were  insufficient  to
    defeat deportation, either on the basis of a human rights claim, or  on
    a consideration of very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public
    interest  in  deportation,  in  effect  a  proportionality  assessment.
    Perhaps the decision could  have  been  better  structured,  but  I  am
    reminded of the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in In AS  (Iran)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1539: "In approaching criticism of reasons given  by  a
    First-tier Tribunal, the Respondent correctly reminds  us  to  avoid  a
    requirement of perfection. As Brooke LJ observed in the course  of  his
    decision  in R  (Iran)  v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982,  "unjustified  complaints"  as  to  an
    alleged failure to give adequate reasons  are  all  too  frequent.  The
    obligation on a Tribunal is to give reasons  in  sufficient  detail  to
    show the principles on which the Tribunal has  acted  and  the  reasons
    that have led to the decision. Such reasons need not be elaborate,  and
    do not need to address every argument or every factor which weighed  in
    the decision. If a Tribunal has not expressly  addressed  an  argument,
    but if there are grounds on which the argument could properly have been
    rejected, it should be assumed that the Tribunal acted on such grounds.
    It is  sufficient  that  the  critical  reasons  to  the  decision  are
    recorded. In respect  of  each  of  these  grounds  of  complaint,  the
    Secretary of State submits that perfectly acceptable reasoning was  set
    out in the First-tier Tribunal decision."

13. The reality of this case is  that  the  appellant  faced  a  very  high
    threshold to defeat the  public  interest  in  deportation,  such  that
    unless it would be unduly harsh for a  child  or  partner  to  continue
    living  in  the  UK  without  the  appellant,  only   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in 399 would  prevail.  As
    it happens, it would appear that because of  the  length  of  sentence,
    paragraph 399A  in  relation  to  private  life  and  very  significant
    obstacles  to  integration  did  not  apply  to  a  person  subject  to
    deportation following a sentence of 4 or more years.

14. However, it is clear from the decision read as a whole that  the  judge
    has  given  anxious   consideration   to   all   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances, including his private life and his mental health issues.
    The grounds essentially disagree with the  form  or  structure  of  the
    decision and the judge's treatment of the mental  health  evidence.  To
    that extent it is little more than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    findings on the mental health evidence, which were open  to  the  judge
    and for which cogent reasons have been  provided.  I  cannot  accept  a
    submission that the decision is irrational or perverse.  In  short,  on
    any realistic assessment of  the  evidence,  the  appellant  failed  to
    demonstrate circumstances sufficient to establish a human rights  claim
    or very compelling circumstances other than those in addressed relation
    to private and family life to  outweigh  the  very  significant  public
    interest in deportation. As Mr Bates pointed out, the medical  evidence
    could not meet the high threshold for article 3 and it is  only  rarely
    that a medical condition that does not meet article  3  can  result  in
    success under article 8.


Conclusion & Decision

15. For the reasons summarised  above,  I  find  that  the  making  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup




Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup




