
IAC-AH-DP/KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05758/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 December 2014               |On 23 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr ZUBAIR MUSTFA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:        Mr I Hussain, Legal Representative,
                           Syeds Law Office Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing on human rights (Article 8) grounds
    an appeal by the claimant against the  decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to grant him leave to remain as a student, and  against
    the Secretary of State's concomitant decision to remove him.  The First-
    tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not
    consider that such a direction is warranted for  these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

The Claimant's Material History

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan,  whose  date  of  birth  is  10
    January 1985.  He first landed in the United Kingdom on 1 May 2010 with
    valid entry clearance as a student until 8 August 2011.  He was granted
    leave to remain as a student from 2 August 2011 until 6 January 2014.

 3. On 23 December 2013 he applied to extend his stay in the United Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  As was apparent from  the  CAS,
    the appellant was seeking to repeat year 2 of his level  5  diploma  in
    management and leadership.  The sponsor explained that he had made good
    progress on this course.  However, due to his uncle's brain haemorrhage
    illness and subsequent death in May 2013, he had found it difficult  to
    concentrate in the second year of the  course  and  not  been  able  to
    submit his  assignments  needed  to  achieve  the  qualification.   His
    ability to continue the course was based on his  performance  to  date.
    As he was repeating the second year of the course in order to achieve a
    full  qualification,  the  sponsor  was  satisfied  he  was  making   a
    satisfactory academic progression.

The Reasons for Refusal

 4. On 22 January 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    the claimant's application.  Grants of  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
    remain for Tier 4 applicants to undertake studies  below  degree  level
    from the age of 18 were limited to a maximum period of three years.  He
    had previously been granted leave to enter in order to study at  Pitman
    Training Centre.  That was for fifteen months eight days  in  duration.
    He was then granted further leave to remain to  study  for  a  level  5
    diploma in management and leadership at the Pitman Training  Centre  in
    Peterborough for 24 months and two days.  As he was applying for  leave
    to remain and wanted to study a course below degree  level,  which  was
    eleven months and 27 days in duration, a further grant of  leave  would
    exceed a period of three years of combined study  below  degree  level.
    So the Secretary of State was not satisfied that a  further  period  of
    leave in this category could be granted.  It had therefore been decided
    to refuse his application for leave to remain under paragraph  245ZX(h)
    of the Rules.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The claimant's appeal came before Judge  North  sitting  at  Nottingham
    Magistrates'  Court  on  13  June  2014.   Both  parties  were  legally
    represented.  It was accepted on behalf of the claimant that he did not
    meet the requirements of the Rules, but it was argued that the decision
    represented a disproportionate interference with his right  to  respect
    for his private life in the United  Kingdom.   The  judge  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  The reasoning was contained in  paragraph
    [10] of his decision:

         Having considered all of the evidence,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         [claimant's] account is credible.  There is no suggestion  that  he
         had not been attending all of his course sessions as  required  and
         that his inability to complete his course was as a  result  of  the
         death of his second paternal figure exacerbated  by  his  financial
         inability to return for the funeral and  then  resume  his  studies
         after a period of mourning.  I  am  satisfied  that  otherwise  the
         [claimant] would  have  completed  his  course.   I  am  unable  to
         identify any provisions in the Immigration Rules  relating  to  the
         [claimant's] studies  which  takes  into  account  the  exceptional
         circumstances faced by him.  The [SSHD's] decision was  lawful  and
         that it was made within the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules.   It
         does engage the [claimant's] rights under  Article  8,  because  it
         affects his ability to complete his  education.   The  decision  is
         made in pursuance of the UK's legitimate aim  of  fair  immigration
         control. It falls to me to  consider  whether  the  decision  is  a
         disproportionate  interference  with  the  [claimant's]  right   to
         respect for private life.  In all the circumstances, I find that to
         refuse the [claimant's] application and to  require  him  to  leave
         without completing his course will effectively end his  chances  of
         higher education.  There is no realistic prospect of him completing
         that education without continuing to study at Pitman.  In  all  the
         circumstances,  I  find  the   SSHD's   decision   amounts   to   a
         disproportionate interference of the claimant's rights  to  respect
         for his private life and to that extent I allow the appeal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 6. A member of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  the  application  for
    permission to appeal on behalf of the Secretary of State.  It was  made
    clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  the  Article  8  assessment
    should only be carried out when there were compelling circumstances not
    recognised by the Rules.  The Tribunal did not identify such compelling
    circumstances  and  its  findings  are  therefore  unsustainable.   The
    Tribunal  failed  to  provide  adequate  reasons  why  the   claimant's
    circumstances were either compelling or exceptional.  There was nothing
    exceptional about his private life  that  could  not  be  continued  in
    Pakistan where he still had family in the form of  his  mother  and  he
    could maintain contact with any friends and connections here via modern
    methods of communication and visits as he had been able to do with  his
    family in Pakistan from  the  UK.   Should  he  wish  to  continue  his
    studies, it was open for him to seek to return to do so.  There was  no
    right to remain purely in order to  complete  his  education.   If  the
    Tribunal had taken his issues into consideration,  the  Tribunal  would
    have found that the decision to remove was proportionate.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 7. On 6 November 2014 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray  granted
    the Secretary of State permission to appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
    judge had not identified, "the compelling and exceptional circumstances
    which are required for this human rights claim to succeed".

The Rule 24 Response

 8. The claimant's solicitors settled a Rule  24  response  in  which  they
    submitted that the judge had directed himself appropriately.  He  found
    there were exceptional circumstances in that the claimant was unable to
    complete his studies due to a death in the family.   The  Secretary  of
    State's argument that the Rules were a complete code was  misconceived,
    having regard to R (on the application of Ganesabalan)  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWHC 2712 (Admin).

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr Melvin developed the arguments  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal, and Mr Hussain developed  the  rebuttal  of  the
    error of law challenge  set  out  in  the  Rule  24  response.   Having
    carefully considered the submissions made by the parties, I ruled  that
    an error of law had been made out.   I  indicated  my  reasons  for  so
    finding in short form, and my extended reasons are set out below.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

10. Of the authorities cited to me, Nasim and  Others  (Article  8)  [2014]
    UKUT 0025 (IAC) is the most pertinent.  At paragraphs [14] and [15]  of
    Nasim, the Tribunal observed that the concept of a private life for the
    purposes of Article 8 is inherently less clear.   At  one  end  of  the
    continuum stands the concept of moral  and  physical  integrity  as  to
    which, in extreme circumstances, even the State's interest in  removing
    foreign  criminals  might  not  constitute  a  proportionate  response.
    However, as one moves down the continuum,  one  encounters  aspects  of
    private life which, even if engaging Article 8(1), are so  far  removed
    from the core of Article  8  as  to  be  readily  defeasible  by  State
    interests, such  as  the  importance  of  maintaining  a  credible  and
    coherent system of immigration control. On this point on the continuum,
    the essential elements of the private life relied upon will normally be
    transposable, in the sense of being capable  of  replication  in  their
    essential respects, following a person's return to their home  country.
    A student here on a temporary basis has no expectation of  a  right  to
    remain in order to further his social ties and relationships in the  UK
    if the criteria of the points-based system are not met.

11. The Tribunal went on  in  paragraph  [16]  to  cite  with  approval  MG
    (assessing interference of private life) Serbia Montenegro [2005] UKAIT
    00113 as follows:

         A person's job and precise programme of studies may be different in
         the country to which he is  to  be  returned  and  his  network  of
         friendships and other acquaintances is likely to be different  too,
         but his private life will continue in respect of all its  essential
         elements.

12. The Tribunal at paragraph [20] reached the following conclusion:

         We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others  is
         a  significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  refocus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and the fact that, unless there are particular reasons
         to reduce the public interest of  enforcing  immigration  controls,
         that  interest  will   consequently   prevail   in   striking   the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached).

13. At paragraph [21], the Tribunal found the nature of the right  asserted
    by each of the appellants before them, based on their desire as  former
    students to undertake  a  period  of  post-study  work  in  the  United
    Kingdom, lay at the outer reaches of  cases  requiring  an  affirmative
    answer to the second of the five Razgar questions  and  that,  even  if
    such  an  affirmative  answer  needed  to  be  given,  the   issue   of
    proportionality  was  to  be  resolved  decisively  in  favour  of  the
    Secretary of State, by reference to her functions as  the  guardian  of
    the system of immigration controls, entrusted to her by Parliament.

14. The Tribunal went on to address the scope of CDS (Brazil)  [2010]  UKUT
    305 (IAC).  At paragraph [41], they declined Mr Jarvis's invitation  to
    find that the obiter remarks in CDS regarding Article 8 were no  longer
    good law in the light of Patel and Others.  But the Tribunal in CDS did
    however expressly knowledge that it was unlikely a person would be able
    to show an Article  8  right  by  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    temporary purposes:

         The chances that such a  right  will  prevail  have,  we  consider,
         further diminished, in the light of  the  judgments  in  Patel  and
         Others.  It would, however, be wrong to say that the point has been
         reached where an adverse immigration decision  in  the  case  of  a
         person was here for study or other temporary purposes can never  be
         found to be disproportionate.  What is clear is that, on the  state
         of the present law, there is no  justification  for  extending  the
         obiter findings in CDS, so as to equate a person  whose  course  of
         study has not yet ended with a person who,  having  finished  their
         course, is precluded by the Immigration Rules from staying on to do
         something else.

15. It follows that it was not necessarily perverse,  as  submitted  by  Mr
    Melvin, for the judge to find that the interference with the claimant's
    studies consequential upon the refusal decision  was  disproportionate.
    But this appellant's case was weaker than  the  paradigm  case  of  CDS
    (Brazil) in that he had been able to complete the course for  which  he
    had been granted entry  clearance  to  the  UK.   Furthermore,  on  the
    current state of the law, the exceptional or  compelling  circumstances
    have to be very cogent to  justify  allowing  an  Article  8  claim  on
    private life grounds by a student.  The judge  sought  to  justify  his
    conclusion of disproportionality by finding that  the  refusal    would
    effectively end the appellant's  chances  of  higher  education.   This
    finding is not adequately reasoned, and so an error of law is made out.

The Remaking of the Decision

16. For the purposes of remaking the decision,  I  invited  Mr  Hussain  to
    tender the claimant as a witness.   In  answer  to  questions  from  Mr
    Hussain, the claimant confirmed that  he  had  completed  the  level  3
    course for which he had sought entry clearance as a student.  He  could
    follow the level 5 course in Pakistan, but he would have to go back  to
    the beginning of the course.  He would not  be  able  to  rely  on  the
    transcripts of results showing that he had successfully completed  year
    1 of the course in the UK.  But once he had completed a level 5  course
    in Pakistan, he would be eligible to  apply  for  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom in order to follow a degree course.

17. His sponsoring college had lost its licence in June 2014, shortly after
    the hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  college  had  stopped
    operating, and so he needed a letter from the  Secretary  of  State  to
    enable him to find an alternative sponsor within 60 days.

18. In his closing submissions on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mr
    Melvin submitted that the claimant's  Article  8  claim  was  now  even
    weaker than it was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  it  was  now
    necessary to apply Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  In reply, Mr  Hussain
    submitted that the claimant had only been refused leave to remain on  a
    technicality, and the public  interest  in  his  removal  was  reduced,
    applying CDS (Brazil).

Discussion and Findings

19. The effect of the refusal decision is not to rob the  claimant  of  the
    chances of pursuing his  higher  education  either  in  the  UK  or  in
    Pakistan.  As the Rules do not enable a  student  to  repeat  a  course
    below degree level (if the effect is to exceed the three year maximum),
    a student has to return to his country  of  origin  or  go  to  another
    country to repeat the course.  While in the  claimant's  case  this  is
    inconvenient  and  will   involve   some   additional   and/or   wasted
    expenditure, it does  not  have  the  consequence  of  frustrating  his
    ultimate ambition of going on to study at  degree  level.   There  were
    undoubtedly compassionate reasons for the claimant not  being  able  to
    satisfy the requirements of the Rules. But on analysis the interference
    consequential upon the refusal decision is not so grave  as  to  engage
    Article 8(1) of the ECHR.  In short, I answer questions 1 and 2 of  the
    Razgar test in favour of the Secretary of State, not in favour  of  the
    claimant.  But even if I am wrong about that, on the current  state  of
    the law, there can only be one answer to the remaining three  questions
    of the Razgar test.  The decision appealed  against  is  in  accordance
    with the law; it is necessary  in  a  democratic  society;  and  it  is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  I am
    reinforced in my finding on proportionality by taking into account  the
    factors set out in Section 117B of the  2002  Act  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  Of particular relevance is sub-Section 4,  which
    provides that little weight should be attached to a private life  which
    is established while a person's status is precarious.  As a student who
    entered for a temporary purpose, the claimant clearly  falls  into  the
    category of a person whose status is and always has been precarious.

20. Mr Hussain invited me to find in the alternative that the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the law, because  she
    had not made a decision on exceptional  circumstances.   She  had  only
    considered the application under the Rules.  While it is true that  the
    Secretary of State only considered the application under the Rules, the
    application did not specifically invite her to exercise  discretion  on
    exceptional circumstances outside  the  Rules.   So  the  duty  on  the
    Secretary of State to consider exercising her  discretion  outside  the
    Rules did not arise on the facts of this particular case,  in  contrast
    to the facts of Ganesabalan.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal against the refusal of further  leave  to
remain as a student, and against the concomitant decision to remove him,  is
dismissed under the Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.



Signed        Date 23 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

