
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05039/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2015                         |On 20th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                            MR MD FAYSAL HUSSAIN
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, of Anwar Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 8th  August  1988.  He
    came to the UK on 14th October 2013 with a Tier 4 student migrant  visa
    valid until 1st November 2014. The appellant was refused leave to enter
    and his leave to remain was cancelled on  23rd  January  2014  when  he
    sought to re-enter the UK after a holiday to  France.  He  appealed  on
    27th January 2014.  His appeal was  dismissed  in  a  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal RG Handley  promulgated  on  6th  June
    2014. On 11th August 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Colyer
    refused permission to appeal.

 2. However the application to appeal was renewed to the Upper Tribunal  by
    the appellant and on 1st December 2014 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley
    found that there was an arguable error of law because it  was  arguable
    that  evidence  about  the   appellant's   attendance   at   Birmingham
    Informatics College in the appellant's bundle had not been  considered.



 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions

 4. I asked Mr Khan if the appellant had in fact completed his  studies  in
    the UK as the paper work indicated they were to be concluded in October
    2014. It transpired however that the  college  had  lost  its  licence/
    closed down in spring 2014 and so the appellant had not  completed  his
    diploma.

 5. Mr Khan relied upon  his  grounds  of  appeal  and  made  further  oral
    submissions. In summary his argument is  as  follows.  He  argues  that
    Judge Handley erred because evidence dated 8th May 2014 from Birmingham
    Informatics College showing that the appellant attended his college  in
    October, November and December 2013 was not considered and reliance was
    just placed on the letter of 3rd  January  2014.  Further  insufficient
    weight had been given to the appellant's consistent answers before  the
    Tribunal. The appellant explained that there had been a mistake in  the
    timetable by the college, and this was why  he  had  been  confused  at
    interview. A letter has been produced after  the  appeal  showing  that
    this evidence was correct.

 6. Mr Khan submitted further that the appellant was  inconsistent  in  his
    interview carried about by UKBA officers, including about the  subjects
    he was studying, because  he  did  not  have  an  interpreter  present,
    because he was tired after his travels, because he had  just  seen  his
    sick cousin  in  France  and  was  terrified  of  being  sent  back  to
    Bangladesh.  There  was  no  separate  statement  by  the  interviewing
    immigration officers, and so Judge Handley was wrong to  consider  that
    the appellant was not  telling  the  truth  about  these  matters.  The
    appellant was able to give correct answers with an  interpreter  before
    the Tribunal: it was plausible that  he  could  not  understand  spoken
    English well given that he came from Bangladesh and might  be  able  to
    write better than understand and express himself orally.  The  decision
    of Judge Handley was in error  because  it  failed  to  appreciate  the
    evidence provided by the appellant and  simply  adopted  the  case  put
    forward by the respondent.

 7. Mr Melvin submitted that the Judge had examined all the evidence before
    him and that the grounds of appeal did not disclose any  legal  errors.
    They were simply an attempt to re-argue the appellant's  case.  It  was
    not relevant that the  letter  of  8th  May  2014  was  not  explicitly
    referred to as he considered the issue  of  attendance  and  was  fully
    appraised of the facts. Judge Handley was entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant ought to have been able to understand the  questions  put  at
    interview if he was genuinely  studying  a  course  which  was  at  the
    equivalent to A level in English. Further there could be no  error  for
    not considering the letter of 20th June 2014  which  was  only  written
    after the determination of Judge Handley had been promulgated.

 8. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I found that  Judge  Handley
    had not erred in law for the reasons I set out below, but that I  would
    set out my full reasons in writing.

Conclusions

 9. The appellant was refused leave to enter  the  UK  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 320(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  had  cancelled  the
    appellant's existing leave under paragraph 2A (8)  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 and paragraph 321(A) of the Immigration Rules so his residence
    permit was no longer effective. The basis of this refusal was that  the
    appellant was not a genuine and credible student attending  college  in
    the UK.

10. Judge Handley does not refer explicitly to the letter of 8th  May  2014
    from Birmingham Informatics College when making his  findings,  between
    paragraphs 18 and 25 of his determination. However at  paragraph  2  of
    his determination he does refer to having before him various  documents
    from Birmingham Informatics College. Mr  Khan  could  not  explain  how
    failure to refer to this letter had made any substantial difference. It
    is clear from the letter of 8th May 2014 that the  appellant  had  only
    had a 66.67% attendance in the period December 2013 to  February  2014.
    This is consistent with  the  evidence  Judge  Handley  did  explicitly
    consider in the form of the document from the college at Annex L of the
    respondent's bundle and the appellant's own testimony to the  Tribunal,
    which make clear that the appellant did attend college in  October  and
    part of November but then did not attend at the  end  of  November,  in
    December and in January 2014 - although there were  a  number  of  days
    holiday during this period. Judge Handley also looked  at  the  answers
    the appellant had given at his second interview and concluded  that  he
    had not properly explained his absences: this is an accurate reflection
    of the appellant's lack of answers  to  questions  19  and  20  of  the
    interview commenced at 16.20. I find that failure to  refer  explicitly
    to the letter of 8th May  2014  made  no  material  difference  to  the
    findings of Judge Handley which were consistent with what was  said  in
    this letter, and that this letter was  unsurprisingly  consistent  with
    the other evidence provided by the college which was clearly considered
    Judge Handley.

11. Judge Handley also made reasoned and lawful findings on other  matters.
    He did not believe that the appellant had requested an  interpreter  at
    his interviews as the records recorded that he had said he was happy to
    be interviewed  in  English  and  had  understood  all  questions,  see
    paragraph 18 of  the  determination.  Further  the  appellant  had  not
    indicated he felt nervous, tired or unwell when he was asked if he  was
    feeling ok. Judge Handley found that the appellant was not  a  credible
    witness on this matter when  he  contended  to  the  contrary.  He  had
    clearly considered the appellant's evidence  to  the  Tribunal  on  the
    matter but did not believe it for the reasons he sets out. This  was  a
    perfectly lawful approach.

12. Having found that the interview record was a proper reflection of  what
    the appellant said at interview Judge Handley considers  at  paragraphs
    19, 20 and 21 of his determination that the  inaccurate  answers  about
    the days and times he attended college and the appellant's inability to
    give an accurate description of his courses at interview  were  further
    matters which diminished  the  appellant's  credibility  as  a  genuine
    student. Again he was lawfully entitled to come to this  conclusion  on
    the evidence before him. The letter of 20th June 2014 from the  college
    does not change the fact that  the  appellant  gave  wrong  information
    about the  days  he  attended  college  in  November  and  December  at
    interview.

13. Judge Handley was entitled to conclude, as he does at paragraph  25  of
    his determination, that the appellant was not a genuine  student  given
    his  findings  about  his  having   missed   lessons   without   proper
    explanation; the  inaccurate  information  the  appellant  provided  at
    interview about  the  days  and  time  he  attended  college;  and  the
    appellant's poor ability to describe his studies at interview.

Decision

      1. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.
      2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 19th January 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 19th January 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
