
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05963/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2016                   |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Abdul Rehman Arif Butt
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Ranjha, Legal Representative, Sky Solicitors
Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against a  determination
    of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  promulgated  on   1
    September 2015 in which the judge allowed the appeal of Mr Abdul Rehman
    Arif Butt, whom I refer to as the claimant, against a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue  him  a  residence  card  as  the
    extended family member of an EEA national pursuant to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The judge in this case heard evidence and  concluded,  having  directed
    himself to the decision in Dauhoon (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2))  [2012]
    UKUT 79 (IAC) that the claimant is in fact an extended family member of
    an  EEA  national.   The  judge  then  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision on the narrow basis that the judge erred in  law  by  allowing
    the appeal outright when the Secretary of State had not considered  her
    discretion pursuant to Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations.  It was
    submitted that what the judge should have done in this case was for the
    appeal to have been allowed on the basis  that  the  decision  was  not
    otherwise in accordance  with  the  law  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    directed to make a fresh decision exercising her discretion pursuant to
    Regulation 17(4), that being the course  of  conduct  outlined  in  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 340.

 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Adio on 29 December 2015.

 5. Before me Mr Wilding relied on the grounds of appeal.   Mr  Ranjha  for
    the claimant sought to distinguish Ihemedu on the basis  that  in  that
    case in the First-tier the  Secretary  of  State  first  had  not  been
    represented and so the possibility of  exercising  discretion  was  not
    relevant.  He submitted also that this case was different on its facts.

 6. I am not satisfied that there is any basis on  which  I  should  depart
    from the course of and principles set out in Ihemedu in the head  note.
    In this case the Secretary of State in her refusal letter had concluded
    that the requirements of Regulation 8 were not met and contrary  to  Mr
    Ranjha's submission I do not consider that  it  could  be  in  any  way
    interpreted as being that the Secretary of State had considered whether
    or not to exercise her discretion pursuant to Regulation 17(4).   There
    is simply no mention of that in the decision of the Secretary of State.

 7. Further I  do  not  consider  that  the  decision  in  Ihemedu  can  be
    distinguished on the basis canvassed by Mr Ranjha.   The  fact  that  a
    Presenting Officer may or may not be present in court before the First-
    tier Tribunal is not relevant to the issue of whether discretion  could
    be exercised.  It would not be possible for there to be an exercise  of
    discretion until specific facts which were in dispute had been  decided
    or conceded.  In this case that is not so and the facts found in favour
    of the claimant were found by the judge in a decision promulgated  some
    time later.

 8. Accordingly, I am satisfied that, following the  decision  in  Ihemedu,
    the First-tier Tribunal did err in allowing  the  appeal  outright.   I
    therefore set aside that  decision  on  the  basis  that  the  decision
    involved the making  of  an  error  of  law.   I  remake  the  decision
    preserving the findings of fact made  by  the  judge  by  allowing  the
    appeal on the basis that the decision of the Secretary of State was not
    in accordance with the law.  The effect of this is that  the  Secretary
    of  State  must  take  a  fresh  lawful  decision  in  respect  of  the
    application for a residence card, taking into account the  findings  of
    fact reached by the First-tier Tribunal which are not challenged and to
    issue a fresh decision pursuant to Regulation 17(4).

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the appeal on the basis  that  it  is
    not in accordance with the law.  The application is thus still  pending
    before the respondent awaiting a fresh, lawful decision, based  on  the
    findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date: 23 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

