
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05994/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 October 2013                            |On 16 October 2013           |
|Prepared 10 October 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                            collins mohammed agho

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, of Counsel instructed by Messrs
Samuel Louis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 13  February  1984  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pears who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 11 July  2013  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse him leave
    to remain as the spouse of an EEA national.

2.   The appellant arrived in Britain as a student on 25 April  2010  having
    been granted leave to remain until 9 April 2012.

3.   On 2 April 2012 he applied for leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  a
    marriage to a Miss Kozo Bernadette Raducanou, a French national.

4.   The Secretary of State considered the application and stated that:-

         "In order to qualify for a residence  card,  you  are  required  to
         provide evidence that you  are  related  to  your  EEA  sponsor  as
         claimed.  As evidence  of  this  your  representatives  supplied  a
         marriage certificate.  However,  a  visit  was  conducted  to  your
         address, and it was found that you and your  EEA  sponsor  do  not,
         never have, resided at this address.   Therefore,  this  department
         cannot accept that you are related as claimed to your EEA  sponsor.




         You are also required to provide evidence that your EEA sponsor  is
         exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom.   As  evidence  of
         this, your  representatives  supplied  wage  slips.   However  this
         department has been unable to verify this employment.


         Therefore it has been decided to refuse to issue  the  confirmation
         that you  seek  with  reference  to  Regulation  6  and  7  of  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."


5.    The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Pears on 8 July  2013.   The
    appellant had submitted a  bundle  of  documents  which  included  bank
    statements, a tenancy agreement, a witness statement and  payslips  and
    an orange telephone bill for the sponsor.

6.   The respondent had produced at the hearing a  report  from  a  Sergeant
    Jenkinson who, at the request of the UKBA had visited the  house  where
    the appellant and Ms Raducanou had claimed to be living.  The visit was
    made on 18 December 2012.  The police officer wrote:-

         "I attended the address at 23 Manor Grove on Tuesday,  18  December
         2012 around 19:30 hours.


         The premises consist of an ex local authority house  which  is  now
         used as  bedsits  and  has  five  bedrooms,  one  kitchen  and  one
         bathroom.


         Initially I had trouble gaining entry but  eventually  got  in  and
         spoke to an African female who claimed to be  visiting  and  denied
         any knowledge of the other occupants of the house.


         I left a note advising I would be reporting the premises as a house
         of multiple occupancy to the local authority.


         At 22:00 hours I received a phone call from "Luke" the landlord and
         a male who claimed to be his solicitor.  I asked the  solicitor  to
         send me an email so I could legitimise who they were they did  this
         the following day.


         The owner of the premises is Mr Basil Ukonu 07941 257966.


         The solicitor and managing agent is Sam Ezeh.


         Samuel Louis Solicitors
         17 Deptford Church Street
         London SE8 4RX


         I was informed that they were not aware of a tenant by the names of
         "Collins" or "Kozo" during the late night call mentioned  above,  I
         had left these details in the note.


         On speaking to the managing agent the next day he stated he was not
         aware of these tenants. I had informed him that  this  was  an  old
         enquiry from a year earlier November 2011.  He  was  not  aware  of
         these people/tenants.


         Regards


         Jeff Jenkinson"

7.   The  report  from  Sergeant  Jenkinson  was  the  basis  on  which  the
    Secretary of State decided that the marriage was not genuine.

8.   The judge noted that  the  appellant,  in  his  witness  statement  was
    stating that he was separated from his wife in May 2013 and that  their
    relationship had irretrievably broken down.

9.   The judge correctly noted that the appellant could  not  qualify  under
    the terms of Regulation 17 as the term "spouse" therein did not include
    a party to a marriage of convenience.

10.  The judge noted that there was no burden on a claimant  to  prove  that
    they were  not  a  party  to  a  marriage  of  convenience  unless  the
    circumstances known to the decision maker gave reasonable  grounds  for
    suspecting that that was the case.  Where there was such suspicion  the
    matter required  further  investigation  and  the  claimant  should  be
    invited to respond on the basis of the decision by producing evidential
    material to dispel it.

11.  The judge found, relying on the decision of a First-tier  Judge  in  an
    appeal brought by Ms Raducanou that she was a  qualified  person.   The
    issue therefore turned on whether or not the appellant was a party to a
    marriage of convenience.

12.  The judge set out the evidence of the appellant  which  was  that  they
    had lived at 23 Manor Grove between late 2010 and their separation.  He
    said that his wife had moved in about March 2011.

13.  He went on to say that the landlord was  Luke  Maroy  Collins  or  Okun
    although the tenancy agreement referred to  him  as  Basil  Ukonu.   He
    noted that 23 Manor Grove was in multiple occupation  and  stated  that
    page 11 of the appellant's bundle referred to Kozo Bernadette Raducanou
    in room 2 and the tenancy agreement in the appellant's name referred to
    room 3.  The appellant had described it as a shared house.

14.  He noted the appellant's bank statement which  had  entries  which  the
    appellant said represented rent although the rent  was  different  from
    that in the tenancy agreement.

15.  The judge noted it was accepted by  both  sides  that  the  police  had
    visited 23 Manor Grove on 18 December 2012 and in paragraphs 16 and  17
    onwards he referred to the appellant's witness  statement  and  to  the
    application form.  He wrote:-

         "16. The Appellant says in his witness statement which he expressly
             adopted and signed in front of me.'However I was  aware  of  a
             visit by officers from Peckham Police station on 18th December
             2012'.  Pausing there he does  not  give  the  source  of  the
             information.  'The officers dropped their card for Collins  to
             contact them.  Our landlord was contacted and he collected the
             card.   Incidentally  I  share  the  same  surname   with   my
             landlord'.  Again pausing there he does not and he said it was
             a mistake on his part.  He goes on  'I  was  contacted  by  my
             landlord regarding the visit,  as  he  had  no  dealings  with
             Peckham Police or  at  all.   My  wife  and  I  contacted  the
             officers and were informed that if there is any need for  them
             to revisit or for us to come we will be notified  accordingly.
             They also collected our numbers' and later he  says  that  the
             officers met a girlfriend of a flatmate who did not know  them
             and that given the way the premises are set out  that  is  not
             surprising.  He had approached her but she was not willing  to
             assist but she had told him that she had never said he and his
             wife did not live there.


         17.  He said in the application form that they were both living  at
             23 Manor Grove, London SE15.  His wife had  been  working  for
             Sabis  Infinity  UK  at  49  Dalkeith  Road,   Wellingborough,
             Northamptonshire from 20th February 2012 (see application form
             5.1ff, E1, I2), so it appears that the Appellant's wife  might
             have had an alternative address.


         18.  There  are  02  accounts  that  indicate  that  his  wife  was
             receiving these addressed to her at 23 Manor Grove - see F1ff;
             there are bank statements addressed to her at that address  at
             G1ff, page 17ff of the Appellant's bundle and a  TV  licensing
             department - G9 - page 11 of the Appellant's bundle.


         19.  There are also documents addressed to the  Appellant  at  that
             address - Santander - G8 -  Lloyds  Bank  -  page  15  of  the
             Appellant's  bundle.   Indeed  there  are   election   notices
             addressed to each of them at 23 Manor Grove - H1 and H2 - page
             13 of the Appellant's bundle.  There  is  an  EU  health  card
             addressed to Kozo Bernadette Raducanou at 23 Manor Grove and a
             P60 of the Appellant.


         20.  It is accepted  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  are  now
             separated and going through a divorce but it was not suggested
             by the Respondent that that was a  ground  for  rejecting  the
             Appellant's application.


         21.  The police report  relied  on  by  the  Respondent  says  that
             Sergeant Jenkinson attended on 18th December 2012 at 23  Manor
             Grove and did indeed speak to an African female who claimed to
             be visiting and denied any knowledge of other  occupants.   He
             left a note and  received  a  telephone  call  from  Luke  the
             landlord and a man who claimed to be  his  solicitor  and  the
             solicitor sent a email the next day giving the details of  the
             owner of the premises who was said to be Basil Ukonu  and  the
             solicitor and managing agent being Sam Ezeh  of  Samuel  Louis
             Solicitors (who I note  are  the  solicitors  acting  for  the
             Appellant  on  this  appeal  although  not  on   the   initial
             application).


         22.  The officer was told they not aware of a tenant by  the  names
             of Collins or Kozo and the managing agent confirmed  this  the
             next day."


16.  In paragraphs 24 onwards the judge set out  his  findings.   The  judge
    stated that there is evidence from a police officer which  he  accepted
    that neither the appellant nor his wife was known to the  landlord  nor
    the managing agent of 23 Manor Grove and  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    police report that neither his wife nor he  were  living  at  23  Manor
    Grove on 18 December 2012 at a time when the appellant claimed that  he
    was living there as was his wife and they were living together  as  man
    and wife.  He went on to find that there is reasonable suspicion on the
    part of the respondent the appellant was  a  party  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience based on the police report and that in phrasing the refusal
    notice as it was the respondent was informed that the appellant was not
    the spouse of an EEA national for the purposes of the application.   He
    went on to say in paragraphs 29 onwards:-

         "29. I found the Appellant less than convincing  in  his  demeanour
             and the manner he gave evidence.  Further there are  a  number
             of mattes that cause me to doubt his account of what  happened
             on or immediately subsequent to the police visit; he gives  no
             names, there is no supporting evidence of his  account,  there
             is no record of him or his wife having called the  police  and
             there  is  the  inherent  implausibility   of   the   landlord
             contacting him but the landlord denying to the police that  he
             knew anything about the Appellant.


         30.  I accept that there is documentary evidence that show that  23
             Manor Grove was used as postal address by  the  appellant  and
             his wife and that at least in the period of  late  2012  there
             was money that was stated to be rent.   Equally  it  is  clear
             that there is evidence that at  times  the  Appellant  was  or
             might have been living elsewhere, as she is now.


         31.  I find in the light of the totality of the information  before
             me, including the assessment of the claimant's answers or  any
             information provided, I am satisfied that it is more  probable
             than not this is a marriage of convenience."


17.  He therefore found the appellant had not shown that he was  the  spouse
    of an EEA national within the meaning of the Regulations.

18.  He went on to consider and  dismiss  the  claim  that  the  appellant's
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR were infringed by the decision.

19.  The grounds of appeal refer to what the judge wrote  in  paragraphs  26
    and 27 of the determination and refer to an  e-mail  sent  to  Sergeant
    Jenkinson by Samuel Louis Solicitors on 19 December 2012.  That  e-mail
    wrote:-

         "Dear Mr Jenkinson


         Further to my telephone conversation  last  night  regarding  above
         property whereas I understand that you conducted a  visit  to  same
         yesterday looking for a Mr Collins and/or Margaret.  These  persons
         are unknown to us or our  client  Mr  Basil  Ukonu  (07941  25796).
         Unless there is any way we can assist you, please  take  note  that
         the individuals sought are unknown to us.


         Kind regards


         Luke
         Samuel Louis Solicitors."


     It was argued that it was apparent from that that the officers were  in
    fact looking for different persons rather than the  appellant  and  his
    wife.   It  was  claimed  that  therefore  the  judge  had  made  wrong
    assumptions without evidence that the people the  officer  was  looking
    for were the appellant and his wife when in fact they were looking  for
    "Mr Collins and/or Margaret". Given that the report did not  mention  a
    "Margaret" I consider that the grounds of appeal are disingenuous.

20.  An application was made to adduce that e-mail as further evidence.

21.  It was argued  that  the  findings  of  the  judge  were  perverse  and
    irrational.

22.  At the hearing of the  appeal  before  me  Ms  Nnamani  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal arguing that the police report could not be relied on
    and that the basis of that assertion was  the  e-mail  from  "Luke"  of
    Samuel Louis Solicitors to Sergeant Jenkinson.  She emphasised that the
    Regulations did not require that the parties should live  together  but
    in any event there was ample evidence that  they  had  done  so  -  she
    referred to the documents from Orange, the sponsor's payslips  and  the
    documents in the appellant's name from Santander and Southwark  Council
    as well as his bank statements and utility bills.  She further referred
    to evidence relating to a European health  card  in  the  name  of  the
    sponsor.

23.  She accepted that only the appellant had given evidence at the  hearing
    stating that by that stage the marriage had broken  down  although  she
    did not go as far as the appellant in his statement  to  say  that  the
    relationship had broken down irretrievably.

24.  With regard to the comment by  the  judge  in  paragraph  17  that  the
    appellant's wife might have had an alternative address given  that  she
    had been working for a company in Northampton she stated  that  in  any
    event the appellant's wife had changed jobs but the  reality  was  that
    the payslips gave the address of the company for which she had  worked.



25.  She emphasised that she considered it wrong for the respondent to  rely
    on the police report and stated that the findings  of  the  judge  were
    inadequate.

26.  Ms Kiss  asked  me  to  find  there  was  no  error  of  fact  and  the
    conclusions of the judge were entirely logical particularly with regard
    to where the appellant's wife would  have  been  living  when  she  was
    employed by a company in Northamptonshire.  She stated that  the  judge
    was entitled to look at all the  evidence  and  reach  the  conclusions
    which he had.

27.  Ms Nnamani further replied referring to the documents showing that  the
    appellant's wife had lived at 23 Manor Grove.  She claimed that it  was
    clear that the judge had not properly assessed the  evidence  that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were living together.

28.  I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of
    the judge.  The reality is that there was no direct evidence  from  the
    sponsor.  The only evidence relating to her are  the  orange  bills,  a
    television licence (which refers to room 2)  at  23  Manor  Grove,  the
    letter from European Health Insurance, her bank statements and a letter
    from Southwark Council.  It is correct however that the  payslips  from
    Sabis - Infinity UK Limited give her address as 23  Manor  Grove.   The
    reality is that 23 Manor Grove was a house in multiple  occupation  and
    even if it were accepted that at some time both the appellant and  Miss
    Raducanou had been living there, there was nothing to suggest that they
    were living there together  and  in  particular  the  evidence  of  the
    television licence which shows Miss Raducanou in room 2 and the tenancy
    agreement which shows the appellant in room 3  indicate  that  in  fact
    they were not living together.  There are no utility or other bills  in
    their joint names - they certainly did not have a joint bank account.

29.  Moreover I consider that the comment of the judge  regarding  the  fact
    that  given  that  Sabis  Infinity  UK  was  in  Northamptonshire  Miss
    Raducanou might well have had an  alternative  address  was  a  comment
    which he was entitled to make.  He did say that it  "appears  that  she
    might have an alternative address - she did not  make  a  finding  that
    that was the case but this was a fact which he  was  entitled  to  take
    into account.  The difficulties of commuting from SE15  to  Northampton
    would certainly be considerable.

30.  Turning to the issue of the police report,  what  the  police  sergeant
    said was that he was not aware of a tenant by the name of "Collins"  or
    "Kozo".  The reality is that those are the  first  names  of  both  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  It would have been  expected  that  another
    tenant at the property would have known of their first  names.

31.  The name "Margarette" is mentioned for the first  time  in  the  e-mail
    from "Luke" of Samuel Louis Solicitors which was sent on  19  December.
    He stated that "these persons were unknown to them or to  their  client
    Mr Ukonu.  It is of note that, of course, the appellant is  represented
    by Samuel Louis Solicitors who appeared also to represent the landlord.
     Despite that, there is no further letter from Samuel Louis  Solicitors
    stating that the landlord  of  the  premises  could  confirm  that  the
    appellant and Miss Raducanou lived at the premises.

32.  The judge took all the relevant information into  consideration  and  I
    consider he properly weighed up that information.  The issue before him
    was whether or not this was a marriage of  convenience.   He  correctly
    addressed himself on the law  considering  first  whether  or  not  the
    respondent was entitled to be suspicious of  the  marriage.   He  found
    that that was so and he was correct to do  so.   Thereafter  the  judge
    considered all the relevant information and  reached  conclusions  that
    this was a marriage of convenience.  Despite the  documentary  evidence
    showing that certain correspondence for Miss Raducanou was sent to  her
    at 23 Manor Grove I consider that the conclusions  of  the  judge  were
    open to him.  His conclusion was not in any way irrational nor  did  he
    apply too high a standard of proof.

33.   I  therefore  find  there  is  no  material  error  of  law   in   the
    determination of the judge and find that his decision  dismissing  this
    appeal on immigration grounds and further his decision to  dismiss  the
    appeal on human rights grounds will stand.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


