
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05032/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2017                    |On 13 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              mr Muhammad Nawaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Bukhari Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lal (the judge), promulgated on 7 July 2016, in which he
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  That appeal had been against  the
    Respondent's decision made on 15 January 2015, which  had  refused  the
    Appellant leave to remain as  a  spouse  of  a  British  citizen,  with
    reference to Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

 2. Although the case was primarily about Article 8, an important aspect of
    this was an  allegation  by  the  Respondent  that  the  Appellant  had
    fraudulently obtained an English language  test  certificate  from  ETS
    back  in  2012.   The  certificate  had  been  used  for  a  subsequent
    application for further leave, but not, however, the latest application
    made by the Appellant on 29 September 2014.



The judge's decision

 3. It was  agreed  by  the  representatives  before  the  judge  that  the
    relationship between the Appellant and his spouse  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting one.  The only live issue  therefore  was  whether  the  ETS
    allegation could  be  made  out,  and  the  effect  of  this  upon  the
    suitability requirements under Appendix FM.

 4. The judge's findings  begin  at  paragraph  15  of  his  decision.   He
    concludes that the Appellant had been dishonest in respect of obtaining
    the test certificate in 2012.  This core finding is  based  on  matters
    set out in paragraphs 16 to 20 to which I shall refer  in  more  detail
    below.

 5. At paragraph 21 the judge concludes that as a  result  of  his  adverse
    findings the Appellant's application fell foul of S-LTR.2.2 of Appendix
    FM.  Thus the Appellant could not  succeed  on  Article  8  within  the
    context of the Rules.  The judge then goes on to consider the Article 8
    claim outside of the Rules and concludes that the Respondent's decision
    was proportionate.  In particular the judge found that the  Appellant's
    relationship with his wife was a "cynical attempt to  bolster  a  claim
    that is already without merit".



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. There are essentially three grounds.  The  first  relates  to  the  ETS
    issue.  It contends that the judge has erred in failing  to  apply  the
    guidance set out in SM and Qadir (ETS - evidence  -  burden  of  proof)
    [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC), and further errs in respect of  his  credibility
    assessment of the  Appellant's  evidence.   Ground  2  relates  to  the
    assessment of Article 8 within the context of the Rules, and  ground  3
    relates to Article 8 outside of the Rules.

 7. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington on 1  December
    2016.  It was her view that the judge's assessment  of  the  ETA  issue
    could not be criticised and that permission was to be refused  on  that
    particular point (see paragraph 2 of her decision). However, permission
    was granted on the basis  that  the  judge  had  apparently  failed  to
    consider the  position  of  the  Appellant's  spouse  when  considering
    Article 8.



The hearing before me

 8. Prior to the hearing the Appellant's solicitors sent  in  a  bundle  of
    updated evidence and, more importantly, an  application  to  renew  and
    expand ground 1 of  the  original  grounds  of  appeal.   This  related
    specifically to the ETS point upon which Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
    had previously refused permission.

 9. The renewed/expanded grounds sought to rely  firstly  on  the  original
    ground 1, but also on two additional points.  The  first  of  these  is
    that the judge is said to have  applied  the  wrong  provision  to  the
    Appellant's case, namely  S-LTR.2.2.   This,  it  is  said,  was  wrong
    because that provision related solely to whether  false  documents  had
    been submitted in respect of the latest  application,  whereas  in  the
    Appellant's  case  the  alleged  false  certificate   related   to   an
    application made back in 2012 or 2013.  Secondly the  expanded  grounds
    suggest that the judge was wrong in taking into account the Appellant's
    ability to speak English at the hearing.  It is  said  that  this  runs
    contrary to the guidance set  out  in  SM  and  Qadir  with  particular
    reference to paragraph 80 of that decision.

10. The new bundle had been received in advance by Mr Tarlow,  and  he  was
    fully  aware  of  its  contents.   Mr  Tarlow  formally   opposed   the
    application to renew and/or expand the grounds of appeal.  He submitted
    that there was no merit in any of them.

11. Having considered this matter I gave permission  for  ground  1  to  be
    argued before me and for that ground to be expanded in  line  with  the
    grounds set out at pages 1 to 3 of the Appellant's new bundle.

12. I gave permission for the following reasons.  First, in my  view  there
    was sufficient merit in the original ground 1 to  render  it  arguable.
    Secondly, that  there  was  again  sufficient  merit  in  the  expanded
    grounds, in particular the two  points  I  have  mentioned  previously,
    which rendered them arguable as well.  Overall, there was enough  there
    to warrant the granting of permission with reference to my powers under
    Rule 5(3)(c) of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  2008  and  the
    decision in Ferrer (limited appeal grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  00304
    (IAC).

13. Following this  preliminary  point,  both  representatives  made  their
    respective submissions.

14. Mr Karim submitted that the judge had erred in a  number  of  respects.
    It was said  that  the  judge  has  not  engaged  adequately  with  the
    Appellant's explanation in respect of the tests undertaken in 2012.  He
    said that the judge had failed to  give  particular  examples  of  what
    information the Appellant was unable to give, why that might have  been
    so, and that he had ignored factors such as the passage of time.

15. It was submitted that the judge had failed  to  exercise  caution  when
    dealing with the oral evidence as was required by the  guidance  in  SM
    and Qadir.

16. Mr Karim suggested that it was a material error for the judge  to  have
    applied S-LTR.2.2 when this clearly did not relate to  the  Appellant's
    case.  Although  an  alternative  under  S-LTR.1.6  might   have   been
    applicable, it had not in fact been applied or indeed considered at all
    by the judge.

17. In respect of Article 8 Mr Karim relied on the  grounds  and  submitted
    that there had been no consideration of the spouse, or indeed her  son.



18. Mr Tarlow submitted that there were no errors in  respect  of  the  ETS
    issue.  The findings were all open to the  judge.   He  had  in  effect
    found that the Appellant's rebuttal evidence was simply  not  credible.
    If the application of S-LTR.2.2 was wrong this  was  immaterial  as  S-
    LTR.1.6 could have been applied instead.

19. In respect of the Article 8 point he accepted that there was  an  error
    and it would be an uphill struggle to argue that  this  error  was  not
    material.  The judge  had  failed  to  deal  in  any  detail  with  the
    Appellant's spouse, and at all in respect of the spouse's  son  from  a
    previous relationship.



Decision on error of law

20. With some reservations, I  conclude  that  the  judge's  decision  does
    include material errors of law and must therefore  be  set  aside.   My
    reasons for this conclusion are as follows.

21. First, the judge has not referred to  any  of  the  relevant  case  law
    relating to the ETS issue.  That in itself is not necessarily an  error
    of course, but it gives rise to uncertainty as to the approach  adopted
    by the judge.  He did correctly identify that there was  an  evidential
    burden upon the Respondent in the first instance  (see  paragraph  16).
    The judge was certainly entitled to find  that  the  generic  materials
    adduced by the Respondent were sufficient to discharge that  evidential
    burden.  According to the guidance set out in SM and  Qadir  and  other
    decisions, once the initial evidential burden is discharged the  burden
    then shifts to the Appellant  who  must  then  provide  what  has  been
    described as "an innocent explanation namely an account which satisfies
    the minimum  level  of  plausibility"  (see  Muhandiramge  (section  S-
    LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 00675 (IAC), at paragraph 10).  Unfortunately, the
    judge has not set out this threshold  test,  as  it  were,  and  it  is
    therefore unclear as to whether the judge is in effect saying that  the
    ultimate legal burden rested upon the Appellant or not.

22. Second, as a result of the above it is unclear as to what threshold the
    judge was considering when assessing  the  Appellant's  explanation  in
    rebuttal of the Respondent's allegation.  The shifting of the burden to
    the Appellant only relates to the requirement to give an account  which
    "satisfies the minimum level of plausibility", which is something  less
    than an ultimate satisfaction of a  legal  burden  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

23. Third, I have sympathy for the judge in that  it  does  appear  he  was
    unimpressed generally by the Appellant's oral evidence at the  hearing:
    this much is clear from paragraphs 17 to 20. However,  and  again  with
    some hesitation, I conclude that what the judge has failed to do is  to
    provide sufficient detail, by way of examples, of: questions  that  the
    Appellant  was  in  fact  unable  to  answer  adequately  or  at   all;
    information that he was unable to provide  that  he  reasonably  should
    have provided; or any objectively verifiable evidence that contradicted
    his account of where the centre was, the format of the tests, and  such
    like.

24. It may be that  there  were  specific  examples  contained  within  the
    evidence as a whole, but none of these had been set out. The result  is
    that that  the  reader  of  the  decision  struggles  to  identify  the
    particular  reasons  why  the  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was "vague and evasive" in material respects.

25. Fourth, if the judge was relying upon  an  inability  to  give  details
    about particular essays or particular questions in respect of the tests
    and/or previous studies, there does not appear to be any  consideration
    of the passage of time given that the tests occurred  some  four  years
    before the  hearing  and  the  undergraduate  degree  in  Pakistan  was
    undertaken longer ago than that.

26. Fifth, in paragraphs 17 and 18 the judge expresses "some doubt"  as  to
    whether the Appellant had  ever  studied  in  Pakistan  or  the  United
    Kingdom, as claimed. However,  there  is  no  clear  finding  on  these
    points. "Some doubt" does not equate to a finding  that  the  Appellant
    was being untruthful, or that he had in effect produced false documents
    and/or made false representations to the Respondent about these studies
    previously.

27. Sixth, the judge clearly did place significant weight on  the  apparent
    inability of the Appellant to understand questions put to  him  at  the
    hearing (see paragraph 19).  The difficulty with this is  that  SM  and
    Qadir strongly encourages real caution on the  part  of  judges  before
    undertaking any assessment of an ability to speak English at a  hearing
    (see paragraph 80).  It does not however prohibit  such  consideration.
    In this case the judge has made no reference to SM and Qadir,  and  has
    not as a matter of substance stated that he has exercised  any  caution
    before taking the ability to speak English at the hearing into  account
    as being a relevant factor.

28. Seventh, with due respect to the judge, it is difficult to see  why  it
    was deemed to be so adverse to the  Appellant  that  he  contacted  his
    solicitor when first told of  the  Respondent's  refusal,  rather  than
    registering any "shock" with the ETS test centre.

29. Eighth, as far as I can see  there  was  no  evidence  adduced  by  the
    Respondent at the hearing which went to contradict matters set  out  in
    paragraphs 10 to 11 of the decision, namely in  respect  of  the  when,
    where and what relating to the 2012 tests.

30. Taking all of the above into account, and with none of the points being
    individually decisive, I conclude that the judge's approach to the  ETS
    issue is materially flawed and for that reason his decision must be set
    aside.

31. I would add that in respect of the application of S-LTR.2.2 of Appendix
    FM, there is also an error because in  my  view,  on  the  natural  and
    ordinary meaning of the words used, the use of false documents needs to
    relate to the application leading to the appeal before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, rather than a previous  application.  However,  it  is  clear
    enough to me that in any event S-LTR.1.6  could  have  applied  in  any
    event, so therefore the error would probably not  have  been  material.
    This point does not need to be conclusively decided given  my  view  of
    the judge's assessment of the ETS issue and credibility.

32. Turning to the Article 8 point  briefly,  it  is  clear  that  somewhat
    unfortunately the judge failed to engage adequately with the  situation
    of the Appellant's spouse and, importantly, her son, the  existence  of
    whom was known to the Respondent and presumably the judge as well.

33. There is clearly a further material error of law here.

34. I  also  note  that  the  Respondent  herself  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's relationship with his wife was genuine and subsisting  (see
    paragraph 14 of  the  refusal  letter).   Therefore  what  is  said  in
    paragraph 28 of the judge's decision appears to go  behind  an  express
    concession of fact made by the Respondent.



Disposal

35. As a result of the material errors of law, this appeal must be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.   No  findings  of
    fact are to be preserved.  The ETS issue and the Article  8  claim  are
    both live, and I express no view on the ultimate prospects  of  success
    in this appeal.

36. Relevant directions to the parties and  the  Tribunal's  administration
    are made, below.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of errors on points of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no preserved
         findings of fact;

      2. The issues to be addressed at the remitted  hearing  are:  the  ETS
         allegation; Article 8 within the context of  the  Rules  (including
         the position of the Appellant's spouse  and  her  son);  Article  8
         outside the context of the Rules (including  the  position  of  the
         Appellant's spouse and her son).





Direction to the parties

      3. Any further evidence relied on by either party must be served  with
         the other side and filed with the First-tier Tribunal no later than
         21 days before the remitted hearing (for the  avoidance  of  doubt,
         the new evidence contained in the Appellant's latest  bundle  shall
         be served and filed in accordance with this timeframe);

      4. The parties must comply with any further directions issued  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to administration

      1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  at
         the Hatton Cross hearing centre before a judge  other  than  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge S Lal;

      2. A new date shall be  fixed  by  the  Hatton  Cross  hearing  centre
         itself;

      3. There is a 2-hour time estimate for the remitted hearing.



Signed                                  Date: 13 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


