
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/05477/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 September 2013                           |On 5 September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                ola ayo ajao

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Victor-Mazeli, Counsel instructed by Grayfield
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                       ORAL DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal  against  the  third  decision  that  has  been  made
    refusing the appellant a permit to remain in the UK as the dependant of
    an EEA national.

2.   The argument before me centred on whether or  not  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Devittie should have granted an  adjournment.   Ms  Victor-Mazeli
    accepts that there was no documentary evidence in front of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that would have enabled a finding of dependency  in
    the UK so the application would have failed on that basis  alone.   The
    issue is whether or not an adjournment should  have  been  granted  and
    thus if it had been evidence could have been produced by the  appellant
    such as to show his dependency.

3.   The reason for requesting an adjournment was so that his sponsor  could
    obtain  funds  for  legal  representation.   The  judge  considers  the
    adjournment request in paragraph 6 of the  determination.  Although  Ms
    Victor-Mazeli says that legal representation is essential, this is  not
    a complicated  case.   Legal  representation  is  not  essential.   The
    Reasons for Refusal Letter set out quite  clearly  that  there  was  no
    evidence of dependency in the UK.  The appellant  did  not  request  an
    adjournment in order to seek advice on the documentation that would  be
    required and gave no indication as to the nature of  the  documentation
    that he would be providing  despite  the  fact  that  he  has  had  two
    previous applications which had  been  refused.   His  application  was
    submitted to the Home Office in August  2012  and  it  was  refused  in
    January 2013.  The appeal was lodged on 15 February 2013  and  in  that
    appeal he refers to having a representative.  He therefore had from  15
    February 2013 until 7 June to obtain legal representation and  even  if
    he did not obtain legal representation he had sufficient time  to  seek
    legal advice as to the documentary evidence that needed to be required.
     The judge in paragraph 6 sets out clear and sustainable reasons why he
    refused the adjournment.

4.   I am satisfied that there was no error of law by the judge in  refusing
    to grant an adjournment and as I have already indicated,  there  is  no
    error of  law  in  the  substance  of  the  decision.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed; the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissing the
    appeal stands.






Signed                                  Date 4th September 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

