
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05891/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
| On 25th June 2015                   |On 17th August 2015                   |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                           MRS LUXMI RANI PERMALL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walsh, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP.
For the Respondent:    Mr.E.Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a national of Mauritius. On 5 September  2013  she
         applied for confirmation of her  right  to  reside  permanently  by
         reason of  European  Treaty  provisions,  namely,  the  Citizenship
         Directive. This is  implemented  domestically  in  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred  to
         as `the 2006 regulations').

      2. Her application was refused on 14  January  2014.  Her  appeal  was
         heard by First-tier Immigration Judge Barker on 27 August 2014.  In
         a decision promulgated on 16 September 2014 it was dismissed  under
         the 2006 Regulations and on human  rights  grounds.  She  has  been
         granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in  relation  to
         the application of European law.

The facts

      3. The facts are not in dispute. In March 2004 she `met' a Mr  Permall
         online. He is a French national born on 20 April 1979  and  he  had
         been living in the United Kingdom with his father since the age  of
         16. Mr Permall had been working in the United Kingdom  since  2003.
         In June 2007 the appellant came to the United  Kingdom  with  leave
         for six months and her relationship with Mr  Permall  continued  to
         develop.

      4. Believing it would  help  the  appellant's  immigration  status  Mr
         Permall  obtained   British   citizenship.   His   certificate   of
         nationalisation is dated 28 February 2008.

      5. The appellant left the United Kingdom  and  returned  again  on  22
         February 2009. On 18 March 2009 she and Mr  Permall  married.  They
         then travelled to Mauritius for a religious  marriage  ceremony  in
         July 2009. The appellant was granted entry clearance as the  spouse
         of a British  citizen,  valid  until  13  November  2011.  She  was
         subsequently granted leave to remain until 17  November  2013.  The
         relationship has ended: the parties have  divorced  with  a  decree
         absolute granted on 9 August 2013.

The issues arising

      6. There are three points of note from the above. Firstly, her  former
         husband is a  dual  British  and  French  national.  Secondly,  the
         appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  spouse  under  the
         immigration rules and  not  as  a  family  member  under  the  2006
         Regulations. Thirdly, the marriage has ended in divorce.

      7. The difficulty for the appellant flows from the amendments  to  the
         2006 Regulations. On 16 July 2012 the regulations were  amended  to
         reflect developing caselaw. Crucially, the  general  interpretation
         section at regulation 2 was amended to read:

             "'EEA national' means a national of an EEA state  who  is  not
             also a United Kingdom national."

      8. This change to the Regulations was in response to the judgement  of
         the Court of Justice of the European Union in the case of  McCarthy
         (see 434/09). Because of her former husband's  British  nationality
         the respondent concluded the essential ingredient of  a  sponsoring
         EEA  national  did  not  exist.  The  respondent  referred  to  the
         transitional  arrangements  but  these  applied  to  third  country
         nationals who had previously relied upon the regulations. As stated
         earlier, the appellant had not relied upon the regulations but upon
         the immigration rules.

The First-tier Tribunal

      9. Before Judge Barker  it  was  accepted  by  the  parties  that  the
         appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the   amended
         regulations. Mr Walsh had appeared at the First -tier Tribunal  and
         argued, as he does now, that the amended regulations  do  not  meet
         the Citizen's Directive and are  not  in  line  with  the  case  of
         McCarthy. Following from this it was argued  that  the  appellant's
         former husband was exercising Treaty rights rather than rights as a
         British national.

     10. At paragraph 23 of the decision Judge Barker stated:

             "Whilst I accept that Mr Permall  was  working  and  therefore
             would be considered a worker if the regulations applied  I  am
             not persuaded that it can  be  said  that  he  was  exercising
             Treaty rights in the UK after his naturalisation in 2008..."

         The judge went on to say:

             "The appellant at no time was in the UK as a family member  of
             a qualified person and was not residing in the United  Kingdom
             on that basis. Her permission to reside in the  UK  was  as  a
             spouse under the immigration rules..."

     11. Judge Barker refers to the amendment to the definition  of  an  EEA
         national in the 2006 regulations at paragraph 24 of  the  decision.
         It was noted  that  Mrs  McCarthy's  case  considered  whether  the
         Directive applied to a citizen who had never exercised the right to
         free movement and always resided in the Member State of which  they
         were a national, albeit they were  a  national  of  another  Member
         State also. The present situation is different in that  Mr  Permall
         did move  from  his  country  of  origin  to  the  United  Kingdom.
         Paragraph 25 of the decision refers to submissions made in relation
         to the McCarthy case:

             "The Tribunal  was  also  referred  to  paragraph  32  of  the
             judgement which states: "First, according to Article  3(1)  of
             Directive 2004/38 all Union citizens who `move to'  or  reside
             in a Member State `other'  than  that  of  which  they  are  a
             national  are  beneficiaries  of  that   directive".   However
             paragraph 34 states: "Since, as stated in paragraph 29 of this
             judgement, the residence of a person residing  in  the  Member
             State of which he is a national  cannot  be  made  subject  to
             conditions,  Directive  2004/38,  concerning  the   conditions
             governing the exercise of the right to move and reside  freely
             within the territory of the Member State, cannot  apply  to  a
             union citizen whose enjoys an unconditional right to residence
             due to the fact that he resides in the Member State  of  which
             he is a national."."

     12. At paragraph 26 a judge concludes :

             "... Paragraph 34 quoted above  seems  to  indicate  that  the
             Directive  cannot  apply  to   a   person   who   enjoys   the
             unconditional right of residence in the Member State in  which
             he is  a  national.  The  effect  of  the  alteration  to  the
             definition would appear to be in line  with  paragraph  34  of
             McCarthy.  Whilst  there  may  be  circumstances   which   the
             amendment does not meet (in  that  regard  I  have  noted  the
             correspondence of the solicitors with the European Directorate
             General to Justice) in the present circumstances I do not find
             that the appellant's rights are prejudiced ..."

     13. At paragraph 27 the judge went on to say:

             "... Even if I am wrong and the amendment is not in line  with
             the Directive there were other grounds on which the  appellant
             did  not  meet  the  requirements  for  a  retained  right  of
             residence, namely, that she had not been a family member of`an
             EEA national in the UK as she had always resided in the UK  on
             the basis that she was a  spouse  of  a  British  citizen  and
             therefore  would  not  have  met  the  requirements   in   the
             Regulations in any event."

The Upper Tribunal

     14. The application for permission to appeal makes the  point  that  Mr
         Permall moved from France to the  United  Kingdom  and  then  began
         working here. Directive 2004/58/EC extends to  all  Union  citizens
         who moved to and reside in a Member State other than that of  which
         they are a national and to their family members.  Consequently,  it
         was argued that the situation is distinct  from  that  in  McCarthy
         where Treaty rights had never been exercised and so she was  not  a
         beneficiary of the Directive.

     15. The appellant satisfies the requirements of  paragraph  10  of  the
         2006 regulations which deals with retained rights of residence  but
         for the issue of her  former  husband's  dual  nationality.  Before
         divorce the marriage had  lasted  at  least  three  years  and  the
         parties had resided in the United Kingdom for  at  least  one  year
         during its duration. The appellant is in employment. It  is  argued
         by Mr Walsh that the fact the appellant availed of the  immigration
         rules  to  reside  rather  than  Treaty  rights  is  an  irrelevant
         consideration as those rights have direct effect.

     16. In the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant's  representative  relied
         upon the decision of Kaheci  and  Inan  C-9/10.  In  that  case,  a
         Turkish national had acquired  Dutch  nationality  whilst  residing
         there. The issue before the ECJ was whether they could  then  avail
         of certain benefits for Turkish nationals in an  agreement  between
         Turkey and the EU aimed at integrating Turkish nationals  into  the
         host Member State.  The court concluded  they  could  as  otherwise
         this would impede the aims of the agreement.

     17. At hearing in the Upper Tribunal the above points are repeated.

Consideration.

     18. When Mr Permall came to the United Kingdom at the age of 16 it  was
         as a member of his  father's  family.  His  father  was  exercising
         Treaty rights as a French worker in the United Kingdom.  From  2003
         Mr Permall was directly benefiting from Treaty rights when he began
         to work. On 28 February 2002 he became  a  citizen  of  the  United
         Kingdom. From that point on he had the  full  benefits  of  British
         citizenship. The issue then is the effect this has  on  his  status
         and as a consequence that of his family members.

     19. Factually, the case of McCarthy -v- SSHD C-434/09 was  considerably
         different. Ms McCarthy was a national of the United Kingdom who had
         always lived here. She was in receipt of State benefits. There  was
         no movement from one European State to another. On  her  behalf  it
         was argued there was an exercise of Treaty rights because  she  was
         also a dual Irish national.

     20. The issue referred was whether she was  a  beneficiary  within  the
         meaning  of  article  3  of   Directive   2004/38.   This   defines
         beneficiaries as all Union citizens who moved to  or  reside  in  a
         Member State other than that  of  which  they  are  nationals.  The
         Treaty was being argued to confer upon her Jamaican husband a right
         of residence which would not otherwise arise under the  immigration
         rules. The question formulated was whether article  3  (1)  of  the
         Directive applied to a Union citizen who had never exercised  their
         right to free movement, who had always resided in a Member State of
         which they are a national and who also was a  national  of  another
         Member State. The court concluded at paragraph 31:

             "A literal, teleological and contextual interpretation of that
             provision leads to a negative reply to that question."

     21. At paragraph 34 the Court in McCarthy said :

             "... Directive 2004/38, concerning  the  conditions  governing
             the exercise of the right to move and reside freely within the
             territory of the member states,  cannot  apply  to  the  Union
             citizen who enjoys an unconditional right of residence due  to
             the fact that he resides in the Member State in which he is  a
             national."

     22. Whilst this provided an answer to Mrs McCarthy's situation  it  has
         to be read as subject to the subsequent comment that this was not a
         purely internal situation and consideration had to be given  as  to
         whether the domestic measures had the effect of depriving a citizen
         of the genuine enjoyment of their free movement.

     23. The representatives for the present appellant wrote to the European
         Commission and a Ms Boulanger replied on 31 July 2014.  Her  status
         within the Commission is not apparent but she is  responding  to  a
         letter addressed to a Mr Meduna who was involved in  preparing  the
         Commission's Opinion in the McCarthy case.  She  indicated  that  a
         dual UK/ EU national cannot be automatically  excluded  where  they
         would be a beneficiary  of  the  Directive.  She  referred  to  the
         qualified nature of the question answered by the Court  of  Justice
         and what she described as the blanket disqualification of  dual  UK
         nationals in the amendment to the 2006 regulations.  She  indicated
         the   Commission   was   contemplating   initiating    infringement
         proceedings against the United Kingdom.

     24. It is apparent that the McCarthy decision was dealing with a narrow
         factual situation.  Mrs  McCarthy  had  never  exercised  her  free
         movement rights and was found not  to  be  a  beneficiary  for  the
         purposes of article 3(1). The fact she was a  national  of  another
         Member State did not alter the position. At  paragraph  46  it  was
         stated the fact she had not made use of the  right  to  freedom  of
         movement did not  mean  the  situation  was  purely  internal.  The
         judgement repeatedly refers to the notion  of  citizenship  of  the
         Union  and  that  article  20  TFEU  precludes  national   measures
         depriving Union citizens of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance
         of the rights. In Mrs McCarthy's  case  the  refusal  of  residence
         documentation did not deprive her of the genuine enjoyment of those
         rights. Paragraphs 51 to 55 discusses national measures which  have
         the effect of depriving Union citizens of the genuine enjoyment  of
         the substance of their rights. Ms Boulanger in her letter sets  out
         five  situations  where  issues  arise   because   of   a   blanket
         disqualification of dual UK nationals.

     25. The decision of Kahveci and Inan (C-7/10 and  C-9-10)  was  dealing
         with  the  interplay  of  movement  rights   and   the   EEC-Turkey
         Association agreement. In that case, the first appellant  had  been
         issued with a residence permit by the Dutch authorities subject  to
         the restriction that he reside with his spouse. His spouse was also
         a Turkish national who had acquired the Netherlands nationality and
         was part of the Dutch labour force. He was subsequently  imprisoned
         and the Dutch authorities decided to withdraw his residence permit.
         It was argued that this  contravened  the  EEC  Turkey  Association
         agreement. The Dutch court found that he could not be regarded as a
         family member of a Turkish worker because  although  his  wife  had
         retained Turkish nationality she also held Dutch  nationality.  The
         second  case  concerned  a  Turkish  national  who  came   to   the
         Netherlands to join his father, a Turkish national  as  well  as  a
         national of the Netherlands. The appellant had been issued  with  a
         residence permit, which again was withdrawn upon his  imprisonment.
         The question referred was whether the family member  of  a  Turkish
         worker lost the benefit of the  EEC  Turkey  Association  agreement
         when the family member had acquired the  nationality  of  the  host
         Member State. The EA Turkey  Association  agreement  was  aimed  at
         improving the treatment of Turkish workers  and  members  of  their
         families with a view to achieving gradually  freedom  of  movement.
         The court concluded that that aim would be impeded  if  acquisition
         of the nationality of the host member state required a  worker  who
         retained Turkish nationality to forego the benefit promoting family
         reunification. Whilst the decision is concerned with dual  national
         rights the context is completely different  from  the  present.  It
         does help illustrate that a person who has the nationality  of  the
         host State is not necessarily thereby deprived of  movement  rights
         from inter county agreements.

     26. Mr. E. Walker provided a copy of the decision in  EN  and  AN  (EEA
         regulation 12: British citizens)  Kenya  [2008]  UKAIT  00028.  The
         appellants where Kenyans who had applied for family permits to join
         their mother and stepfather, a dual British and Irish national. The
         Tribunal was considering whether a  person  could  be  regarded  as
         residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the   EEA
         regulations for the purposes of regulation 12  which  concerns  the
         issue by an entry  clearance  officer  of  an  EEA  family  permit.
         Significantly, the tribunal stated that regulation 12 was a  matter
         of pure United Kingdom law outside the requirements of European law
         because it has the  effect  of  ensuring  that  a  British  citizen
         residing in United Kingdom is treated as such rather than as  being
         a national of a Member State.  It is akin to  entry  clearance.  At
         paragraph 11 the Tribunal pointed out  that  article  3(1)  of  the
         Directive provides that it applies to all union citizens  who  move
         to or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are  a
         national (the Tribunal's emphasis). The  Tribunal  noted  that  the
         regulations contain provisions about the admission and residence of
         EEA nationals and that a British citizen has  no  restriction.  The
         Tribunal concluded a person who is a British citizen who  may  also
         be an EEA  national  cannot  properly  be  described  as  a  person
         residing under the regulations. However, this decision  has  to  be
         read in the context of regulation 12 rather than the  wider  issues
         raised in McCarthy and dual nationality.

Conclusions

     27. I see nothing from the cited cases which would cause  me  to  doubt
         the validity of the amendment to the definition of an  EU  national
         in the 2006 regulations as applied to the facts  here.  Unlike  Mrs
         McCartney, Mr Permall had made use  of  the  right  of  freedom  of
         movement. He also has an unconditional  right  of  residence  as  a
         British citizen.  He does not come within the definition of an  EEA
         national  following  the  16th  July  2012  changes  to  the   2006
         regulations. It may be that certain factual  situations  will  call
         into question the  compatibility  of  the  exclusion  of  joint  UK
         citizen's .In the present case however it has not been demonstrated
         that it prevents Mr Permell from enjoying his  rights  of  movement
         within the  community.  His  former  wife  now  faces  her  present
         difficulties because of those changes. However, I do  not  find  it
         established on the facts that the Citizenship  Directive  has  been
         thwarted.

     28. Following on from this I considered if the appellant  was  assisted
         by the transitional provisions  contained  at  schedule  3  of  the
         Immigration (European  Economic  Area)(Amendment)Regulations  2012.
         Although the Treaty has direct  application  these  provisions  are
         intended to protect individuals who had acted in  reliance  on  the
         earlier Regulations. They provide that notwithstanding  the  change
         to the definition of EEA national, the Regulations  will  be  still
         satisfied were the family  member  on  the  6th  July  2012  had  a
         permanent  right  of  residence.  This  does  not  apply   in   the
         appellant's situation. The second category  is  the  person  had  a
         right to reside under the regulations as at the 6th July  2012  and
         held relevant documentation or had made an application. Again, this
         does not apply.  In the appellant's case  she  had  relied  on  the
         domestic immigration  rules  not  the  Regulations.  My  conclusion
         therefore is that the appellant is not assisted by the transitional
         provisions.

     29. Having considered the arguments advanced I find no error of law  in
         the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Barker. The decision  has
         been  carefully  prepared  and  clearly  sets  out  the   arguments
         advanced. Adequate findings are made and the arguments  considered.
         At paragraph 27 the judge concluded that the appellant had not been
         deprived of her rights under European law  by  the  change  in  the
         definition of EEA national which I would concur with.

Decision.

    The decision of the  First-tier  tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal does not contain a material error of law and shall stand



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

