

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: IA/05916/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated   |
|On September 4, 2014                 |On October 6, 2014          |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                             MRS EFETURI ANIANU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chimpango (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born  July  27,  1978  is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.  The
    appellant was granted leave to enter as a Tier 1 (Post  Study)  partner
    on August 3, 2010 for the period July 19, 2010 and September  9,  2011.
    On January 26, 2011 her leave was extended until January 26,  2013.  On
    January 16, 2013 she applied for leave  to  remain  as  a  PBS  Tier  1
    dependant partner but her application was refused with no right appeal.
    On January 24, 2013 she submitted an application for leave to remain as
    a PBS Tier  1  dependant  partner.  The  respondent  refused  this  and
    following a hearing on the papers on June 7, 2013 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Turnock allowed her appeal to the extent the decision was
    not in accordance with the law because it had been decided on the wrong
    Immigration Rules and the section 47 removal fell foul of the  decision
    of  Adamally  and  Jaferi  (section  47  removal  decisions:   Tribunal
    Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414. The respondent re-considered the  matter
    afresh on January 7, 2014 and refused the appeal and took a decision to
    remove her from the United Kingdom by way of directions  under  section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on January 28, 2014
    and on April 29, 2014, 2013 Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal  Grimmett
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") dealt with her  appeal  on  the
    papers and in determination promulgated on May 14, 2014 she refused her
    claim under paragraph 320(7A) and 322(2) HC 395 and human rights.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on May 22, 2014 and on June  20,
    2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lever  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 4. The respondent filed a Rule 24 statement on July 11, 2014 in  which  it
    was argued there was no material error.

 5. The matter came before me on the above  date.  The  appellant  and  her
    husband were in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Chimpmango submitted a skeleton argument in which he argued that the
    appellant had not acted dishonestly and whilst  the  evidence  was  not
    before the FtTJ he submitted I should have regard to the situation  she
    faced because the situation that occurred in 2008 was unrelated to  the
    current application and was of a different nature.  The  appellant  was
    not seeking to benefit from the previous "deception" and  he  submitted
    the respondent had been harsh to place reliance on it. With  regard  to
    article 8 he submitted the FtTJ had not properly  considered  the  fact
    that both the appellant's husband and her two children were  here.  The
    fact she was here as a dependant was a  matter  the  FtTJ  should  have
    given more weight to. The FtTJ erred by failing to consider Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 7. Mr Harrison submitted that the appellant had not  helped  her  case  by
    applying for her case to be dealt with on the papers and by failing  to
    supply any evidence of  private  life.  The  FtTJ  had  identified  the
    inadequacies in paragraph [10] and referred to the  previous  file  for
    evidence something that he was not obliged to do. There was no evidence
    of the husband's status or being in the United Kingdom  when  the  FtTJ
    considered the case. Similarly there was no evidence of the appellant's
    children being present in the United Kingdom. The FtTJ  considered  the
    application under the Immigration Rules  and  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence to the contrary he was entitled to dismiss  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 322(1A) and 320(7A) HC 395. The issues raised in the skeleton
    argument were not matters before the FtTJ and  should  not  be  factors
    considered now. With regard to the article 8 assessment the FtTJ had no
    evidence of family or private life but he was not satisfied  they  were
    present and therefore found no private or family life. This finding was
    open to him.

 8. At  the  conclusion  of  submissions  I  refused  the  application  and
    indicated I would give written reasons.

    ASSESSMENT OF ERROR OF LAW


 9. This is an application to  remain  as  a  family  dependant.  The  FtTJ
    refused her appeal and gave reasons. The adequacy of those reasons  has
    been challenged and I was invited to find an error in law.


10. The problem for this appellant is that on September 1, 2008 she applied
    for leave to enter as a Tier (Post Study Work) Migrant and in doing  so
    she submitted a post graduate diploma in business management  from  the
    Cambridge College of Learning. Following the Tribunal decision in NA  &
    others [2009] UKAIT 00031 the respondent was satisfied the diploma  was
    not genuine because the college never ran such a course.  Unfortunately
    for the appellant this  only  came  to  light  when  her  January  2013
    application was submitted  and  was  the  reason  her  application  was
    refused in 2013 albeit that decision was subsequently found by a  judge
    to be not in accordance with the law.

11. The result for this appellant was when  her  case  was  considered  the
    refusal under the Rules was a mandatory refusal  unless  the  appellant
    provided evidence that the course she had  been  on  was  genuine.  The
    respondent and  FtTJ  were  entitled,  in  the  absence  of  any  other
    evidence, to rely on the authority of NA.  The  FtTJ  was  entitled  to
    dismiss the appeal under paragraph 322(1A) HC 395.  There  was  nothing
    before the FtTJ that would have persuaded  him  to  reach  a  different
    conclusion and no error is displayed by this finding.

12. Whilst I note  the  appellant's  explanation  in  her  representative's
    submissions the reality is this is the first  time  she  has  mentioned
    this and no evidence was submitted to support her claim in  any  event.
    Clearly this is something she needs to address.

13. I have also considered whether there  has  been  an  error  in  law  in
    relation to the FtTJ's assessment of the article 8 claim.  No  evidence
    was provided other than the application form and grounds of appeal.  No
    evidence was submitted to support anything contained in the grounds  of
    appeal and the FtTJ was asked to deal with the case on the papers.  The
    FtTJ found in paragraph [11]  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  her
    husband was in the United Kingdom at all or with  leave  and  there  as
    also no evidence that she had any children living with her or  anywhere
    else in the United Kingdom. The FtTJ gave reasons for finding no family
    life. Based on those findings there was no need  for  him  to  consider
    Section 55. No error of law is revealed.

14. The FtTJ also rejected a claim for private life noting her private life
    had only been built up because she entered the United Kingdom illegally
    in 2008 using false documents. His finding that there  was  no  private
    life is sustainable.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error.  I
    uphold the original determination.


16. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and I do not  vary  that
    decision.

Signed:                                 Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as the appeal was dismissed.


Signed:                                 Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
