


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05141/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 2 August 2013                            |On : 5 August 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                           sesan adeleye adekunle
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, instructed by Chancery CS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 22 March  1984.  Following  a
grant of permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
to issue him with a Residence Card under the Immigration (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006, Lord Burns and I sitting as a  panel  found,  at  an
error of law hearing on 18 June 2013, that the Tribunal had made  errors  of
law in their decision. We directed that the decision be set  aside  and  re-
made by the Upper Tribunal.

The appellant applied,  on  15  February  2012,  for  a  Residence  Card  as
confirmation of a right  of  residence  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
national.  He  submitted,  with  his  application,  a  marriage  certificate
stating that he was married to his EEA national in  Nigeria  on  3  February
2012 under customary law. His wife was a French citizen.

The appellant's application was refused on 8 June 2012 on the  grounds  that
he had failed to produce sufficient evidence that he was related as  claimed
to an EEA national. The  respondent  did  not  consider  that  the  marriage
conformed to the requirements set out in the Nigerian Marriage Act.  It  was
considered further that, since the appellant had  only  been  divorced  from
his previous, British, wife in December 2011, it was unlikely that he  would
marry again within two months, and the respondent  noted  that  very  little
evidence had been provided to  show  that  he  and  his  EEA  national  wife
resided together in the United Kingdom.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and,  at  his  request,  his
appeal was determined on the papers, without  an  oral  hearing.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Page gave some  consideration  to  the  status  of  customary
marriages but found that, as they were not recognised by the Nigerian  civil
authorities, they were not considered  to  be  valid  for  the  purposes  of
acquiring residence as a spouse under the EEA regulations. Judge  Page  made
some observations about the documentary evidence produced by the  appellant,
noting references in the documents to the "Customary Marriage Act" which  he
was not satisfied existed.  He  concluded  that  the  appellant's  purported
customary marriage did not meet the requirements under Nigerian law to  have
the same status as a marriage properly registered under Nigerian law and  he
was not satisfied that the appellant had acquired the status  of  spouse  of
an EEA national. Having made that finding, he did not consider it  necessary
to go on to consider the other  issues  raised  by  the  respondent  and  he
dismissed the appeal in a determination promulgated on 19 April 2013.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  behalf  of  the
appellant on the grounds that the judge had erred by dismissing  the  appeal
on the basis that a marriage according to  local  custom  was  not  a  valid
marriage, since  paragraph  35  of  the  Nigerian  Marriage  Act  recognised
customary marriages as being valid. Permission to appeal was granted  on  16
May 2013.

At the  error  of  law  hearing  Lord  Burns  and  I  found  the  Tribunal's
determination to be materially flawed, for the following reasons:

    "In view of Mr  Deller's  indication,  we  concluded  that  there  were
    material errors of law in the judge's decision such that it ought to be
    set  aside  and  re-made.  The  judge  had  made  adverse  findings  at
    paragraphs 13 and 14 in relation to references in the documents to  the
    Customary Marriage Act, an issue which had not been  previously  raised
    by the respondent in the refusal decision as being of concern and which
    the appellant  had  therefore  not  been  put  on  notice  to  address.
    Furthermore, there were issues  as  to  the  validity  of  a  customary
    marriage which arose from sections of the Marriage Act  and  which  had
    not been properly addressed by the judge, albeit that he  was  in  some
    difficulty himself without proper guidance. As such, we considered that
    the Tribunal's decision had to be set  aside,  with  a  view  to  fresh
    findings being made with respect to all issues raised  in  the  refusal
    decision and not limited  to  the  question  of  the  validity  of  the
    marriage. We considered it appropriate for the matter to remain in  the
    Upper Tribunal and indeed no submissions were made to the contrary."

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me for a  resumed  hearing  on  2  August  2013.  The
appellant attended with Fatou Mbengue, his claimed wife, whom I shall  refer
to as "the sponsor". Mr Malik had advised the Tribunal at the error  of  law
hearing that she would be attending and  giving  oral  evidence.  Ms  Martin
applied for an adjournment of  the  proceedings  on  the  grounds  that  the
impending reported decision from the Deputy President of the Upper  Tribunal
referred to at the error of law hearing was still awaited and  was  relevant
to the matter of the validity of the customary marriage. Mr  Malik  did  not
object to an adjournment on that basis but asked that the  sponsor  be  able
to give her evidence today. With the agreement  of  the  parties  I  decided
that the most appropriate course was to hear all of the  oral  evidence  and
submissions on the genuineness of the  relationship  and  the  marriage  and
resume for a further hearing once the reported  decision  was  available  in
order to hear relevant submissions if that was necessary.

The appellant and the sponsor then gave  oral  evidence  in  turn  and  were
cross-examined  at  some  length  by  Ms  Martin,   in   regard   to   their
relationship, the marriage proceedings, their own family and life and  their
knowledge of the other's family and life. I also sought  some  clarification
from  the  parties  myself.  The  evidence  is  set  out  in  my  record  of
proceedings and extends to some 30 pages of notes. As such I do not  propose
to set it out or even summarise it and will refer to relevant  parts  in  my
findings.

Ms Martin, in her submissions, referred to the inconsistent  evidence  given
by the appellant and the sponsor in regard to  the  various  family  members
present at  the  marriage  ceremony,  the  witnesses  at  the  ceremony  and
registration, the reasons for the absence of the sponsor's mother and  other
matters. She referred to a  decision  of  the  Vice-President  in  a  recent
unreported case in which the essential ingredients of a  customary  marriage
were set out  and  submitted  that  the  ingredients  were  lacking  in  the
appellant's case as there was no evidence of written consent being given  to
the marriage either by the  appellant  or  the  sponsor's  mother  who  were
absent. The appellant had also given inconsistent evidence about the  checks
carried out before the marriage. The appellant and sponsor appeared to  know
little or nothing about each other's families and their  lives  and  it  was
clear that they were not in a relationship and were not married.  Ms  Martin
submitted that in the alternative, if they were found to be married  and  in
a  relationship,  it  was,  according  to  an  article  she  produced  about
customary marriage in Nigeria, not possible for them  to  be  married  since
they were both required to be natives of  Nigeria  or  persons  of  Nigerian
descent, which was not the case with  the  sponsor  who  was  of  Senegalese
descent and of French nationality.

Mr Malik  acknowledged  that  there  were  obvious  inconsistencies  in  the
evidence but submitted that the relationship was fairly recent. He asked  me
to make my own findings on the relationship. With  regard  to  the  ceremony
itself, the inconsistencies in the evidence about those present  could  have
been due to the fact that the appellant's family lived in a  big  house  and
that there were so many people present. He asked me to find that  there  had
been a marriage but could make no further submissions on  the  point,  other
than to submit that customary marriages were valid within Nigerian law.

Both parties were in agreement that if I were to find that the  relationship
and marriage was not genuine and that there had been no  marriage  ceremony,
there would be no need for  a  further  hearing  and  the  appeal  could  be
finally determined. On the other hand if I found the marriage to be  genuine
there would be a further hearing at which submissions could be made  on  the
validity of the customary marriage, in the  light  of  the  Vice-President's
forthcoming reported decision.

Consideration and findings

I have no doubt that there never was  any  customary  marriage  ceremony  in
Nigeria and that there is not a genuine relationship  and  marriage  between
the appellant and the sponsor.  The  evidence  of  both  was  so  completely
riddled with inconsistencies that  it  was  plain  that  neither  was  being
truthful.

With regard to  their  "relationship",  there  was  a  significant  lack  of
knowledge on the part of the appellant and sponsor about each other's  lives
and families.  Neither was able to give the names of  the  other's  siblings
and the sponsor did not even know  how  many  siblings  the  appellant  had,
despite having claimed to have spent some time in  the  family  compound  in
Nigeria where they all lived, after the wedding. Whilst the  appellant  gave
evidence that the sponsor had a sixteen year  old  sister  living  with  her
boyfriend in London whom she saw once a week,  the  sponsor's  evidence  was
that both her sisters lived in France with their  mother.  The  sponsor  was
unable to  give  the  names  of  the  appellant's  parents,  despite  having
apparently attended the marriage ceremony in  Nigeria  with  them,  and  was
unable to say who Michael Adekunle was, whilst the  letter  of  confirmation
of  the  customary  marriage  names  him  as  the  appellant's  father.  The
appellant said that the sponsor's mother had never been to visit her in  the
United Kingdom since they had been together, whilst the  sponsor  said  that
her mother had visited last year and had met the  appellant.  The  appellant
had no idea of the sponsor's work or studies before she came to  the  United
Kingdom whilst the sponsor's evidence was that she had studied a  degree  in
economics at university in France. When asked when the sponsor came to  live
in the United Kingdom, the appellant said that she came in 2009, whilst  the
sponsor said that it was in mid-2011  and,  when  told  of  the  appellant's
evidence, said that she spent a  few  weeks  here  in  2009.  That  in  turn
contradicted the account of both that they had first met and started  living
together in March 2011.

The appellant has produced a number of utility  bills  and  bank  statements
addressed to himself and to the sponsor individually at their  previous  and
current address. However, that in itself is not evidence of cohabitation  as
partners and shows little more than that they  have  the  same  address  for
correspondence or, at its highest, that they share  accommodation.  Included
in the documents is a voter registration confirmation for the 2013  register
of electors which includes the names of the appellant and sponsor  at  their
claimed address, but with  two  additional  names.  When  clarification  was
sought, the appellant explained that  the  property  consisted  of  separate
studio flats and that  the  other  two  people  lived  in  different  flats.
However it is clear that  the  registration  is  for  the  one  address  and
suggests shared accommodation  rather  than  a  family  home.  None  of  the
documents are addressed to the appellant and sponsor  together  and  neither
is there evidence of  joint  bank  accounts.  In  view  of  the  significant
inconsistencies in the oral evidence of  the  appellant  and  sponsor  about
their lives I place no weight upon the documentary evidence as  evidence  of
cohabitation between partners/ husband and wife.

The evidence of the marriage ceremony in Nigeria  was  equally  inconsistent
and lacking in  credibility.   The  appellant  and  sponsor  gave  different
accounts of who was present at the ceremony,  with  the  appellant  claiming
that both his parents and  all  his  six  siblings  and  their  spouses  and
children were present, whilst the sponsor's evidence was that  his  siblings
did not attend. The appellant  initially  said  that  the  sponsor's  mother
attended the ceremony, but later said that she did not because she was  ill,
whilst the sponsor said that her mother could not attend because it was  too
short notice for her. The appellant said that the sponsor's sisters did  not
attend and that she had only her father and his work colleagues  there  from
her side, whilst she said that her youngest sister attended  with  an  aunt.
The appellant said that after the ceremony the sponsor went  to  his  family
home and remained there until returning to the United  Kingdom,  whilst  her
evidence was that she went to her father's  house,  although  spending  some
time  in  her  in-law's  home.  The  appellant  and  sponsor  gave  entirely
different accounts of the contents of the  dowry  and  their  evidence  also
differed as to whether or  not  written  consent  had  been  given  for  the
marriage by the appellant and the sponsor's mother.  The  sponsor's  account
of the witnesses was different to that of the appellant and to  that  stated
in the documentary evidence. The  appellant's  evidence  varied  as  to  who
registered the marriage in the court. He initially stated that  it  was  his
brother but then changed his account to his  father  when  reminded  of  the
contents of the letter from the Grade "A"  customary  court.  The  appellant
named the witnesses at the marriage as his brother and the sponsor's  father
until reminded of the information in  the  marriage  certificate,  at  which
point he stated that he was referring to the statutory declarations.

Aside from the inconsistent evidence  of  the  appellant  and  sponsor,  the
documents  relating  to  the  claimed  marriage  contain  discrepancies   in
themselves. There is no evidence to undermine the observations of the First-
tier Tribunal as  to  the  existence  of  a  "Customary  Marriage  Act",  as
referred to in the letter from the customary court,  despite  the  appellant
having since been put on notice of the matter.  The  statutory  declarations
both give the wrong date of birth for the sponsor, albeit only by  one  day.
The statutory declaration from the appellant's brother refers to  him  being
the head of the family in the absence of his father and the wording  of  the
document suggests that he represented the appellant at the wedding, yet  the
appellant's evidence was that his  father  was  in  attendance  himself  and
indeed that he attended to  register  the  marriage.  It  is  also  of  some
significance that there are no photographs of the wedding.  The  explanation
initially offered by the appellant was that  the  photographs  were  all  in
Nigeria, but when asked why he did not have any here he  said  that  he  had
one or two but had not been asked by his solicitor to produce them.

In view of the wholly inconsistent nature of the  evidence,  both  oral  and
documentary, I have no hesitation in concluding that  there  never  was  any
customary marriage ceremony in Nigeria or anywhere else. The  appellant  and
the sponsor are clearly not in a relationship and the documents produced  by
the appellant in relation to the  claimed  customary  marriage  have  simply
been prepared for his application  and  are  not  reliable  in  any  way  as
evidence of the events they claim to represent. Even  if  it  was  the  case
that the sponsor, as the stamps in her passport suggest, was in  Nigeria  at
the time of the claimed marriage, I do not accept that she  entered  into  a
customary marriage with the  appellant.  There  is  and  never  has  been  a
marriage between the appellant and the  sponsor  and  the  question  of  the
validity of customary marriages under Nigerian law is thus not  relevant  to
the determination of the appellant's appeal. The appellant  is  not  married
to the sponsor and is accordingly not a family member  of  an  EEA  national
for the purposes of regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations. Neither is  he  the
partner of an EEA national, for the purposes of regulation 8(5). He  is  not
able to meet the requirements of the EEA regulations and is not entitled  to
a residence card.

Article 8 has not been pursued as a separate ground of appeal, but  for  the
sake of completeness I do not consider that  the  appellant's  removal  from
the United Kingdom would breach his human  rights.  For  the  reasons  given
above, it is clear that he does not have a family  life  with  the  sponsor.
There is no suggestion of family life existing on any  other  basis.  Whilst
he may have established a private life in the United Kingdom and whilst  his
removal may well interfere with that  private  life,  such  interference  is
entirely proportionate to the legitimate aim  of  maintaining  an  effective
immigration control. There does not appear to be any evidence before  me  of
the appellant's length of stay in the United Kingdom, but  I  note  that  he
was married in October 2008 to  a  British  national  whom  he  subsequently
divorced. There is no suggestion that there were children of that  marriage.
In any event the evidence before me does not demonstrate that the  appellant
has developed ties in the United Kingdom such  that  his  removal  could  be
considered to be disproportionate. He has no basis of  stay  in  the  United
Kingdom. He has a large family who are  all  in  Nigeria  and  there  is  no
reason why he could not re-establish himself there. The decision is  not  in
breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside.
I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.



Signed                                  Date 5th August 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
