
                                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
                                             IA/05410/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                                Decision
                                             & Reasons promulgated
On 11 November 2014            On 17 June 2015

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                             Pratigyan Kepchhaki
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:      Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:   Ms R Stickler of Counsel instructed by NC  Brothers  &
                       Co, Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Murray promulgated on 31 July  2014  allowing  Ms  Kepchhaki's  appeal
      against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 10  January  2014
      to refuse to vary lave to remain and to remove her from the UK.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Ms
      Kepchhaki is the respondent, for the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Ms Kepchhaki as the Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.



Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of  Nepal  born  on  29  April  1989.  The
      Appellant immigration history is a matter of record  on  file:  it  is
      summarised in the cover sheet to the Respondent's  bundle  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, and referenced in the decision of the  First-tier
      Tribunal herein; something of the history may also be  discerned  from
      the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      earlier   appeal   proceedings   concerning   the    Appellant    (ref
      IA/15819/2011). This history is known to the parties, and  accordingly
      I do not reproduce it in its entirety here: I make reference to it  as
      is incidental for the purposes of this document.  Most  recently,  and
      subsequent to her successful appeal in  IA/15819/2011,  the  Appellant
      was granted a period of discretionary leave from 13 June  2012  to  28
      December 2012. On  20  December  2012  she  made  an  application  for
      variation of leave to remain to complete her studies in  the  UK.  Her
      application was refused for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal'
      letter ('RFRL') dated 10 January 2014; on the same date, a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision was signed on behalf of the Respondent  which  as
      well as the decision to refuse to vary leave, communicated a  decision
      to remove the Appellant pursuant to section  47  of  the  Immigration,
      Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   4. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


   5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR for reasons set out in his determination.


   6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal. The Grounds in support  of
      the application focus on the soi disant 'intermediary step' identified
      in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC), and argue that there were  "no  case
      specific  findings  as  to  arguably  good  grounds   and   compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules",  and  that
      the Judge "has given inadequate findings as to arguably  good  grounds
      and compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
      Rules, to justify a freestanding Article 8 assessment".


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge White on
      6  October  2014.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal  Judge   White
      recognised that "the issue of whether there  must  be  "good  arguable
      grounds" before Article 8 can be considered has now been  disposed  of
      in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128/129". However, seemingly of
      his own motion, Judge White considered that it was arguable  that  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal was inconsistent with the guidance
      in Patel [2013] UKSC 72 - although, as  recognised  in  the  grant  of
      permission to appeal, Judge Murray had directed himself  to  Patel  at
      paragraph 22 of his decision.


   8. In any event, as Mr Bramble identified, the substance of  the  Grounds
      necessarily also went to  the  substantive  question  of  whether  the
      Appellant's removal would be in breach of Article 8.


Consideration

   9. The Appellant succeeded in her earlier appeal  (IA/15819/2011)  before
      the Upper Tribunal on Article 8 grounds. Just as now, she had  applied
      for leave to remain as a student. In allowing the appeal under Article
      8 the Tribunal identified, amongst other things,  as  a  relevant  and
      persuasive  factor  that  the  Appellant  had  experienced  "unhelpful
      officialdom" (paragraph 26, see also  paragraph  17-18  and  paragraph
      23). The Tribunal on that occasion identified that the period of leave
      to be granted in consequence of the successful appeal under Article  8
      was "a matter for the respondent" but  went  on  to  state  "we  would
      envisage a period that would enable  the  appellant  to  complete  the
      proposed course". The decision of the Upper Tribunal  was  promulgated
      on  7  October  2011;   the   Appellant   was   subsequently   granted
      discretionary leave to remain in the  UK  from  13  June  2012  to  28
      December 2012.


  10. It  is  clear  that  Judge  Murray  had  this  history  in  mind  when
      determining the instant appeal: see paragraphs 19-21  (although  there
      appears to be a slip at paragraph 19 in stating the  date  upon  which
      leave was granted as being 28 December 2012, rather than  leave  being
      granted until 28 December 2012).


  11. It is also clear that Judge Murray had well in mind the effect of  the
      decision in Patel. He cites it at paragraph 22,  and  states  the  key
      factor upon which the Respondent - opportunistically in light of Judge
      White's grant of permission to appeal - now seeks to  place  reliance:
      "The opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in the
      this country, however  desirable  in  general  terms,  is  not  itself
      protected right under article 8". Further, Judge  Murray  goes  on  to
      state at  the  beginning  of  paragraph  24  "I  have  considered  the
      Appellant's arguments in the context of this case law".  I  detect  no
      misdirection in this, or indeed in the subsequent paragraphs where the
      Judge considered the application of principle  to  the  facts  of  the
      particular case.


  12. In addition to identifying the favourable factors of  the  Appellant's
      case historically by reference to the earlier decision  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal, and finding  irrespective  of  the  'opportunity  to  pursue
      studies' point that the Appellant had established a  private  life  in
      the UK, the Judge went on, at paragraph 24, to  identify  features  of
      the case post-dating the earlier appeal proceedings that were relevant
      to the current assessment of Article 8. In particular:

(i) The Judge identified that  notwithstanding  the  basis  upon  which  the
      Appellant had succeeded before the Upper Tribunal she was only granted
      6 months discretionary leave, and not leave as, all comparable to, the
      leave that would have been  granted  to  a  Tier  4  student  after  a
      successful appeal.

(ii) The Judge also identified that it had taken the Respondent  over  9  to
      grant leave.

(iii) The Judge accepted that the reason the Appellant had  been  unable  to
      obtain a CAS was because she  had  been  granted  discretionary  leave
      rather than Tier 4 leave.

(iv) In consequence, and critically, the Judge concluded "she was  therefore
      unable to continue her studies in the manner contemplated by the Upper
      Tribunal in short, this is a finding that the  leave  granted  by  the
      Respondent did not give effect to  the  basis  upon  which  the  Upper
      Tribunal allowed the Appellant's appeal.

(v) The Judge  recognised  that  it  was  the  circumstances  that  led  the
      Appellant to apply again in December 2012 for further leave.

(vi) The Judge noted that it had taken the Appellant 13 months to  determine
      the application.


  13. See similarly paragraph 25.


  14. The Judge's evaluation that in all such circumstances the Respondent's
      reliance upon the public interest  in  the  maintaining  of  effective
      immigration control  in  order  to  justify  a  removal  decision  was
      "seriously undermined" (paragraph 25) was entirely open to him on  the
      facts. The Judge's conclusion that removal would  be  disproportionate
      expressly took into account matters not  covered  by  the  Immigration
      Rules that were particular to the  circumstances  of  the  Appellant's
      case.  In  my  judgement,  there  was  no  misdirection  in  law:  the
      Respondent's challenge is really one of  mere  disagreement  with  the
      outcome, and I reject it.


  15. In all such circumstances I find no error of law in the  approach  and
      findings of the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision

  16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of law, and
      accordingly the decision stands.


  17. The challenge of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


  18. Ms Kepchhaki's appeal remains allowed.


  19. No anonymity order is sought or made.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     12 June 2015
