
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05043/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 December 2013                        |On 20 December 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                        MR NICHOLAS IKPONMWOSA ONAIWU
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr P Uzoechina a legal
           representative from Obaseki Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who has been given permission to
      appeal the determination of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kaler  ("the
      FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against the respondent's  decision  of
      30 January 2013 to revoke his EEA residence card.


   2. On 5 April 2011 the appellant made an application for a residence card
      as the spouse of Anna Sajdak ("Ms Sajdak"), a Polish citizen  and  EEA
      national. The  application  was  granted  on  15  July  2011  and  the
      appellant  was  issued  with  a  residence  card.   Subsequently   the
      respondent discovered that on 26 January 2012 Ms Sajdak had been named
      as the spouse of an Algerian national on an  application  for  another
      residence card made on 26 January 2012. The marriage certificate which
      had been submitted stated that she was a single woman. The  respondent
      wrote to the appellant's representatives on 31 December 2012 to enable
      him to explain the position and show that he had retained the right of
      residence as the divorced husband of an EEA national.  The  respondent
      did not receive any response and  made  the  decision  to  revoke  the
      appellant's residence card.


   3. The appellant appealed and the judge heard  the  appeal  on  5  August
      2013. Both parties were represented, the appellant  by  Mr  Uzoechina,
      who appears before me.


   4. The appellant's case was that  he  had  married  Ms  Sajdak  by  proxy
      customary marriage in Nigeria on 12 May 2011 and  that  such  marriage
      was valid under Nigerian law. They had separated but,  until  February
      2012, he had been trying to effect reconciliation. He had no idea that
      she had entered into a marriage with anyone else. He was still married
      to her and still entitled to a residence card as her husband.  In  the
      alternative his Article 8 human rights were engaged. He was the victim
      of abuse because she had had an affair with and married another man.


   5. The FTTJ accepted almost all of the appellant's evidence and the basis
      of his claim. She found that the appellant and Ms Sajdak  had  entered
      into a valid marriage. They had not divorced so that the appellant and
      Ms Sajdak were still spouses. She  was  not  his  former  spouse.  The
      appellant's marriage to Ms Sajdak was not a marriage  of  convenience.
      However, having married on 17 May 2011, they had not been married  for
      three years. The appellant had  to  show  that  Ms  Sajdak  was  still
      exercising treaty rights at the time of the  decision  to  revoke  his
      residence permit on 30 January 2013. The FTTJ accepted that Ms  Sajdak
      was still present in the UK in January 2012 when she married  somebody
      else. Whilst the documents indicated  that  the  appellant  was  still
      living with Ms Sajdak in October 2012  the  appellant's  evidence  was
      that they had separated by then. The FTTJ  found  that  there  was  no
      evidence before her to indicate that Ms Sajdak was present in the  UK,
      that she was a worker  as  defined  in  the  European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") or that she  was  exercising
      treaty rights in some other way on 30 January 2013. As  the  appellant
      status in the UK depended on the  status  of  Ms  Sajdak  he  had  not
      established that he was still entitled to a residence card at the date
      of the respondent's decision. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal under  the
      2006 Regulations.


   6. The judge went on to consider the Article 8 human rights grounds.  She
      found that the appellant had not shown that he had a  family  life  in
      this country. On his own evidence he was estranged and separated  from
      Ms Sajdak. Whilst he had been in the UK since 2003 he had  spent  most
      of his adult life in Nigeria where he had  family.  There  was  little
      evidence about his private life in the UK. His removal  would  not  be
      disproportionate. The FTTJ dismissed the appeal  on  Article  8  human
      rights grounds.


   7. The appellant applied for and was granted permission  to  appeal.  The
      judge who granted permission considered that there was little merit in
      the grounds except possibly  those  relating  to  Articles  2  and  8.
      However permission was granted in relation to all grounds.


   8. Paragraph 1 of the grounds of appeal largely  consists  of  statements
      agreeing with the conclusions reached by the FTTJ. In  part  they  are
      misconceived. They state  that  the  appellant's  residence  card  was
      revoked in January 2012. That is not correct. It  was  revoked  on  30
      January 2013. The difference is crucial. The  FTTJ  accepted  that  Ms
      Sajdak was present  in  this  country  and  exercising  treaty  rights
      possibly up to January 2012 but not after that.


   9. Understandably on the material before her the respondent  decided  the
      application on the basis that if Ms Sajdak had married another man she
      was likely to have done so after a divorce from  the  appellant.  That
      was a reasonable conclusion particularly in the light of the  lack  of
      response to the letter of 31 December 2012  sent  to  the  appellant's
      then representatives. I can find no merit in  the  argument  that  the
      FTTJ should only have determine the appeal on the basis of  the  facts
      as the respondent thought them to be and the regulations  which  would
      have applied had this been the case. The appellant is complaining that
      the FTTJ reached a conclusion by accepting the evidence which  he  put
      forward. It was the duty of the FTTJ to  reach  a  conclusion  on  the
      basis of the facts she found and the appellant,  who  was  competently
      legally represented, cannot be heard to complain by alleging  that  he
      or they failed to consider the obvious legal consequences of the  case
      they were putting forward.


  10. I am not persuaded that the appellant  and  his  representatives  were
      taken by surprise but even if they were there has been  no  unfairness
      because further time for consideration and legal  argument  could  not
      lead to any different conclusion. The FTTJ correctly applied the law.


  11. I find that the FTTJ's consideration  of  the  Article  8  grounds  in
      paragraphs 22 and 23 was not superficial. It is  properly  structured,
      addresses the appropriate tests in the correct  order  and  reaches  a
      conclusion open to the FTTJ on the evidence. The  main  cause  of  the
      brevity is not any omission on the part of the FTTJ but the dearth  of
      relevant evidence submitted by the appellant.


  12. In his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the  appellant  alleges
      that the FTTJ failed to consider his claim  that  removal  to  Nigeria
      would breach his right to life under Article 2. I cannot find  and  Mr
      Uzoechina could not point me to anything  raised  in  connection  with
      Article 2 in the application to the respondent or the  appeal  to  the
      First-Tier Tribunal. With his application to the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      the appellant submitted grounds  of  appeal  and  further  grounds  of
      appeal. I can find no reference to Article 2 in either of them.  There
      is no reference to Article 2 in the skeleton argument submitted by  Mr
      Uzoechina to the FTTJ. All I can find is the following at the  end  of
      the FTTJ's record of proceedings; "appellant was a witness to  a  very
      serious crime. Sentenced to 8  1/2  years  for  drug  trafficking.  He
      received a threat from criminals' friends and relations. That  is  why
      he has the alarm at his house. P60A newspaper  report.  Police  warned
      him not to travel to Nigeria and oral evidence life in danger. Art 2."
      I find that the FTTJ did not err in law by failing to address  matters
      not put to the respondent, not in the grounds of appeal and not in the
      skeleton argument. Even if the FTTJ had erred in  law  by  failing  to
      address this no judge properly directing himself or herself could have
      reached  a  conclusion  that  to  the  appropriate  low  standard  the
      appellant had established that he faced a real risk of a breach of his
      human rights including Articles 2 and 3.


  13. The appellant and the respondent have now produced two  letters  which
      were not before the FTTJ. The first is a heavily redacted letter dated
      31 December 2012. The redactions are such that it is not clear to whom
      it was sent although there are some indications that it may have  been
      to those representing the Algerian man who, it is claimed, married  Ms
      Sajdak. The second letter, dated 30 January 2013, is also redacted but
      there are clearer indications that it was sent to the Algerian man. Mr
      Saunders conceded that these may  indicate  that  the  respondent  has
      accepted that the Algerian man was the family member of an EEA citizen
      exercising treaty rights in the UK. I find that these letters may mean
      that  the  respondent  has  accepted  matters  which  impinge  on  the
      appellant's application. However, it is by no means certain that  they
      do so or that they reveal the whole story. There is still a great deal
      which is unclear. What is clear is that these letters were not  before
      the FTTJ. I find that she cannot be said  to  have  erred  in  law  in
      relation to material which was not before her and  which  she  had  no
      reason to  believe  existed.  It  may  be  that  the  respondent  will
      reconsider the appellant's application. It may be that he will make  a
      fresh application. These are not matters which I  can  decide  on  the
      material before me.


  14. I have not been asked to make an anonymity direction and I can see  no
      good reason to do so.


  15. I find that the FTTJ did not err in law and I uphold her decision.












      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 18 December 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

