


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      IA/05048/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 21st November 2016                        |On: 5th December 2017        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                                     TK
                          (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr Waithe, Counsel instructed by Rashid &
Rashid
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born in 1977.   She appeals with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Maxwell)
    to dismiss her appeal, on human rights grounds, against a  decision  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.




    Anonymity Order

 2. There is no reason why the Appellant's identity  should  be  protected.
    Her case does however turn on the presence in the United Kingdom of her
    three young children. I have had regard to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders. I am concerned that identification
    of the Appellant could lead to identification of her minor children and
    I therefore consider it appropriate to make an order in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant claims to have last arrived in the United Kingdom in 2007
    with leave to enter as a visitor. That leave expired and she became  an
    overstayer.   She and her partner TA were  living  together  in  London
    when they had their first child (C1), who was born on the 21st February
    2008. Their second son (C2) was born on the 13th May  2012,  and  their
    third (C3) on the 6th November 2015. Both adults were  overstayers  and
    none of the children have ever had any valid leave.


 4. The family have made various unsuccessful attempts to regularise  their
    status, having made human-rights based submissions to the Respondent on
    several occasions, for instance  in  February  2012,  January,  August,
    September and December 2014.   The chronology is not entirely clear but
    it would appear  that  it  was  in  response  to  that  latter  set  of
    representations that the Respondent served upon the Appellant,  on  the
    20th January 2015, a 'section 10 notice' advising her of a decision  to
    remove her to Nigeria.  That was a  decision  which  attracted  an  in-
    country right of appeal, and the Appellant took advantage of that, duly
    lodging her appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. TA, C1 and C2 were all, by contrast, all served with an 'IS.151B'. That
    is an 'immigration decision' advising the recipient that he or  she  is
    an overstayer, and offering a reminder that a IS.151A had already  been
    served, in October 2013.  The notices stated that these were  decisions
    that attracted only an 'out of country' right of appeal. TA, C1 and  C2
    ignored this and tried to lodge their appeals from  within  the  United
    Kingdom.  In a decision dated 15th April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    North held, in the absence of evidence before him  that  the  decisions
    were made in response to a human rights claim, that there was indeed no
    in-country right of appeal.  There has been to  date  no  challenge  to
    that decision.

 6. So it was that when the Appellant's appeal came before  Judge  Maxwell,
    she was the only member of the family who had a file in front  of  him.
    Judge Maxwell noted the effect of Judge North's decision, and the  fact
    that a third child had now been born.  Much  of  the  determination  is
    taken up with recording evidence about the family as a  whole,  and  in
    particular the health concerns in respect of C1.  Judge Maxwell was not
    however not minded to make a decision about the Article 8 rights of the
    Appellant's family members. Whilst the Respondent had  taken  a  global
    view of the position of the  family  as  a  whole,  Judge  Maxwell  was
    concerned that for the Tribunal to do  so  would  have  the  effect  of
    granting TA and the  children  an  in-country  right  of  appeal  where
    parliament had legislated for no such right exist.  He  also  expressed
    concern that it would be inappropriate for  him  to  make  findings  in
    respect of the children's best interests - and presumably the connected
    question of whether or not it was 'reasonable' to expect them to  leave
    the United Kingdom - when the Respondent had not yet done so.

 7. The determination consequently  focussed  on  the  Appellant.  She  had
    conceded that she could not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM,  so
    the  Tribunal  proceeded  directly  to   consideration   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules. The Appellant had submitted that the health
    concerns of C1 would present her with 'very significant obstacles' upon
    return to Nigeria. Judge Maxwell did not accept this to  be  a  "proper
    consideration", since he had to assume that C1  and  the  rest  of  the
    family were already in Nigeria.   He found that  she  and  her  husband
    would be able to find work, and in any event would  find  support  from
    other family members already there.  They could  receive  support  from
    the  church  just  as  they  have  been  doing  here.   She  could  not
    demonstrate  that  she  met  the  requirements  of   the   rule.    The
    determination then embarks, for reasons that are not entirely clear, on
    a lengthy summary of the jurisprudence relating  to  foreign  criminals
    and Article 8, before returning to  the  matter  in  hand,  the  Razgar
    assessment[2]. The Tribunal found that the Article 8 family life of the
    Appellant was not engaged, since she would be reunited with her  family
    in Nigeria.  Nor did he consider that her private life  was  materially
    affected by the decision, since she would be able to make  friends  and
    attend church in Nigeria.  In case it was wrong  about  the  first  two
    Razgar questions, the Tribunal  goes  on  to  address  proportionality.
    Reminding itself that the focus of enquiry was the Appellant  alone  it
    declined to make findings about the best  interests  of  the  children.
    When it came  to  the  final  consideration  in  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act, the Tribunal confined itself to
    saying the following:


         "47. In this instance the qualifying child is himself  the  subject
         of removal directions which may only be appealed out of country. As
         he has no freestanding right to remain in the  United  Kingdom,  it
         follows that it is reasonable for him  to  leave  if  he,  and  his
         parents, intend to pursue an appeal against his removal"


 8. Having found the Appellant's removal to be  proportionate  and  lawful,
    the appeal is dismissed.




    Submissions Error of Law


 9. The Appellant was granted  permission  to  argue  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal materially erred in its approach to the other family  members.
    Notwithstanding the decision of Judge North it was  apparent  from  the
    material before the Tribunal that the position of the children was  the
    central factor in all the representations made to the Respondent  since
    2012. The focus of those submissions had been  that  the  children  had
    established substantial  private  lives  here,  and  that  C1  had  not
    insignificant health concerns.  He had been unwell since birth and  has
    received extensive treatment at St Barts and Great Ormond  St  Hospital
    for  Children.  His  conditions  are  Saethre-Chotzen   Syndrome   with
    multisuture synotosis, Opthalmoparesis, Elevated Serum Lactate, Coronal
    Synotosis and Mil Ataxia. He has been diagnosed with hyperactivity  and
    a history of speech delay, for which he is  receiving  support.   Those
    matters could not  be  sensibly  divorced  from  the  position  of  the
    Appellant, and the attempt to do so ran contrary  to  the  guidance  in
    Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39.


10. The Appellant further submitted that the Tribunal  was  bound,  by  the
    clear terms of two statutes, to properly consider the position  of  the
    children: see section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 and section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

11. At a hearing on the 12th September 2016 I heard submissions in  defence
    from the Secretary of State, who was that  day  represented  by  Mr  T.
    Wilding, Senior Presenting  Officer.     Mr  Wilding  agreed  that  the
    structure of the determination was not terribly helpful.  He  submitted
    however that properly analysed, the  determination  contained  all  the
    constituent parts of a sustainable decision. The Tribunal  was  correct
    to have rejected the case under paragraph 276ADE. The finding of  Judge
    North had not been challenged and there was only one appeal before  the
    Tribunal. In those circumstances the Judge could not be criticised  for
    focussing  on  the  Appellant  in  its   assessment   of   Article   8.
    Notwithstanding any complaints about the failure to take a  Beoku-Betts
    approach to proportionality, the Tribunal had in any event  found  that
    Article 8 was not even engaged. The merits or  otherwise  of  the  117B
    assessment were not therefore material.

12. In a written decision dated the 18th October  2016  I  found,  for  the
    reasons that follow, that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  its
    approach and that the decision must be set aside.



    Findings on Error of Law

13. This does not appear to have been  an  easy  case  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to determine. Having reached its preliminary findings on  what
    its remit was, the evidence, and indeed  the  law,  kept  dragging  the
    determination back to the children.    There  is  a  reason  for  that.
    Notwithstanding the fact that they were not  parties  to  this  appeal,
    their position and that of their mother were  two  sides  of  the  same
    coin.


14. Section 117B (6) of the NIAA 2002 reads:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public
         interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and
         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom.

15. That provision specifically requires the decision maker to consider the
    position of the children. It  is  not  confined  to  children  who  are
    British, nor to children whose immigration status is  settled,  nor  to
    children who have a valid right of appeal.  If  a  child  has  spent  a
    continuous period of seven years in the UK at the date of  the  appeal,
    as C1 had, the Tribunal is bound to conduct a comprehensive  evaluation
    of whether it is reasonable for that child to leave the United Kingdom.
       In this case that evaluation was confined to the observation [at 47]
    that it must be reasonable for C1 to leave because he  has  no  current
    leave. That is not a lawful approach. For all the reasons set out in MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined
    family claims) [2016]  UKUT 108, the evaluation must be a holistic one,
    taking into account all relevant factors including the  fact  that  the
    Respondent's own guidance states that "strong reasons" will be required
    to remove a child who has accrued seven years continuous residence. The
    fact that the child or his parent has no valid leave  to  remain  under
    the immigration rules  cannot  of  itself  amount  to  such  a  'strong
    reason'.  If applicants under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) or paragraph EX.1
    of Appendix FM were defeated simply because they had  no  leave,  there
    would be no point in the provisions' existence.  There is a  suggestion
    [at 41] that the Tribunal did not want to delve into  the  issue  where
    the Respondent had  not  yet  done  so  herself,  thus  protecting  the
    position of C1. Whilst that is an understandable sentiment, it  is  not
    in accordance with the clear terms of the statute.


16. Mr Wilding's answer to this was to point to paragraphs 34 and 35 of the
    determination: any error in approach to proportionality was  immaterial
    because the Tribunal did not even find Article 8 to be  engaged.   This
    was an attractive point which at first blush assumed  the  power  of  a
    knock-out blow.    On  reflection  I  am  however  persuaded  that  the
    fundamental error at the  heart  of  this  determination  infected  the
    decision overall. The finding on family life at paragraph  34  directly
    flowed from the Tribunal's refusal to factor in the presence of TA  and
    the children in the UK.   The fact that the children  did  not  have  a
    right of appeal before him did not mean that they were  not  here.  The
    children's best interests still fell to be determined, and the  statute
    still required a 'reasonableness' assessment.   In focusing  on  family
    life rather than making a global assessment of the Appellant's  Article
    8 rights as a whole,  the  Tribunal  impermissibly  excluded  the  very
    matter that s117B(6) required it to examine with care.

17. I directed that the matter be re-made before me.



    The Re-Made Decision

      The Evidence and Submissions

18. At the resumed hearing I heard brief evidence from the Appellant.   She
    explained that she had first noticed that C1 might have  problems  when
    he was a small baby.  He frequently had discharge flowing from his eyes
    and she had taken him to the  GP.  Investigations  had  resulted  in  a
    referral to a local hospital and eventually to Great Ormond St. She was
    told that there was a problem with his head in that his skull had fused
    in the wrong place and at the wrong  time.   This  affected  his  brain
    development. He had impaired vision. At present he cannot  see  at  all
    out of one eye, and the  other  one  is  alright.  He  has  speech  and
    development difficulties. He is in mainstream education but has  always
    had special provision. He has a speech therapist who works closely with
    him and has 'one on one' teaching assistance. His key worker at present
    is a lady called Mrs Eto. He has been at the same school since  he  was
    three (he started in the nursery). He enjoys it  there  and  they  have
    been very supportive.  I was provided with  a  series  of  letters  and
    reports from the school which confirm this evidence.


19. Mr Waithe asked me to have regard to the medical evidence.  It  is  not
    disputed by the Respondent that  C1  has  had  specialist  intervention
    since he was 6 months old and that he continues to be seen on a regular
    basis by clinicians at Great Ormond St and the Royal  London  Hospital.
    The Respondent has been provided with numerous letters and reports over
    the years but the most significant are those dealing with the  position
    of C1 today.  I was provided with recent  correspondence  from  various
    departments in Great Ormond St. A letter dated 30th June 2016 from  the
    Department of Clinical and Academic  Opthalmology  states  that  he  is
    currently being treated for Saethre-Chotzen Syndrome  with  multisuture
    synostosis and left  optic  atrophy.   Although  expressed  in  medical
    terminology the letter appears to confirm the Appellant's evidence that
    her son has vision in his right eye, although not in his left.  He  has
    reported pain in his left eye and  this  is  being  investigated.   The
    Department of Psychosocial Services confirm that he  attends  regularly
    for   screening   and   developmental   checks.   The   Department   of
    Audiovestibular Medicine wrote on the 21st October 2016 to  C1's  local
    hospital in Romford concerning ongoing investigations into mild hearing
    loss and possible Eustachian tube dysfunction. The Speech and  Language
    Therapy Department wrote on the 12th October  2016  to  state  that  C1
    continues to receive treatment and assessment  for  intermittent  voice
    loss and strained voice quality.   His mother has  reported  occasional
    name-calling and harassment from peers due to his appearance and  voice
    quality. A recent assessment showed him to be a very social little  boy
    whose  receptive  and  expressive  language  skills  were  only  mildly
    delayed.   There  are  no  concerns  with  his  eating  and   drinking.
    Correspondence shows C1 to have three appointments  in  December  2016:
    with Paediatric Neurology at the Royal London,  and  with  Opthalmology
    and the Cranio-facial clinic at Great Ormond St.


20. Mr Duffy confirmed that the facts are not in dispute.  It  is  accepted
    that all three children were born in the United Kingdom and that C1 has
    now lived here for 8 years and 9 months. It is  accepted  that  C1  was
    born  with  a  congenital  condition  which  has  affected  his   brain
    development, speech eyes and ears as outlined above.   It  is  accepted
    that the Appellant has no criminal convictions.  It is the  Appellant's
    evidence that the family are supported by the Church and friends and Mr
    Duffy did not seek to challenge that evidence, although  he  relied  on
    dicta in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 803 to the effect that  this  does  not  constitute  financial
    independence for the purpose of s117B(3).

21.  Mr Waithe for his part accepts that none of the family  have  had  any
    leave since the adults' visit visas expired in 2007. The parties agreed
    that the only appeal before me is that of the Appellant, and that  must
    be determined first with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and then
    if necessary and appropriate, to Article 8 outside of the rules.  If  I
    proceed to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules  I  must  take  into
    account the factors set out at section 117B(1)-(6) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).


    Legal Framework


22. The parties were in agreement that the only possible rule  under  which
    the Appellant might succeed herself was 276ADE(1)(vi):
         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:
         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM;
         and
         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and
         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or
         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.
23. In Bossade (s117B A-D - interrelationship with Rules) [2015]  UKUT  415
    (IAC) the Upper Tribunal  considered  the  test  of  "very  significant
    obstacles to integration" in the  context  of  the  rules  relating  to
    deportation. The Tribunal did  not  elucidate  on  what  factors  might
    establish such obstacles, but found the test to be  a  "stringent"  and
    demanding standard.  This would accord with  the  established  European
    jurisprudence on 'foreign' private life cases. As the  respondent  puts
    it in her guidance:

         "A very significant obstacle to integration means  something  which
         would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating
         into the country of return. The decision maker is looking for  more
         than obstacles. They are looking to see  whether  there  are  "very
         significant" obstacles, which is a high threshold. Very significant
         obstacles will exist where the  applicant  demonstrates  that  they
         would be unable to establish a  private  life  in  the  country  of
         return, or where establishing a private  life  in  the  country  of
         return would entail very serious hardship for the applicant[3].


24. If the Appellant cannot establish a case under that provision,  I  must
    consider whether there are good grounds to look to Article 8 outside of
    the Rules. If I do so I must have regard to s.19 of the Immigration Act
    2014 which inserted a new Part 5A into the Nationality Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. For the purposes of this appeal the key  provision  in
    Part 5A is s.117B:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

25. It is, for the moment at least, the position that this section is to be
    interpreted as follows. Decision-makers must have regard to all of  the
    factors listed at (1)-(5) when assessing Article 8 claims, but in cases
    where the applicant can show  both  limbs  of  sub-section  (6)  to  be
    satisfied, an appeal must succeed on Article 8 grounds: Treebhawon  and
    Ors (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC), MA (Pakistan) [at  14-20].
       There being no dispute that the Appellant in this case has a genuine
    and parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  the  question  is
    whether it would be reasonable to expect that child to leave the United
    Kingdom.


26. Judge Maxwell considered it reasonable that C1 do so because neither he
    nor his mother had any leave. That is not sufficient reason. The  terms
    of s117B(6) are mirrored in both paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and  paragraph
    EX.1. As I observe above, these are both  provisions  under  the  Rules
    whereby applicants with no status are able to  secure  some.  It  would
    make little sense if a child applicant  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    could be refused simply on the ground that he has no leave, or a parent
    relying on EX.1 could be refused because he was an overstayer. The very
    point of the rules would be defeated.  It follows that a claim  resting
    on s117(B)(6) cannot be rejected purely because the adult  in  question
    has no status.    What factors then are to be taken into account?

27. The genesis of the 'seven year' provision was the concession  known  as
    DP5/96.  That policy, and those which followed, created a general,  but
    rebuttable,  presumption that enforcement action would  "not  normally"
    proceed in cases where a child was born here and had lived continuously
    to the age of 7 or over, or where, having come to the United Kingdom at
    an early age,  7  years  or  more  of  continuous  residence  had  been
    accumulated[4]. Although there have been shifts and amendments to  this
    policy over the years, the government has consistently maintained  that
    a residence of at least 7 years duration is  a  significant  benchmark.
    As the  policy  statement[5]  which  accompanied  the  introduction  of
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) puts it: "a period of 7 continuous years spent
    in the UK as a child will generally establish  a  sufficient  level  of
    integration for family and private life  to  exist  such  that  removal
    would normally  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child"  [my
    emphasis].    The Hansard record of the debate in the House of Lords on
    the introduction of section 117B(6) (in the Immigration Act 2014)  sets
    out the government's position on the significance  of  the  seven  year
    mark, as explained  by  then  Home  Office  Minister  Lord  Wallace  of
    Tankerness:


         "we have acknowledged that if a child has reached the age of seven,
         he or she will have moved beyond simply having his or her needs met
         by the parents. The child will be part of the education system  and
         may be  developing  social  networks  and  connections  beyond  the
         parents and home. However, a child who has not spent seven years in
         the United Kingdom either will be  relatively  young  and  able  to
         adapt, or if they are older, will be likely  to  have  spent  their
         earlier years in their country of origin or another  country.  When
         considering  the  best  interests  of  the  child,  the   fact   of
         citizenship is important but so is the  fact  that  the  child  has
         spent  a  large  part  of  his  or  her  childhood  in  the  United
         Kingdom"[6].

28. The current policy statement reaffirms that this is the starting  point
    for  consideration  of  the   rule.     The   Immigration   Directorate
    Instruction 'Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes'   ("the  IDI")
    states:
         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
         child to leave the UK?
         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
         preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
         more than 7 years.
         The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to live in another country.
         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
         in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
         also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.
29. All of this guidance recognises that after a  period  of  seven  years'
    residence a child will have forged strong links  with  the  UK  to  the
    extent that he or she will have an established private life outside  of
    the immediate embrace of his parents and siblings. It is  that  private
    life which is the starting point of consideration under this Rule.  The
    relationships and understanding of life that a  child  develops  as  he
    grows older are matters which in themselves attract  weight.  The  fact
    that the child might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is  a  relevant
    factor but it cannot be determinative, since exclusive  focus  on  that
    question would obscure the fact that for such  a  child,  his  "private
    life" in the UK is everything he knows.   That is the  starting  point,
    and the task of the Tribunal is to then look to other factors to decide
    whether, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  these  displace  or
    outweigh the presumption that interference with that private life  will
    normally be contrary to the child's best interests.  Those factors  are
    wide-ranging and varied. The IDI gives several examples including,  for
    instance, the child's health,  whether  his  parents  have  leave,  the
    extent of family connections to the country of proposed return.  In  MA
    (Pakistan) Elias LJ (albeit reluctantly) accepted  that  it  must  also
    encompass matter pertaining to the family as  a  whole,  including  the
    factors at s117B(1)-(5) as they relate to the parents.  The  assessment
    of what is "reasonable" will call for the  Tribunal  to  weigh  all  of
    these matters into the balance  and  to  see  whether  they  constitute
    "strong reasons" - the language of the current IDI -  to  proceed  with
    removal notwithstanding the established Article 8 rights of  the  child
    in the UK.




    My Findings


30. I am  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  can  demonstrate  that  she
    qualifies for leave with reference to paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules.   The adults in the  family  both  grew  up  in  Nigeria,  speak
    languages spoken in that country and continue to be familiar  with  the
    social and cultural  norms.  Neither  have  any  health  concerns.  The
    Appellant still has a brother and an elderly mother in the  country.  I
    am satisfied that one or both of the adults in  this  family  would  be
    able to work should  they  return  there.   The  Appellant  told  Judge
    Maxwell that she was fearful of life in Nigeria because  of  pollution,
    terrorism and disease. Those are understandable concerns, but they  are
    not matters that  can  establish  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration. She can alleviate her own concerns  by  choosing  to  live
    somewhere where the risk of all three is reduced.  She  does  not,  for
    instance, have to go and live in Maiduguri.  Her real fear  is  whether
    she will be able to access the right healthcare for C1. It  is  evident
    from the material before me that this little boy  has  benefitted  from
    highly specialised medical intervention from an early age. What is  not
    evident is the extent to which he continues to need such care -  it  is
    not for instance clear whether he would  need  any  operations  in  the
    future - nor  whether  equivalent,  or  adequate  care,  would  not  be
    available in Nigeria.   The burden of proof lies on the Appellant and I
    assume that if there was a real  risk  of  harm  coming  to  C1  if  he
    travelled to Nigeria, one of the many clinicians involved in  his  care
    would have said so.  It would of course be preferable if there could be
    a continuity of care, and it would no doubt be in his best interests to
    remain at Great Ormond St,  but that is not the test to be applied when
    considering whether there are obstacles to his mother's integration  in
    Nigeria. I find that whilst there will  undoubtedly  be  obstacles  and
    difficulties for the family in relocating, they would not  be  such  to
    meet the "stringest" test that must be applied  in  a  foreign  private
    life case.


31. I am satisfied that there  are  good  grounds  to  consider  Article  8
    outside of the rules, since in this case there  are  important  factors
    that have not been considered within the ambit of the rule, such as the
    private lives of  the  other  family  members  and  in  particular  the
    qualifying child C1.  I am satisfied that Article 8  is  engaged.  Each
    member of the family has established  a  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom and collectively  they  plainly  share  a  family  life.  I  am
    satisfied that if the family were to be removed together there would be
    an interference with private life; if the Appellant were to be  removed
    without her husband and children there would be  an  interference  with
    family life.

32. I find that the Secretary of State has the power in law to make removal
    decisions in respect of persons who do not have  any  leave  to  remain
    under the Rules and that such decisions are rationally  connected  with
    the legitimate Article 8(2) aim of protection of the economy.

33. In  considering  whether  the  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant  is
    necessary in a democratic society (in  pursuit  of  the  aim  mentioned
    above) and proportionate, I must have regard to  all  relevant  factors
    including the matters listed at s117B(1)-(6) NIAA 2002 rehearsed above.
     I begin with sub-section (6), following the suggested structure in  MA
    (Pakistan).

34. It is not in dispute that the Appellant is the mother to a  little  boy
    who was born in the United Kingdom and has now lived here  continuously
    for approaching 9 years.  Like  other  8  year  olds  that  that  child
    attends  school,  has  developed  interests,  made  friends   and   has
    established good relationships with his teachers. He has,  to  use  the
    language of  the  IDI,  "put  down  roots".  This  little  boy  has  an
    additional element to his private life that other  children  might  not
    have: due to his  special  needs  he  has  also  developed  therapeutic
    relationships with his personal keyworkers and the clinicians who  have
    cared for him since  he  was  born.    Having  regard  to  the  various
    policies and ministerial statements set out above, I consider that this
    is a private life that attracts substantial weight.  Whereas  an  adult
    could reasonably be expected to replicate that private life in Nigeria,
    different considerations arise in the case of a child, particularly one
    who has known no other life,  and  particularly  one  who  has  special
    educational needs such as this one.   I find that it would be  contrary
    to C1's best interests to interfere with the private life that  he  has
    developed in this country.


35.  Against  those  matters  I  must  weigh  the  countervailing   factors
    identified by Mr Duffy. I do so with reference to ss  117B  (1)-(5)  of
    the 2002 Act.  I find that the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.   None of the family presently have
    leave. The adults have deliberately overstayed and have missed a number
    of opportunities to make a voluntary departure from the UK. This  is  a
    matter that must weigh against the Appellant.    As I note  above  this
    is a family who have (by  necessity)  been  dependent  on  charity  and
    goodwill to support themselves. They are not  financially  independent.
    Although I do not rule out the possibility that they would  be  if  the
    adults were able to legally work, this too is a matter that must  weigh
    against the Appellant.   I attach little weight to the Appellant's  own
    private life, since it has been established at a time when she has been
    living in the United Kingdom without any leave. I am satisfied that the
    Appellant, her husband and the older  children  speak  fluent  English,
    which will mean that they  are  less  likely  to  become  a  burden  to
    taxpayers and that they are better able to integrate into society. This
    is however a neutral factor.


36.  I bear in mind that the family have  had  extensive  recourse  to  NHS
    treatment for C1. As far as I am aware none of his treatment  has  been
    paid for privately.   I also bear in mind that the private life that he
    currently enjoys could, given time, money and (in  respect  of  finding
    specialist doctors) possibly luck, be replicated in  Nigeria.  Although
    his removal would  be  hugely  disruptive  and  contrary  to  his  best
    interests it would not involve, in the long term,  a  nullification  or
    flagrant interference with his Article 8(1) rights.

37. I have weighed all of those matters in the round. Having done  so,  and
    having reminded myself of the language used  in  the  Respondent's  own
    guidance, I am not satisfied that it would be 'reasonable' to expect C1
    to leave the United Kingdom.  Unlike  the  child  in  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 he is a qualifying child  who  prima  facie  has  a
    claim under the Rules.  The assessment of 'reasonableness' is not  akin
    to a proportionality balancing exercise where  no  such  claim  arises.
    There must be 'strong reasons' to  require  him  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom today.  His parents have not complied with immigration control.
    They are not financially independent.  They  (and  it  would  seem  his
    doctors) have allowed him to have treatment on the NHS at  the  expense
    of the taxpayer.  I am not satisfied,  having  regard  to  all  of  the
    factors and in particular his strong and substantial private life, that
    these matters  amount  to  'strong  reasons'  such  that  it  would  be
    reasonable to disrupt the only life that C1 knows.

38. It follows that the appeal must be allowed.




      Decisions


39. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


40. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is dismissed 'under the rules'.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds"

41. There is an order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   5th
                                January 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on the 1st August
2016
[2] Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27
[3] From Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private
Life: 10-Year Routes August 2015.  As an aside I would wonder why, if the
rule simply requires the decision maker to assess whether there will be an
infringement of Article 8(1) rights, it doesn't just say so. It seems
unfortunate that the guidance is expressed in these clear terms whilst the
policy itself is expressed in the rule through the prism of yet another
'test'.
[4] For a detailed history of the rule and its development see Dyson LJ in
Munir v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 paras 9-13
[5] The Grounds of Compatibility with Article 8 of the ECHR: Statement by
the Home Office (13 June 2012) at 27.
[6] At column 1383, Hansard 5th March 2014

