
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
IA/05614/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 16 December 2014                      |On 12 January 2015        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MS RIVA AKTER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M M Islam, Authorised Representative
      (London Law Associates)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies on  4  November
           2014 against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Dineen who had  allowed  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the
           Secretary of  State's  decision  dated  20  January  2014  in  a
           determination promulgated on 19 September 2014.  The  Respondent
           is a national of Bangladesh, who had applied for  further  leave
           to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant,  which  was
           refused on the grounds that although the Appellant had submitted
           a  valid  CAS,  she  had  not  shown  that  she  satisfied   the
           maintenance requirement.  The Respondent had relied on access to
           a  fixed  deposit  account  held  in  her  mother's  name.   The
           Secretary of State had not accepted that  such  funds  could  be
           considered as funds  available  or  under  the  Appellant's  own
           control during the prescribed 28 period.   The  application  was
           refused under paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Immigration  Rules.  The
           reasons for refusal letter conveying the decision to  refuse  to
           vary the  Respondent's  existing  leave  incorporated  a  second
           decision to remove the Respondent by  way  of  directions  under
           section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

      2.    Judge Davies considered it arguable that Judge Dineen should not
           have concluded that  the  funds  relied  on  by  the  Respondent
           satisfied the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The  judge
           had accepted into evidence a letter dated 2 March 2014 which had
           not been  submitted  with  the  visa  application,  contrary  to
           section 85A(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
           2002.  In any event the funds relied on  were  not  cash  funds:
           Appendix C, paragraph 1A(j) of the Immigration Rules.


      3.    Mr Tufan for the Appellant relied on the onwards grounds and the
           grant of permission to appeal.  He submitted that it was, as the
           First-tier Tribunal Judge had observed,  a  narrow  point.   The
           judge  had  not  explained  with  sufficient  reasons   why   he
           considered that the Respondent had complied with the Immigration
           Rules.  The post application letter from  the  bank  should  not
           have been admitted.  The determination was defective and  should
           be set aside.


      4.    Mr Islam for the Respondent submitted that the determination was
           correct.  The bank letter dated  2  March  2014  concerning  the
           deposit account to which the judge had referred was not new, but
           merely reinforced what was obvious, namely that  access  to  the
           deposit account was possible at any time  without  notice.   The
           only penalty would be reduced interest.  That was in  accordance
           with ordinary banking  principles.   The  relevant  Home  Office
           Guidance, policy version 10/2013, paragraph 177 states:


            "The evidence of money that you can use must be of cash funds in
           the bank (this includes savings accounts  and  current  accounts
           even when notice must be given), as a loan  letter  or  official
           financial or government sponsorship  available  to  you.   Other
           accounts  or  financial  instruments  such  as  shares,   bonds,
           overdrafts, credit cards and pension funds are  not  acceptable,
           regardless of notice period."


             This  paragraph  had  not  been  mentioned   in   the   judge's
           determination but had been included in the  Respondent's  bundle
           produced for the hearing and had not been in dispute.  There was
           accordingly no  material  error  of  law  and  section  85A  was
           irrelevant.


      5.    In reply  Mr  Tufan  accepted  that  the  relevant  Home  Office
           guidance was in force at the material time.


      6.    At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal indicated that  it
           found that the judge had not fallen into material error of  law.
           The determination was succinct, prepared by a  very  experienced
           judge.  There is no doubt that the relevant Home Office guidance
           was in force and that the judge had been directed  to  it.   The
           Upper Tribunal has seen the bundle which was  before  him.   The
           letter from the bank dated 2 March 2014  merely  reinforced  the
           Respondent's  existing  case  and  the  mention  of  it  in  the
           determination was immaterial.


      7.    With the wisdom which hindsight can provide,  it  might  perhaps
           have been helpful had the judge referred to paragraph 177 of the
           guidance  (cited  above),  but  no  doubt  the  point  had  been
           perfectly  obvious  to  the  parties  present  at  the  hearing.
           Unfortunately it had not been so obvious when  the  Home  Office
           sought to make a routine  challenge  to  an  allowed  appeal,  a
           practice which really ought  to  be  undertaken  with  far  more
           circumspection.    The   Upper   Tribunal    understands    that
           applications are often made on behalf of the Secretary of  State
           without access to the original appeal file.  The present  appeal
           shows why such a practice is bad one.


      8.    The tribunal should  not  interfere  with  a  properly  reasoned
           determination of a First-tier Tribunal judge unless there  is  a
           clear and material error of law.   Paragraph  177  of  the  Home
           Office guidance simply reflected  normal  banking  practice,  of
           which the judge was well aware.   It was thus obvious  that  the
           Respondent had relied on cash funds  to  which  she  had  lawful
           access when she made her visa application: see [8] and  [12]  of
           the  determination.  The  judge  was  right  to  find  that  the
           Respondent met the Immigration Rules.


      9.    The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly dismissed.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The determination stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated 09/01/2015






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


