
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05674/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |       Decision & Reasons     |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 7 August 2015                             |       On 14 August 2015      |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                               MISS YOKO KONDO
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B K Sharma, legal representative, MAAS
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Morrison (hereinafter referred to as the FTTJ), promulgated on 9  March
    2015,  in  which  he  dismissed  an  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision, dated 15 January 2014,  to  refuse  to  grant  the  appellant
    indefinite leave to remain and to remove her from  the  United  Kingdom
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    on 7 May 2015.



Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and I see no reason for one now.

Background

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 July 2003 with  leave
    to enter as a student. Further leave to remain was granted in the  same
    capacity until 28 February 2011, following timeous applications. On  24
    February 2011 the appellant applied for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4
    migrant and this was granted until 5 August 2013. On 13 March 2013, the
    appellant's leave was curtailed to take effect on 12  May  2013.  On  9
    April 2013, the appellant sought indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on  the  basis  of  her  long,  lawful,  residence.  Her
    application was refused as  the  respondent  considered  that  she  had
    accrued only 9 years and 10 months leave because  her  last  period  of
    leave was curtailed.

The hearing before the FTTJ

 5. The FTTJ found that the appellant had  been  awarded  an  MA  from  the
    University of London in 2005, an MSc from the University of  Oxford  in
    2007 and had completed two of the three examinations required  for  her
    to complete a D.Phil course at the University of Oxford. The  appellant
    was diagnosed with bilateral  lateral  epicondylitis,  which  adversely
    affected her day-to-day activities, including  her  studies.  The  FTTJ
    accepted  that  as  a  result  of  the  aforementioned  condition,  the
    appellant struggled to complete her thesis by 2012 and  ultimately  the
    University had advised the respondent that her studies had lapsed.  The
    FTTJ concluded that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 276B or 276ADE of the Rules and there was no  reason  for  a
    second stage Article 8  assessment  to  be  made  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's private life.

The grounds of appeal

 6. In essence, the grounds argued that the FTTJ's decision that the  Rules
    were not met was irrational in that the appellant met the  requirements
    of paragraph 276B of the Rules shortly after her application  was  made
    in April 2013. It was said that the FTTJ erred in failing  to  consider
    that the respondent had failed to  exercise  differently  a  discretion
    conferred on her and that the FTTJ failed to carry out a full Article 8
    assessment.

 7. FTTJ Osborne granted permission primarily on the basis  that  the  FTTJ
    arguably erred in applying an exceptional  circumstances  threshold  in
    terms of his Article 8 assessment. All the issues raised in the grounds
    were said to be arguable.

 8. In her response of 11 May 2015,  the  respondent  opposed  the  appeal,
    stating that the grounds were misconceived in relation  to  Article  8,
    the appellant's case was mundane and her circumstances did not  require
    a consideration outside the Rules. No mention was made  of  the  FTTJ's
    findings on paragraph 276B of the Rules.

The hearing

 9. At the hearing before me, I invited the views of the representatives on
    the indication that the appellant met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B of the Rules at the time the respondent's decision was  taken.  Mr
    Sharma agreed that this was his primary submission.




10. I gave Mr Tarlow (at his  request)  additional  time  to  consider  the
    appellant's   immigration   history   and   to    take    instructions.
    Unfortunately, Mr Tarlow's calls to the respondent went unanswered  and
    I therefore heard submissions from both  parties,  which,  essentially,
    went no further than to repeat  the  grounds  of  application  and  the
    respondent's Rule 24 reply. Mr Tarlow made no submissions on whether or
    not the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Rules.

Decision on error of law

11. The FTTJ erred in finding, at [18] of the decision and reasons that the
    appellant "had been in the United Kingdom for less than 10  years."  At
    the  time  of  the  respondent's  decision,  the  appellant  had   been
    continuously, lawfully, present for 10 years and 5 months. By the  time
    of the hearing before the FTTJ, the appellant had been residing in  the
    United Kingdom for 11 years and 7 months. No reasons were  provided  by
    the FTTJ for finding that the appellant had acquired less than 10 years
    residence. In fairness to the FTTJ, it  appears  that  the  appellant's
    case under the Rules was not clearly put, as is apparent  from  reading
    the aforementioned paragraph.

12. It is also the case that the FTTJ erred in not carrying out an  Article
    8 assessment, outside the Rules in view of the fact that she found  the
    Rules were not met. There was copious evidence before the FTTJ  of  the
    appellant's lengthy,  lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom;  her
    successful  studies,  the  importance  of  her  D.Phil  research,   her
    charitable work and the incapacitating medical problems which  she  had
    overcome but which had set  back  the  progress  of  her  research.  In
    addition, at [18] the FTTJ was of the view that the appellant's  was  a
    "near miss" case. I consider  that  in  all  these  circumstances,  the
    appellant showed good reason  as  to  why  her  case  should  be  given
    individualised consideration outside the Rules, SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 applies.

13. It was appropriate for me to re-make the  decision  without  adjourning
    the appeal. Neither party sought to suggest otherwise. No new  evidence
    was submitted and the parties elected  to  rely  upon  the  submissions
    previously made. At the end of the hearing I allowed the  appeal  under
    the Rules and reserved my  decision  in  respect  of  Article  8  ECHR,
    outside the Rules.

14. Paragraph 276A of the Rules provides definitions relevant to  paragraph
    276B of the Rules as follows;
    (a) continuous residence" means residence in the United Kingdom for an
    unbroken period, and
    for these purposes a period shall not be considered to have been broken
where an applicant is
    absent from the United Kingdom for a period of 6 months or less at any
    one time, provided that
    the applicant in question has existing limited leave to enter or remain
    upon their departure and
    return, but shall be considered to have been broken if the applicant:
    (01.04.2003 HC 538)
           (i) has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act, section
          10 of the 1999 Act,
           has been deported or has left the United Kingdom having been
         refused leave to
           enter or remain here; or (01.04.2003 HC 538)
           (ii) has left the United Kingdom and, on doing so, evidenced a
      clear intention not to
           return; or (01.04.2003 HC 538)
           (iii) left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which he could
         have had no
           reasonable expectation at the time of leaving that he would
        lawfully be able to return;
           or (01.04.2003 HC 538)
           (iv) has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced to a
          period of
           imprisonment or was directed to be detained in an institution
         other than a prison
           (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution for
        young offenders), provided that
           the sentence in question was not a suspended sentence; or
           (01.04.2003 HC 538)
           (v) has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from the
         United Kingdom during

           the period in question. (01.04.2003 HC 538)
      (b) lawful residence" means residence which is continuous residence
pursuant to:
           (i) existing leave to enter or remain; or (01.04.2003 HC 538)
           (ii) temporary admission within section 11 of the 1971 Act where
      leave to enter or
           remain is subsequently granted; or (01.04.2003 HC 538)
           (iii) an exemption from immigration control, including where an
      exemption ceases to
           apply if it is immediately followed by a grant of leave to enter
      or remain. (01.04.2003
           HC 538)
           (c) 'lived continuously' and 'living continuously' mean
           'continuous residence', except that     paragraph 276A(a)(iv)
           shall not apply. (HC 565 06.09.2012)

15. The requirements to be met by the appellant to qualify for a  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain on the grounds are as follows;
    276B. The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave
    to remain on the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom are
    that:
    (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in the
    United Kingdom.
    (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons why it
    would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain on
    the ground of long residence, taking into account his:
    (a) age; and
    (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and
    (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations and
    employment record; and
    (d) domestic circumstances; and
    (e) compassionate circumstances; and
    (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and
    (iii) the applicant does not fall for refusal under the general grounds
    for refusal.
    (iv) the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge of the English
    language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United Kingdom, in
    accordance with Appendix KoLL.
    (v) the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws
    except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less
    will be disregarded, as will any period of overstaying between periods
    of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28 days
    and any period of overstaying pending the determination of an
    application made within that 28 day period.

16. Starting with the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom.  At  the
    time of the hearing before me, the  appellant  had  acquired  12  years
    continuous, lawful residence in the United Kingdom. As  accurately  set
    out in the respondent's reasons for refusal  letter  dated  15  January
    2014, the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 July 2003  with
    leave to enter as a student until 30 September 2004.  On  14  September
    2004 she applied for leave to remain as  a  student  and  was  "granted
    continuous leave as a student" until 28 February 2011. On  24  February
    2011 she applied for leave to remain as a Tier 4 migrant and  this  was
    granted until 5 August 2013. At the end of that  period  of  leave  the
    appellant would have reached the 10-year point,  however  on  13  March
    2013, her leave to remain was curtailed to 12 May 2013.  The  appellant
    made an in-time application for the variation of her leave on  9  April
    2013. That application had the effect of extending her  existing  leave
    to remain under section 3C(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 (as amended).
    Therefore  while  the  appellant  had  not  acquired  10  years  lawful
    residence at the time of her application on 9 April 2013, she had  done
    so as of 24 July 2013 when  her  application  was  still  awaiting  the
    respondent's decision. A decision was not made until 15  January  2014.
    That decision was served on the appellant on 22 January  2014,  against
    which she appealed on 28 January 2014; thus continuing  to  extend  her
    leave under section 3C(2) of the Immigration Act.

17. I have carefully considered the detail of the appellant's residence  in
    the United Kingdom,  with  reference  to  276A(a)  of  the  Rules.  The
    appellant provided her valid passports as well as  an  account  of  her
    absences from the United Kingdom on her  application  form.  There  was
    just one occasion when the appellant was absent from the United Kingdom
    for a lengthy continuous period and this was between 30  December  2007
    and 29 June 2008 when she travelled to Bangladesh in order to carry out
    fieldwork for her D.Phil at the University of Oxford.

18. The appellant drew attention to this matter in her covering letter of 9
    April 2013 which accompanied her application.  The  Rules  states  that
    continuous residence  will  not  be  considered  to  have  been  broken
    following an absence of a "period of  6  months  or  less  at  any  one
    time..." The appellant's absence was exactly 6 months and at  the  time
    she left and returned, according  to  her  residence  permit,  she  had
    existing limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom  dating  from  3
    November 2006 until 28 February 2011. I have calculated the appellant's
    total periods of absence from the United  Kingdom  during  the  10-year
    period from 24 July 2003 onwards and it amounts  to  slightly  under  9
    months absence whereas the Rules permit up to 18 months absence.

19. Turning now to 276B of the Rules, as indicated above I accept that  the
    appellant has had at least 10 years continuous lawful residence in  the
    United Kingdom.

20. The respondent raised no public interest considerations as  to  why  it
    would be undesirable for the appellant to be granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain on the grounds of long  residence.  Indeed  the  respondent's
    sole objection to the application was on the  basis  of  the  erroneous
    decision  that  the  clock  stopped  when  the  appellant's  leave  was
    curtailed. I permitted Mr  Tarlow  additional  time  to  consider  this
    aspect of the appellant's case and he raised no objections of any sort.
    Therefore I am satisfied that there are no reasons for the  appellant's
    application  to  fall  under  the  general  grounds  of  refusal.   The
    appellant demonstrated that she had sufficient knowledge of the English
    language and sufficient knowledge about life in the United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with Appendix KoLL. At the  time  of  her  application,  the
    appellant provided specified evidence that she had taken and passed  an
    ESOL with citizenship qualification including speaking  and  listening,
    at ESOL Entry level 3, was regulated by OFQUAL and  was  listed  as  an
    ESOL qualification on the Register  of  Regulated  Qualifications.  She
    also provided a letter from the college, which set  out  that  she  had
    progressed from Entry level 2 to level 3 and taken her qualification at
    an accredited college. The appellant  has  never  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of immigration laws.

21. Given the foregoing paragraphs, I  find  that  the  Appellant's  appeal
    succeeds under Paragraph 267B of the Immigration Rules.

22. It is not strictly necessary for me to consider the appellant's Article
    8 claim outside the Rules as I have found she meets the requirements of
    paragraph 276B however I shall do so for completeness.  It  is  not  in
    dispute that the appellant has established a considerable private  life
    in the United Kingdom, demonstrated by her residence here, her master's
    degree in Lifelong Learning from the University of London in  2005  and
    MSc in Educational Research Methodology from the University  of  Oxford
    in 2007. The appellant's thesis  for  her  D.Phil  was  frustrated  and
    considerably delayed by difficulties she had in being able to  use  her
    arms and hands. It appears  those  problems  have  alleviated  to  some
    extent with treatment and the passage of time and the completion of her
    thesis appears to be in prospect. Clearly the decision  to  remove  the
    appellant amounts to a degree of interference with the private life the
    appellant has established in this country.  I  find  that  the  removal
    decision was in accordance with the law and was made in  pursuit  of  a
    permissible aim, that is the economic wellbeing  of  this  country.  In
    terms of proportionality, I have had regard to the  relevant  parts  of
    paragraphs 117A and B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended)  and  note  that  the  maintenance  of  a  system  of
    immigration control is in the public interest as  it  is  that  persons
    seeking leave to remain speak English and are financially  independent.
    I have had regard to the fact that the  appellant's  private  life  was
    established at a time when her immigration status  was  precarious  and
    reduced the weight I attach to her private life accordingly.

23. I have also had regard to the fact that the appellant was  resident  in
    Japan until her late  thirties  and  has  visited  her  family  on  two
    occasions since arriving here in  2003.  I  have  also  considered  the
    appellant's  charitable  endeavours,  which  include  her  funding  the
    education of a child in Pakistan and caring for two elderly  people  in
    Oxford. In addition, Dr  Shannon  Magness  who  previously  taught  the
    appellant and assisted her in relation to her  research  considers  the
    appellant's research work to be "extremely important" for education  in
    poor countries. The appellant also has a spotless  immigration  history
    and I am satisfied  that  her  studies  were  interrupted  by  genuine,
    serious, medical problems.

24. I bear in mind what was held in Patel & Ors v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72,  in
    that "Article 8 is not a general dispensing power"[57] and further "the
    opportunity for a promising student to  complete  his  course  in  this
    country, however desirable in general terms, is not in itself  a  right
    protected under article 8."[57]. At its essence, the appellant's  human
    rights claim amounts to a desire to complete her research degree  which
    she started in 2005 and which was unfortunately delayed  owing  to  her
    medical  problems.  I  conclude  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate in all the circumstances.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
and dismissing it under the ECHR(Article 8).


Signed                                       Date: 9 August 2015


T Kamara
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a  full  award
owing to the fact that the appellant met the residence requirements  of  the
Rules at the time of the respondent's decision.


Signed                                       Date: 9 August 2015


T Kamara
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






