
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05213/2013
                                                               IA/05220/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26 July 2013                                 |On 29 July 2013            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                            1) Mrs monuara begum
                             2) ms forhana begum
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S. Saeed, Solicitor Advocate, Aman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Specialist Appeal Team

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Grimmett sitting at Sheldon Court, Birmingham on 2nd  May  2013)
    dismissing their appeals against the decision by the Secretary of State
    to refuse to issue them with residence cards as confirmation  of  their
    claimed right to reside in  the  UK  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The  first  appellant  ("M")  is  the
    mother of the second appellant ("F"), and both of them are nationals of
    Bangladesh.

 2. The background to this case is that M's late  husband  ("K"),  who  was
    born in Bangladesh, acquired Portuguese nationality in  February  2003.
    He came to the UK in March 2003 and remained here until his death on 31
    January 2011. M entered the UK on 22 December 2003 as his  spouse,  and
    obtained an EEA residence card on 14 March 2006. F entered the UK on 13
    September 2005 with a brother Muhammad  Ali  ("A")  who  was  one  year
    younger than her.  (As of July 2011, A was aged 26 and F was aged  27).
    Each of them was issued with a residence card that was valid  until  29
    January 2010.

 3. M, F and A applied for permanent residence cards under Regulation 15 of
    the Regulations 2006, but their applications were refused in June 2011.
    They appealed against these refusals on inter alia Article  8  grounds,
    and their appeals were dismissed by Judge Stott sitting in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in Birmingham on 26 July 2011. He accepted that M, F  and
    A had all lived with their EEA national "sponsor" K from 2005 until his
    death, but K had not acquired a right of  permanent  residence  by  the
    time he died as he was not a qualified person after  30  January  2006,
    when he retired. So none of M, F or  A  could  claim  a  permanent,  or
    indeed  a  continuing  right,  of  residence  on  the  basis  of  their
    relationship to K. As for the Article 8 claim, he found that  F  and  A
    each had a spouse in Bangladesh; and that M had two married sons  still
    living in Bangladesh. M  would  leave  behind  in  the  UK  a  son  and
    daughter, both of whom had acquired Portuguese nationality.  But  there
    was no evidence that the ties between these two and M,  F  and  A  went
    beyond normal emotional ties.

 4. Following this ruling by Judge Scott, A went back to Bangladesh. M  and
    F stayed here, and applied for residence cards on the ground that  they
    were family members of Ali Haydor ("H").  H is the son of M referred to
    by Judge Scott.  The applications were refused in February  2013  inter
    alia on the grounds that M and F had not shown that they were dependent
    on H in the UK, and that F had not shown that she was dependent on H or
    a member of H's household prior to arriving in the UK.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. As previously indicated, the appeals of the two appellants came  before
    Judge Grimmett sitting at Sheldon Court in Birmingham on  2  May  2013.
    Mr Hussain appeared on behalf of the appellants and Ms Venables, a Home
    Office Presenting Officer, appeared on behalf of the  respondent.   The
    judge received oral evidence from the first and second appellants,  and
    from their sponsor, H.

 6. In his subsequent determination, Judge Grimmett gave  detailed  reasons
    for finding that M had not proved that she was dependent on H in the UK
    (paragraphs  5  to  10);  and  for  finding  that  F  had   not   shown
    prior/present dependency on H or  prior  membership  of  H's  household
    (paragraphs 11 to 22).

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. Mr Saeed settled the appellants' application for permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  He submitted that the Judge had erred in law in
    failing  to  consider  whether  the  appellants  were  members  of  the
    sponsor's household in Bangladesh; and whether  they  continued  to  be
    members of his household in the  UK.  The  Judge  had  only  looked  at
    whether the appellants had lived with the sponsor in  Portugal,  "which
    is not a requirement of the regulations." The Judge had failed to  make
    a finding as to whether the appellants were members of H's household in
    the UK.

The Grant of Permission

 8. On 11 June 2013 Designated Judge  J.M.  Lewis  granted  the  appellants
    permission to appeal.  He saw merit in the argument raised by Mr Saeed,
    following RK (India) v SSHD [2010] UKUT 421.

The Appeal Hearing

 9. At the hearing of the appeal, Mr Saeed submitted that it did  not  need
    to be shown that the sponsor was the head  of  the  household.  It  was
    enough that the  appellants  had  shared  the  same  household  as  the
    sponsor. In support of  this  proposition  he  referred  me  to  an  EC
    proposal document issued in 2001 which, he submitted,  was  a  valuable
    aid in interpreting the subsequent directive dealing with the rights of
    union citizens and their family  members  to  move  and  reside  freely
    (Directive 2004/38/EC of 29 April 2004).  The document contains at page
    8 the following commentary on Article 3:

         These provisions are taken from the existing provisions of  Article
         10(2)  of  Regulation  1612/68  and  Article  1(2)   of   Directive
         73/148/EEC, which call on Member States to facilitate the entry  of
         any other family members of Union citizens or their spouses who are
         dependent on them or lived with them (my emphasis) in  the  country
         from which they are arriving.

10. In reply, Mr Walker repeated and adopted the points made by Lee Ong  of
    the Specialist Appeals  Team  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  Rule  24
    response.

Analysis

11. At paragraph 40 of Moneke (EEA - OFMS) Nigeria [2011] UKUT  341,  which
    is reported in the immigration appeal reports for 2011 at pages 928  to
    944, the Upper Tribunal concluded that for the time being,  subject  to
    future clarification by the higher courts,  Immigration  Judges  should
    adopt the following approach:

         (i)  A person claiming to be an OFM may either be a dependant or  a
             member  of  the  household  of  the  EEA  national;  they  are
             alternative ways of qualifying as an OFM.

         ii) In either case the dependency or membership of  the  household
             must be on a person who is an EEA  national  at  the  material
             time.  Thus dependency  or  membership  of  a  household  that
             preceded the sponsor becoming an EEA  national  would  not  be
             sufficient.  ...

        iii) By contrast with Article 2(2) family members, an OFM must show
             qualification as such not just since  arrival  in  the  United
             Kingdom but before arrival here and the  application  to  join
             the EEA national who is resident  here.   The  applicant  must
             have been a dependant in the  country  from  which  they  have
             come, that is to say their country of origin or other  country
             from which they have arrived in the United Kingdom.

         iv) Membership of a household has the meaning set out in  KG  (Sri
             Lanka) and Bigia (above); that is to say it imports living for
             some period of time under the roof of a household that can  be
             said to be that of the EEA national for a time when he or  she
             had such nationality.  That necessarily requires  that  whilst
             in possession of such nationality the family member has  lived
             somewhere in  the  world  in  the  same  country  as  the  EEA
             national, but not necessarily in an EEA state.

          v)  By  contrast  the  dependency  on  an  EEA  national  can  be
             dependency as a result of the material remittances sent by the
             EEA national to the family member, without the  pair  of  them
             having lived in the same country at that time.

28. At paragraph 41 the Tribunal held that nevertheless dependency was  not
    the same as the mere receipt as  some  financial  assistance  from  the
    sponsor.   For  present  purposes  the  Tribunal  accepted   that   the
    definition of dependency was accurately captured by  the  current  UKBA
    ECIs which read as follows at chapter 5.12:

         Financial dependency should be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  the
         person needs financial support from the  EEA  national  or  his/her
         spouse/civil partner in order to meet his/her essential needs - not
         in order to have a certain level of income.

         Provided a person would not  be  able  to  meet  his/her  essential
         living needs without the financial support  of  the  EEA  national,
         he/she should be considered dependent on that national.   In  those
         circumstances, it  does  not  matter  that  the  applicant  may  in
         addition receive financial support/income from other sources.

29. At paragraph 42 the Tribunal said:

         We of course accept (and as the ECIs reflect) that dependency  does
         not have to be necessary in the sense  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
         that is to say an able bodied person who chooses to  rely  for  his
         essential needs on material support of the sponsor may be  entitled
         to do so even if he could meet those needs from his or her economic
         activity: see SM (India).  Nevertheless where, as in  these  cases,
         able bodied people of  mature  years  claim  to  have  always  been
         dependent  upon  remittances  from  a  sponsor  that   may   invite
         particular close scrutiny as to why this should be  the  case.   We
         note further  that  Article  10(2)(e)  of  the  Citizens  Directive
         contemplates documentary evidence.  Whether dependency can ever  be
         proved by oral testimony alone is not something  that  we  have  to
         decide in  this  case,  but  Article  10(2)(e)  does  suggest  that
         responsibility is on the applicant to satisfy Secretary of State by
         cogent evidence that is in part documented and can be tested as  to
         whether the level of material support, its duration and its  impact
         upon the applicant combined together meet the  material  definition
         of dependency.

30. At paragraph 43 the Tribunal went on to  say  that  where  there  is  a
    dispute as to dependency Immigration Judges should therefore  carefully
    evaluate all the material to see whether the  applicant  has  satisfied
    them of these matters.

31. In Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Regulation  8(2)  [2012]  UKUT  79,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey said as follows at paragraph 13:

         It is immediately apparent there  is  nothing  in  the  wording  of
         Article 3(2)(a) that requires a person who,  in  the  country  from
         which they have come, was a dependant or a member of the  household
         of a union citizen to show they continue in the host  member  state
         be in precisely the same category.  Further,  to  read  in  such  a
         requirement would be contrary to the stated underlying  purpose  of
         facilitating the residence of such persons.  It would exclude,  for
         example, a sibling who abroad had been, although self-sufficient, a
         member of the EEA principal's household but who  now  wished,  with
         the financial support of the EEA principal,  to  undertake  studies
         living separately.  An elderly aunt who had been a dependant abroad
         but who had now moved into the EEA principal's household  would  be
         excluded simply if, for example, she was recently left enough in  a
         will to make her self-sufficient  financially.   My  conclusion  is
         that under Reg. 8(2) there are four,  not  two,  possible  ways  in
         which a person can qualify as an extended family member.

32. Article 10(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC (the Citizens Directive) sets out
    the documents which should be presented to a member state in order  for
    a residence card to be issued. In cases falling under Article  3(2)(a),
    the following is required:

         [A] document issued by the relevant authority  in  the  country  of
         origin or country from which they are arriving certifying that they
         are dependants or members of the household of the Union citizen...

Membership of Household in Bangladesh

33. The evidence before Judge Grimmett included a certificate issued by the
    Chairman of  No-5  Chilaura  Holdipur  Union  Parishad  in  March  2102
    certifying that M and her sons and daughters including  F  and  H  were
    living as members of a joint family unit  at  Holding  No  05/62  until
    2002.

34. In his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  H  was  silent  on  the
    question of when he acquired  Portuguese  nationality.  H's  Portuguese
    passport was issued to him in 2011 and it is unlikely that his  citizen
    card, which has an expiry date of 2014, was issued to him before  2009.
    In any event, it was not part of the appellants' case before the First-
    tier Tribunal that H had Portuguese nationality when  the  family  were
    living under the same roof in Bangladesh. So Judge Grimmett did not err
    in law in failing to consider whether  M  or  F  were  members  of  H's
    household in Bangladesh. As he was not a Union citizen at the time,  it
    is a completely irrelevant  consideration,  as  is  apparent  from  the
    guidance given in Moneke.

Membership of Household in Portugal

35. There is no challenge in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal to
    the finding by Judge Grimmett that F had not  proved  that  she  was  a
    member of H's household in Portugal in the period after 2002 until  she
    came to the UK in 2005. But the judge accepted, on  the  basis  of  the
    documentary evidence provided, that H and F were  living  at  the  same
    address in Portugal in 2002. Mr Saeed submits that this  is  enough  to
    discharge the burden of proving prior membership of  H's  household  in
    another country apart from the UK. He relies  on  the  following  dicta
    from paragraph 21 of RK:

         For an OFM to fulfil the household requirement he or she must  have
         lived with the Union citizen in the same country at  some  time  in
         the past (my emphasis), whilst dependency requires  no  such  link.



36. I accept that the implication of RK is that  there  can  be  a  lengthy
    interregnum during which the relative outside the UK is not a member of
    the  Union  citizen's  household   without   that   relative   becoming
    disqualified from subsequently claiming OFM status in the UK.

37. However, it was  not  part  of  the  appellants'  case  that  H  was  a
    Portuguese national in 2002. Therefore the judge did not err in law  in
    failing to consider whether this period of cohabitation qualified F for
    OFM status.

38. The same considerations apply to M.  In addition, I  am  not  persuaded
    that Mr Saeed's construction of Article 3(2)(a)  of  the  Directive  is
    correct. I consider that the OFM must show that he or she was a  member
    of the EEA national sponsor's household, and not merely  that  the  OFM
    and the sponsor lived under the same roof. If the head of the household
    and/or the provider of the accommodation  is  not  the  sponsoring  EEA
    national,  it  is  straining  the  language  of  Article   3(2)(a)   to
    characterise the  OFM  as  being  a  member  of  the  sponsoring  Union
    citizen's household, as opposed to (i) the sponsor being  a  member  of
    the OFM's household or (ii) the sponsor and the OFM  being  members  of
    someone else's household (e.g. members of K's household  prior  to  K's
    death). The guidance from Moneke which I have cited above  supports  my
    construction. It is also supported  by  Judge  Storey's  discussion  in
    Dahoo where he refers to the "EEA principal". This  term  implies  that
    the OFM must be occupying a subordinate position in  the  household  of
    the EEA principal in order to be treated as a member of his  household,
    even if the OFM  is  not  otherwise  dependent  on  the  EEA  principal
    (because, for instance, he or she has independent  means).  However,  I
    accept that there are other passages in Moneke and elsewhere which  are
    consistent with the more  liberal  construction  contended  for  by  Mr
    Saeed. For that reason, I primarily base my decision on the fact that H
    is not shown to have acquired Portuguese nationality at the time when F
    and M were residing under the same roof as him in Portugal.

    Membership of Household in UK

39. The Judge did not make a specific finding  on  whether  M  and  F  were
    living under the same roof as H. But it is reasonably apparent from his
    other findings that he treated this as an accepted  fact.  It  is  also
    reasonably apparent that he did not accept that M and F were members of
    H's household, as opposed to H and F being members of M's household. He
    did not accept that H was providing M with accommodation (paragraph 6).
    The evidence indicated to him that it was the other way round:  that  M
    was providing H and F with accommodation, since "the  tenancy  appeared
    to be in the name of their mother"  (paragraph  7)  and  there  was  no
    evidence that H was paying rent (paragraph 7).  The  failure  to  prove
    that M was  financially  dependent  on  H  fed  into  an  implicit  and
    sustainable finding that M was not a member of H's household.

40. F stands in the same position as H vis-�-vis  her  mother.  It  follows
    from the judge's  findings  that  she  is  a  member  of  her  mother's
    household, as opposed to being a member of H's household.

41. On an alternative and more liberal construction of the  "membership  of
    household" requirement, M and F meet this criterion. But they only meet
    it in the United Kingdom, and this is not sufficient to  enable  either
    of them to qualify as family members of  H  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Regulations 2006. So even if the judge erred in law in not finding that
    M and F are members of H's household in the United Kingdom,  the  error
    is not material.

42. In conclusion, and for the reasons I have given above, I find the First-
    tier Tribunal did not err in law in dismissing the appellants' appeals.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and so the decision stands.


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

