





UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05073/2014
                                                               IA/05074/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2 October 2014                            |On 13 October 2014           |
|Prepared:  10 October 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Ms Salamatu Freeman
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M A Rana, counsel (instructed by Daniel Aramide
Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to  the  appellant  as  "the
      secretary of state" and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is the mother of Titus Samura born on 14th December 2008.
      His appeal was allowed on 11 July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  R
      I Kanagaratnam as referred to below.


   3. His mother is a Sierra Leone national, born on 19th July 1972.


   4. The claimant and her son originally appealed against the  decision  of
      the secretary of state dated the  10th  January  2014  refusing  their
      applications for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of  Article  8
      of the Human Rights convention.


   5. The secretary of state had considered  the  applications  pursuant  to
      Article 8 under paragraphs 276ADE of the rules, finding that they  had
      not met the relevant requirements.


   6. Their appeals against  those  decisions  were  allowed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge R I Kanagaratnam in a determination promulgated on 11th
      July 2014. Although it is stated that the case  was  heard  at  Hatton
      Cross on the papers, it is evident that both parties were  represented
      at the hearing, where evidence was given.


   7. The  Judge  found  that  the  claimant  did  not  have  sole  parental
      responsibility for  her  son  although  she  had  a  genuine  parental
      relationship with him [7]. The  Judge  referred  to  the  requirements
      under paragraph 276ADE setting out the requirements to be  met  by  an
      applicant for leave to remain as a parent on the grounds of private or
      family life in the UK.


   8. He also referred to the  requirements  to  be  met  as  a  partner  as
      contained in R-LTRP.1.1 (d) of Appendix FM. He found that she was  not
      married to Mr Sanura and had not been able to establish at  least  two
      years' cohabitation with him prior to the date of her application. She
      admitted  having  lived  in  Bristol.   She   provided   documentation
      confirming that she was  living  in  Bristol  in  December  2013.  She
      subsequently moved to her brother's residence and  thereafter  to  "Mr
      Sanura's place in London" [7].


   9. In considering her claim to remain as a parent, the Judge  noted  that
      she had claimed to live with the father of their  child  in  a  family
      unit. He proceeded to consider her evidence as to whether she had sole
      responsibility  for  the  child.  He  concluded  that  she   had   not
      established that she has sole  parental  responsibility  as  required,
      despite the fact that she has a genuine parental relationship with her
      son.


  10. Judge Kanagaratnam then considered her  application  under  the  Human
      Rights Convention ".....on a stand alone basis of Izuazu (Article 8  -
      new rules) [2-13] UKUT 0045 (IAC)".


  11. He set out the steps referred to in Razgar. He noted that it had  been
      conceded "on new evidence" that her son (the  second  claimant  before
      the First-tier Tribunal) is a British citizen. His father had not been
      present at the hearing. Her son is six years old and both parents  are
      of Sierra Leonean origin.


  12. He also considered the rights of the claimant child "upon  which  much
      emphasis has been placed" and in  considering  s.55  of  the  Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, noted that the child is British.


  13. In considering his best interests he directed  himself  in  accordance
      with ZH (Tanzania) [2011]. He stated that while the interests  of  the
      child "may be the overarching  issue"  he  went  on  to  consider  the
      "specific question of circumstances and whether it is  permissible  to
      remove a non citizen parent."


  14. He found that, given the case specific nature of the  claimant's  case
      and the position in EM and Others (Zimbabwe) the  tender  age  of  the
      child would cause the Article 8 balance to be tipped in favour of  the
      claimants.


  15. He had regard to the precarious immigration circumstances in which the
      child was conceived. Despite those circumstances, the  child  had  not
      been party to any of the "breaches". He found that the child's welfare
      would be prejudiced by the removal of his mother, whom he accepted had
      cared for him as the main, albeit not sole carer.


  16. He also considered in this context "the position" in Chikwamba v  SSHD
      [2-8] UKHL 40 and found that it would be  disproportionate  to  ignore
      the fact that the father has indefinite leave to remain and little  is
      known as to the future plans of the parents who now live together.


  17. For those reasons he found that it cannot be said that  there  are  no
      countervailing factors "that weight (sic) towards  consolidating  this
      family   in   the   UK."   Accordingly,   their   removal   would   be
      disproportionate.


  18. The grounds accompanying the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
      argued that the claimant did not have sole responsibility for her  son
      and did not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  a
      partner. The Judge however had failed to consider at all whether there
      was "arguably good grounds for proceeding to assess the  appeal  as  a
      free standing Article 8 claim (Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)).


  19. On 19th August  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Reid  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal in respect of the claimant, Ms
      Freeman. The Judge pointed out that  the  determination  was  also  in
      respect of the claimant's British son, Titus, but no  application  for
      permission to appeal by the secretary of state appears  to  have  been
      lodged.


  20. In granting the secretary of state permission  to  appeal,  she  found
      that it was arguable that the Judge failed to make  adequate  findings
      in respect of the Immigration Rules and also failed  to  address  what
      grounds there were for proceeding to  make  an  Article  8  assessment
      "outwith the rules."


  21. Mr Whitwell relied on the reasons  for  appealing  identified  in  the
      secretary of state's application.


  22. Having found that the claimant could not qualify for leave  to  remain
      under the Immigration Rules, it was only if there may be arguably good
      grounds for granting leave to remain outside the rules that  it  would
      be necessary for the Judge to proceed to consider  whether  there  are
      compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


  23. The Judge had failed  to  consider  the  claimants'  case  "correctly"
      outside the rules, having regard to Nagre. There were no  findings  or
      reasons as to why there are arguably good grounds for  granting  leave
      outside the rules.


  24. The claimant  could  return  to  Sierra  Leone  and  apply  for  entry
      clearance as the partner of a settled person in the UK under  Appendix
      FM. The child could remain here with his father or go with his  mother
      to Sierra Leone, pending that application.


  25. There were accordingly no compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
      recognised under the rules.


  26. Mr Rana submitted that the Judge  has  appropriately  dealt  with  the
      claimants'  case  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  rules.  He   also
      considered the case under Appendix FM, finding  that  she   failed  to
      meet the eligibility requirements for limited leave  to  remain  as  a
      parent as she did not show that she had sole  parental  responsibility
      for the child.


  27. The Judge was accordingly entitled to proceed to consider  the  appeal
      under the Human Rights Convention (Article 8). He submitted  that  the
      Judge took  into  account  all  the  relevant  factors  including  the
      interests of the secretary of state [8]. He balanced the interests  of
      the child, noting the fact that he was a British citizen of  a  tender
      age.  He  also  balanced  that  against  the  precarious   immigration
      circumstances in which the child was conceived. He  accordingly  found
      that it would be  a  disproportionate  interference  were  the  mother
      and/or child to be required to make an application from abroad.


Assessment


  28. I have had regard to the recent decision in MM (Lebanon) and Others  v
      SSHD and others [2014] EWCA Civ  985  (Court  of  Appeal)  where  Lord
      Justice Aikens had regard to R (Nagre) v SSHD [128].


  29. He noted that the secretary of state had issued guidance in  the  form
      of instructions  regarding  the  approach  of  officials  in  deciding
      whether to grant leave to remain outside the rules in the exercise  of
      the residual discretion that the secretary of state had to grant  such
      leave.  It  could  be  granted  in  "exceptional  circumstances".   He
      recognised that the new rules  could  not  provide  for  all  possible
      circumstances that might arise under Article 8. The  new  rules  would
      guide the decision makers in most cases. In those cases not covered by
      the new rules, only if there is an "arguable case" that there  may  be
      good grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules  by
      reference to Article 8 would it be necessary for Article 8 purposes to
      go on to consider whether there are compelling circumstances to  grant
      leave.


  30. Lord Justice Aikens also considered MF (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2014]  1WLR
      544 and SSHD v Shahad [2014] UKUT  85  (IAC).  At  paragraph  135,  he
      stated that where the relevant group of immigration rules, upon  their
      proper construction, provide a "complete  code"  for  dealing  with  a
      person's Convention rights in the context of a particular  immigration
      rule  or  statutory  provision,  such  as  in  the  case  of  "foreign
      criminals", then the  balancing  exercise  and  the  way  the  various
      factors are to be taken into account in an  individual  case  must  be
      done  in  circumstances  with  that  code,  although   references   to
      "exceptional circumstances" in the code would  nevertheless  entail  a
      proportionality exercise. If the relevant group of rules is not such a
      "complete code" then the proportionality test will be more  at  large,
      albeit guided by the Huang tests and the UK and Strasbourg case law  -
      MF (Nigeria), supra, at [45].


  31. In MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, the judgment of the court
      was that the new rules are a complete code and  that  the  exceptional
      circumstances to be considered in the balancing exercise  involve  the
      application of a proportionality test as required  by  the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence. Accordingly, it is not correct that the decision  maker
      is not "mandated or directed" to  take  all  the  relevant  Article  8
      criteria into account.


  32. Even if wrong about that, the court went on to hold that it  would  be
      necessary to apply a proportionality test outside the  new  rules,  as
      was done by the Upper Tribunal in MF. Either way, the result should be
      the same.


  33. Although the context of the decision in MF related to the  deportation
      of a foreign national criminal, said to have been contrary to  Article
      8 of the Human Rights Convention, the construction by the Court of the
      new rules applies equally to the present context.


  34. Judge Kanagaratnam in effect held that it would be necessary to  apply
      a proportionality  test  outside  the  new  rules.  That  approach  is
      consistent with the analysis and conclusions in MM, supra  [135].  The
      relevant group of rules applicable in this  case  is  not  a  complete
      code. Accordingly, the proportionality test "will be  more  at  large"
      albeit guided by the Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.

  35. Judge Kanagaratnam set out and had regard to the well known  questions
      to be asked in an   appeal  of  this  nature  as  summarised  by  Lord
      Bingham (in an appeal against removal on Article 8 grounds) in  Razgar
      v SSHS [2004] UKHL 27.

  36. In the earlier decision in Huang, the House of  Lords  emphasised  the
      importance of careful investigation of the relevant  facts  (paragraph
      15).  At the same time, they acknowledged the need to give  weight  to
      the established regime of  immigration  control.   The  importance  of
      family life (paragraph 18) was also emphasised as was  the  nature  of
      proportionality (paragraph 20).

  37. Huang's case offered the guidance that  in  assessing  proportionality
      there is no legal test of "truly exceptional circumstances."   It  was
      stated that  the  ultimate  question  for  the  appellate  immigration
      authorities whether the refusal  of  leave  to  enter  or  remain,  in
      circumstances where the  life  of  the  family  cannot  reasonably  be
      expected  to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking  full  account  of   all
      considerations weighing in  favour  of  the  refusal,  prejudices  the
      family life of the Applicant  in  a  manner  sufficiently  serious  to
      amount to a breach of fundamental rights protected by Article  8.   If
      the answer to this question is affirmative, the  refusal  is  unlawful
      and the authority must so  decide.   It  is  not  necessary  that  the
      appellate immigration authority,  directing  itself  along  the  lines
      indicated in this opinion, need ask in addition whether the case meets
      a test of exceptionality.


  38. Although, as submitted by Mr Whitwell, the basis for the "stand alone"
      Article 8 analysis  was  not  clearly  identified,  and  although  the
      proportionality analysis  might  have  been  the  subject  of  greater
      detail, I nevertheless  find  that  the  Judge  has  directed  himself
      appropriately and has given sustainable reasons for finding  that  the
      interference   contemplated   would   be   disproportionate   in   the
      circumstances.


  39. Having found that the  claimant  could  not  succeed  under  paragraph
      276ADE, the Judge properly applied a proportionality test outside  the
      rules in accordance with the authorities, including Razgar.


  40. Although the analysis, assessment  and  reasoning  undertaken  may  be
      sparse, I do not  find  that  the  decision  reached  is  in  any  way
      irrational or perverse or inconsistent with the evidence before him.


     Decision


     The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not involve  the
making of     any material error on a  point  of  law.  The  decision  shall
accordingly stand.


     No anonymity direction made.



                               Signed                 Date 10/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
