
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05194/2013
                                                               IA/05199/2013
                                                               IA/05203/2013
                                                               IA/05210/2013
                                                               IA/05207/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th February, 2014                        |On 13th March, 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              Shakil Ahmed Khan
                                Samina Shakil
                              Hunain Ahmed Khan
                                 Sonia Khan
                                 Khan Hunza

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Chhotu of Counsel instructed by Henneberry & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer






                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are husband  and  wife  and  the  third,  fourth  and  fifth
    appellants are the children of the first and second  appellants.   They
    are all over the age of 18 and were at the date of their applications.

2.   On 10th June,  2007,  the  first  appellant  and  his  son,  the  third
    appellant, entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa  indicating  that
    they wished to visit Danish Ahmed  Khan  who  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on a work permit in January 2007.  Danish Ahmed Khan is the son
    of the first and second appellants.

3.   The second appellant, accompanied by her two children, the  fourth  and
    fifth appellants, entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa  some  two
    months later, indicating that they were also coming  to  visit  Danish.
    All the appellants overstayed.

4.   On 10th January, 2013, the appellants applied for  residence  cards  as
    the family members of an EEA national.  The EEA national in question is
    the wife of Danish, Aksar Afsal Chowdhury.  She and Danish were married
    in the United Kingdom in a ceremony according to Islamic tradition  and
    rites in August 2012 and  in  December  2012  they  underwent  a  civil
    marriage.  Before coming to the United  Kingdom  on  25th  June,  2005,
    Danish Ahmed Khan's wife, Aksar Afsal Chowdhury was living in Holland.

5.   The applications made  by  the  appellants  were  all  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State and the reasons were  set  out  in  a  'Reasons  for
    Refusal' Letter of 12th February, 2013.   The  Notices  of  Refusal  to
    issue residence cards were dated 14th March, 2013, and  the  appellants
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   It is clear from the file that the matter was brought to the  attention
    of the Resident Upper Tribunal Judge at the hearing  centre  in  Hatton
    Cross, because the parties  were  advised  that  the  appeal  had  been
    assigned to a 'float' list.  A float list is a list of cases  which  it
    is expected judges will take in the event that their lists  fall  short
    for some reason.

7.   That was a mistake.

8.   This matter should never have been listed as a float case.

9.   It was a mistake because four bundles of evidence appear to  have  been
    submitted on behalf of the appellants and  apart  from  the  fact  that
    reference is made to a "skeleton argument" which did not appear in  the
    bundles, it would have taken somebody at least  an  hour  and  probably
    two, just to familiarise themselves with the content of the bundles.

10.  Unfortunately,  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  heard  this
    appeal, the skeleton argument did not appear in the bundle.  I have now
    seen it and it is anything but a skeleton.  It is a written submission.
     Undoubtedly it would have assisted the judge had she  read  it  before
    the hearing.  Unfortunately it was handed to her by counsel during  the
    hearing.  When documents are not submitted in advance of the hearing in
    strict accordance with directions, judges do not have  the  opportunity
    of being able to read the documents.

11.  This judge clearly had not read the skeleton argument, (because it  had
    not even been filed by the start of the hearing) but proceeded to  deal
    with the appeal and gave to the representatives who appeared before her
    a copy of a case which she thought was on point.  In fact it  does  not
    appear to have been.

12.  Having heard some oral evidence, the judge indicated that as the  issue
    was dependency; she could not understand  how  the  evidence  of  other
    witnesses would assist her in determining that issue.   I  am  told  by
    Counsel today that he made a robust request that he should be permitted
    to call the other witnesses and that the judge should hear the evidence
    of the other witnesses, because it was relevant  to  the  appeal.   The
    judge  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeal  and  the  first  ground  of
    challenge and, it transpires, the main ground of challenge,  is  as  to
    procedural unfairness because, it is  suggested,  the  appellants  were
    denied the opportunity of giving evidence to the judge.

13.  Mr Tarlow  suggested  that  it  appears,  having  read  the  Record  of
    Proceedings that the judge simply said that she could not see  how  the
    evidence of the other witnesses would assist in determining the  issue;
    that  in  effect  there  was  an  agreement   between   her   and   the
    representatives that no further evidence should be  called.   I  rather
    agreed, but I am advised by Counsel who was present at the time that he
    made a robust submission to her and he is very clear  about  that.   In
    the circumstances, I find that there is an error on a point of  law  in
    the determination.

14.  I suggested to both representatives that the matter should  be  reheard
    afresh by the First-tier, because clearly  it  will  be  necessary  for
    clear findings of fact to be made this appeal before the matter can  be
    decided.  Neither representative objected to the matter being  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal and, mindful of paragraph 7  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice  Statement,  and  having  regard  to  the  overall
    objectives set out in Rule 2 of the Procedure  Rules,  I  am  satisfied
    that this is a matter which falls squarely within paragraph  7  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement given the length of time that the
    appellants would have to wait  before  the  matter  could  be  relisted
    before me at Field House.  It  could  conversely  be  heard  relatively
    speedily by the First-tier Tribunal.   I  decided  therefore  that  the
    matter will be remitted for hearing by the First-tier  Tribunal  afresh
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Margot Ford.

15.  I am told that there will be five witnesses.

16.  For listing purposes I am told that there will be a requirement for  an
    Urdu interpreter for two of them.

17.  Witnesses can of course adopt statements that they have made, but  they
    will only be permitted to adopt statements where English is their first
    language, or,  if  English  is  not  their  first  language,  if  their
    statement contains an endorsement by a suitably  qualified  interpreter
    that prior to signing the statement,  the  maker  of  it  has  had  the
    statement had its contents and any documents  to  which  the  statement
    refers, read to  them  in  their  own  language  and  that  they  first
    confirmed that they have no objections, alterations or comments to make
    on it and are content that the contents of it are true.  If  statements
    from witnesses whose first language is not  English  are  prepared  and
    endorsed in that manner and submitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  then
    it will obviously save time in disposing of the matter.  Nonetheless, I
    believe that this appeal should  be  allocated  a  whole  day  for  its
    disposal.

18.  Any documents should be submitted to the Tribunal no later  then  seven
    clear working days before  the  hearing  in  order  that  they  can  be
    properly read and considered by the  judge  before  the  start  of  the
    hearing.

Summary

    a. Remittal to the First Tier Tribunal (NOT before Judge Margot Ford)


    b. None of the findings to stand.

    c. Evidence to be given by 5 witnesses.

    d. Urdu interpreted required.

    e. 1 whole day to be allocated to the hearing.

    f. Documents to be submitted  no  later  than  seven  days  before  the
       hearing.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
