
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05462/2015
                                                               IA/05463/2015
                                                               IA/05721/2015
                                                               IA/05724/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th August 2016                  |On 14th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

               mr Diponkar Chandra Karmakar (first Appellant)
                     mrs Priyanka Pal (second Appellant)
                  mrs Syeda Kaniz Fatema (third Appellant)
                     mr Fakharul Alam (fourth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Seehara of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clark


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Bangladesh.  They were born on  25th
    December 1983, 25th November 1988, 8th January 1983  and  30th  January
    1981 respectively.  The first two Appellants are husband and  wife  and
    the wife is wholly dependent for any status  in  this  country  on  her
    husband's claim.  The third and fourth Appellants are  also  a  husband
    and wife but it is the husband  who  is  entirely  dependent  upon  his
    wife's  claim  for  status  in  this  country.   The   Appellants   are
    represented by Miss Seehra of Counsel.  The Respondent was  represented
    by Mr Clark, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. Application was made by the Appellants for leave to remain  as  Tier  1
    Entrepreneurs on 28th August 2014.  The  Respondent  had  refused  that
    application on 27th January 2015.

 3. The Appellants had appealed that decision and their appeal was heard by
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Eldridge  sitting   at   Richmond
    Magistrates' Court on 14th January 2016.  The judge had dismissed their
    appeals on all grounds.  Application for permission to appeal was  made
    and granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on 4th  July  2016.   It
    was said by the judge that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal
    had made an error as the  judge  had  barred  the  admission  of  post-
    application evidence but such bar only apply to  point-scoring  reasons
    and the refusal of the application in this case had been on  non-point-
    scoring reasons.  Permission to appeal was granted.

 4. Directions were set for the matter to be heard by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    firstly to decide whether or not an error of law had been made in  this
    case.  The matter comes before me in accordance with those  directions.



Submissions on Behalf of the Appellants

 5. Miss Seehra referred me to the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the  skeleton
    argument that had been presented before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    was submitted by her that the judge had failed to engage  with  all  of
    the evidence.  This related to post-application material.

 6. Secondly it was said that there was an issue of fairness in this  case,
    in that the Respondent's refusal letter had raised fresh  matters  that
    had not  been  put  to  the  Appellants  on  a  previous  occasion  and
    accordingly the Appellants had had no opportunity to  deal  with  those
    fresh matters raised and that was and had led to  an  unfair  position.
    Finally it was said that with regard to the question of  fairness  that
    should have entered  into  a  consideration  of  proportionality  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 7. Mr Clark referred me to the case of Nassim where it was submitted  that
    it was possible to put evidence in so long as that  was  prior  to  the
    Respondent's decision.  In relation  to  the  matter  raised  when  the
    application was granted, I was referred to the case of  Ahmed  and  the
    link between point-based decisions and non-point-based refusal.

 8. Mr Clark then submitted in respect of the main features in the  Grounds
    of Appeal where it was said that there had been a failure  to  consider
    evidence or an unfairness  in  the  way  that  the  evidence  had  been
    approached.  Finally it was submitted that it would have been an  error
    of law for the  judge  to  have  looked  at  postdecision  evidence  in
    accordance with the decision in Ahmed.

 9. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and the submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

10. Permission to appeal was granted principally  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge on application found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred
    in not admitting or considering post-application evidence.  It was said
    that such bar only applied to point-scoring reasons.   It  was  further
    said that the refusal was based on non-point-scoring reasons and it was
    therefore an error to refuse such  further  post-application  evidence.
    The Grounds of Appeal seeking permission and submissions  were  put  in
    more general terms of unfairness.

11. The First-tier Judge had noted at paragraph 4 that the application made
    by the  two  pairs  of  Appellants  for  leave  to  remain  as  Tier  1
    Entrepreneurs was an application requiring the acquisition  of  points.
    The judge further noted at paragraph 4  that  refusal  had  been  under
    paragraph 245DD, in particular paragraph 245DD(h)(i) and (ii).

12. He correctly identified at paragraph 13 the case of Ahmed  [2014]  UKUT
    00365.  Contrary to the assertions made  strongly  in  the  grounds  of
    application the judge did not err in his approach.  He noted  paragraph
    5 of Ahmed where the vice president stated

         "Where  a  points-based  application  is  made  and   refused   the
         assessment by the judge is to be of the material  that  was  before
         the decision maker rather than a new consideration of new material.
          In other words the appeal if it is successful is on the basis that
         the decision maker with the material before him should have made  a
         different decision not  on  the  basis  that  a  different  way  of
         presenting  the  application  would  have  produced   a   different
         decision".

13. Whether or not that is unfair (as argued by  Miss  Seehra)  or  not  is
    academic.  The judge is constrained by Section 85A of the 2002  Act  as
    interpreted in Ahmed from considering evidence not before the  original
    decision maker.  Having correctly identified the  legal  framework  the
    judge next correctly asked himself what was  the  evidence  before  the
    decision maker.   He  identified  that  evidence  with  proper  reasons
    provided at paragraphs 16 to 18.  That investigation denoted no  error.



14. Thereafter the judge correctly identified his task was to  see  whether
    the decision maker should have made a different decision on  the  basis
    of that material.  He looked carefully at that  material  and  analysed
    the salient features at paragraphs 19 to 28  and  concluded  for  clear
    reasons provided that the Respondent was perfectly entitled  to  refuse
    both applications on the basis that she did.  He had further noted that
    whilst Miss Seehra had raised discretion as a  feature  she  had  never
    identified the basis upon which discretion  should  be  exercised.   He
    correctly concluded that there was no discretion conferred by the Rules
    that could or should have been exercised differently (paragraph 29).

15. He further noted that in general terms it was submitted (as before  me)
    that the decisions were  unfair.   The  judge  gave  cogent  and  clear
    reasons at paragraphs 30 to 31 why he did not accept  the  validity  of
    that argument, but also made it clear at paragraph 31 that in any event
    the issues put forward for claiming unfairness were  not  issues  taken
    into account by him in reaching his decision.

16. Finally the judge correctly dealt  with  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  (at
    paragraphs 32 to 37).  In summary the First-tier Judge gave a detailed,
    clear and legally correct judgment.  It was the granting  of  leave  to
    appeal that unfortunately was legally misconceived.

Notice of Decision

17. There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever                14th September 2016

