
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/05732/2015
      IA/05912/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                             |On 19 May 2016                |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             mary agyapoma sakyi
                          victoria agyakobea sackey
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, Counsel, instructed Ozoran Turken
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M A Khan (the judge), promulgated on 24 September  2015,
    in which he dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals.  Those  appeals  were
    against the Respondent's decisions of 26 January 2015, refusing to vary
    leave to remain and to remove the Appellants from  the  United  Kingdom
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. These cases arise out of tragic circumstances. The first  Appellant  is
    the aunt of R and D, both British citizens who have always  resided  in
    this country. The second Appellant is their grandmother. In  May  2012,
    when D was still a minor  and  R  only  a  young  adult,  their  father
    murdered their mother and then killed himself.  The  Appellants  sought
    entry clearance to attend the mother's funeral. This was duly  granted.
    Once in this country, the Appellant's sought an extension of  leave  in
    order to provide additional care for D and R. Further leave was granted
    by the Respondent on a discretionary basis,  in  particular  that  care
    should be provided to D until she became eighteen. On 18 November  2014
    the  Appellants  sought  another  extension.  These  applications  were
    refused



The judge's decision

 3. In a fairly brief decision, the judge finds that D and R had  benefited
    from the Appellants' presence in the United Kingdom (paragraph 37).  He
    finds that other friends had assisted D and R prior to the  Appellants'
    arrival, and that D and R had managed "quite well". R had  completed  a
    degree and was in employment; D was at university  (paragraph  38).  He
    finds that D and R had forged their own  lives  and  that  the  purpose
    initially served by the Appellants had now been served (paragraph  39).
    There was no family  life  as  between  the  Appellants  and  D  and  R
    (paragraph 41). The Appellants' private life could continue  in  Ghana.
    Having applied the relevant factors under Part 5A of the NIAA 2002, the
    judge concludes that removal would be proportionate. The  appeals  were
    dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds assert that the judge erred in three ways: in finding  that
    no family life existed; in failing to consider the evidence before him;
    in failing to undertake an adequate proportionality exercise.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    29 February 2016.



The hearing before me

 6. Mr Burrett submitted that the errors identified  in  the  grounds  were
    made out. They were, taken as a whole, material to the outcome  of  the
    appeals. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge had  taken  all  relevant
    matters into account.  Even  if  there  were  errors,  these  were  not
    material.

Decision on error of law

 7. I announced to the parties at the hearing that  I  found  there  to  be
    material errors of law in the judge's decision. I now give my reasons.

 8. In respect of family life, the judge does not engage with the  evidence
    as a whole when reaching his finding on this point. He  fails  to  deal
    with the evidence before him concerning the nature of the ties  between
    the Appellants and D in particular. If the judge had this  evidence  in
    mind,  there  are  no  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  it  and  thus
    concluding that there was nothing beyond "normal" ties.

 9. It is right that the judge found the Appellant's to have  private  life
    here, if not  family  life.  In  principle,  this  could  lead  to  the
    conclusion that the error set out above is not material.  However,  the
    manner in which the judge has dealt  with  private  life  is  to  focus
    exclusively on the Appellants, without proper regard to D and R.  As  a
    consequence, the private life consideration has  missed  out  important
    aspects of the Appellants' case. The error is material.

10. Related to the first error is the judge's failure to deal with relevant
    aspects of the evidence before him, in  particular  a  detailed  letter
    from a psychotherapist and statements from  R  and  D  themselves  (all
    contained within the Appellant's bundle). With respect  to  the  judge,
    too much space was taken up by citations from Part 5A of the  2002  Act
    and case-law, and not enough afforded  to  the  evidence  and  findings
    based thereon. This is a second material error.

11. Finally, as a result of the first tow errors, the judge  has,  I  find,
    failed to  conduct  an  adequate  balancing  exercise  based  upon  the
    evidence before him.

12. In light of what I said, the judge's decision is set aside.



Remaking the decisions in the Appellants' appeals

13. Both representatives were agreed that I should remake the decisions  on
    the evidence before me. Neither of the Appellants attended the hearing.
    I was satisfied that they were aware of the  hearing.  Mr  Burrett  was
    content to proceed in their absence. There was in my view no  need  for
    additional oral evidence and thus I decided to proceed.

The evidence before me

14. I have before me the following evidence: the Respondent's bundle before
    the First-tier Tribunal and the Appellant's bundle (AB).

Submissions

15. Mr Burrett made the following submissions.  The  Appellants  could  not
    succeed under the Rules.  The  Respondent  had  previously  granted  an
    extension of leave to the  Appellants  on  compassionate  grounds.  The
    friends referred to by the judge had only assisted for  some  three  or
    four  months.  The  Appellants  continued  to  provide  vital  support,
    particularly for D. I was referred to D's statement at pages 26-28  AB.
    There was no evidence of professional input now. R lives together  with
    the Appellants. D resides in Northampton (where she attends university)
    during  the  week  but  comes  to  London  every  weekend  to  see  the
    Appellants. I was referred to the GP report at pages 41-42 AB,  and  to
    the  psychotherapist's  report  at  166-167  AB.  Overall,  Mr  Burrett
    submitted, there are compelling circumstances in these cases.

16. Ms Fijiwala relied on the fact that the Rules could not  be  satisfied.
    The Respondent's decision letters were relied on. D was  now  an  adult
    and was living away  from  home.  Any  therapy  D  is  receiving  could
    continue. She has her brother's support.  The  reasons  why  leave  was
    extended by the Respondent previously have now gone.

Findings and reasons

17. I have considered the evidence  as  a  whole.  The  burden  of  proving
    relevant facts rests with the Appellants.

18. I have no proper reason to doubt the credibility of the  Appellants,  R
    or D. The Respondent has not sought to  challenge  the  reliability  of
    their evidence. I find all the  evidence  before  me  to  be  credible,
    including that from independent sources.

19. R and D's mother was murdered by their father  in  May  2012.  He  then
    committed suicide. It is rather stating the obvious that  this  was  an
    extremely traumatic experience for R and D. D was then  still  a  minor
    (being fifteen years old), a fact which I would infer made  the  matter
    even worse. R was an adult, but not by a substantial period.

20. I find that the Appellants initially arrived here on the genuine  basis
    of wishing to deal with the mother's funeral. They had every  intention
    of leaving the United Kingdom. I accept that R and D had some help from
    friends here, but that this was for a short period only. I  also  find,
    as stated by the first Appellant, that in fact these  friends  did  not
    provide real help beyond the time of the funeral.

21. Unsurprisingly and to their credit, the Appellants saw the suffering of
    their relatives and regarded it as a familial duty to  assist.  I  find
    that they sought legal advice and them made an in-time  application  to
    the Respondent for an extension of leave.

22. The Respondent was clearly sympathetic to the  family's  situation:  an
    extension of leave was granted (not something that  is  done  lightly).
    The extension lasted until D reached her eighteenth birthday.

23. I find that R did complete his degree and is now in steady  employment.
    He still lives with the Appellants. Having regard to his age  when  the
    tragic events occurred in May 2012  (twenty  years  old),  his  current
    circumstances, and his statement at page 31 AB, I  infer  that  he  has
    probably coped better with what has happened than his sister.  That  is
    not to say that the Appellants have played an insignificant role in his
    life. I find that their presence and support will have been crucial  in
    helping to ensure that R maintained a relatively  focused  line  during
    the completion of his degree and into the world  of  work.  Taking  the
    evidence as a whole, and in particular the horrific genesis of the case
    and the on going support offered by the Appellants, I find  that  there
    is a special bond between them and  R  which  goes  beyond  a  'normal'
    relationship.

24. Turning to D, I find that the evidence set  out  in  her  statement  at
    pages 25-30 AB is compelling. It is quite clear  that  the  murder  and
    suicide constituted a devastating  blow  to  her  emotional  wellbeing.
    There was obviously a very close bond  between  D  and  her  mother.  I
    accept, based on what is said in her statement at pages 28-29 AB,  that
    to an extent the Appellants have filled the gap  left  by  her  mother.
    This  is  reflected  in   the   detailed   report   from   Ms   Dodgen,
    psychotherapist, at pages 167-168 AB. I accept that  D  was  presenting
    with features of PTSD and Severe  Major  Depressive  Disorder  when  Ms
    Dodgen met her in 2014. There is nothing in the rest  of  the  evidence
    before me which contradicts this state of affairs. I find  that  it  is
    not inconsistent with D's ability to have started her degree, given the
    support she was receiving from the Appellants and R. The importance  of
    the support from the former is remarked upon by Ms Dodgen at  page  167
    AB. I find this evidence, combined with that of the Appellants  and  D,
    goes to show that there are very close bonds indeed as  between  D  and
    the Appellants.

25. I find that D is currently in her second year of the degree  course  at
    university. I find that she lives in student accommodation  during  the
    week, but comes to London every weekend to see R and the Appellants, as
    claimed in the evidence before me.

26. I find that D does in fact continue to rely heavily upon the  emotional
    support of the Appellants notwithstanding that she is  undertaking  the
    degree in Northampton. I accept D's evidence that without  the  support
    of the Appellants she could not have begun the  degree  course  in  the
    first place. I infer that for the Appellants to depart  midway  through
    the course would be a very significant blow to  D,  with  the  distinct
    possibility that she might not compete her studies.

27. There is no evidence before me that D is receiving on going  specialist
    mental health treatment. I find that she is not. I infer from this that
    her situation is not as bad as it otherwise could be, and also that the
    Appellants are providing useful support which has a positive impact  on
    her wellbeing.

28. In respect of the Appellants' own personal circumstances, I  find  that
    they had settled lives in Ghana prior to arriving  here.  I  find  that
    they could quite readily re-enter Ghana and fit back into  those  lives
    now. There is no evidence to the contrary.

29. The second Appellant may be relatively  elderly  now,  but  I  have  no
    evidence that any medical conditions are  significantly  disabling,  or
    that treatment is not available in Ghana. I emphasise that the  appeals
    have not  been  argued  on  the  basis  of  any  difficulties  for  the
    Appellants in reintegrating into Ghanaian society. I  find  that  there
    are no such difficulties.





Conclusions on the Article 8 claims

30. Neither Appellant can satisfy the Rules as they relate  to  Article  8.
    This in itself counts against them when conducting the  proportionality
    exercise. It also means that I am  following  the  Razgar  step-by-step
    approach.

31. I conclude that there is family life as between the Appellants,  R  and
    D. As a consequence of the tragic events  in  2012  and  the  on  going
    support provided by the Appellants to R and D, there  are  ties  beyond
    those to be expected between the individuals concerned.

32. The Appellants also have  private  lives  here,  the  most  significant
    aspect of which is the relationship with R and D.

33. Removal would constitute a sufficiently serious interference  with  the
    family and private lives so as to engage Article 8.

34. The Respondent's decisions were in accordance with  the  law  and  they
    pursue a legitimate aim.

35. So to proportionality. Having regard to section  117B(1)  of  the  2002
    Act, the public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration  control  is  a
    weighty factor in this case. Both Appellants have  only  ever  been  in
    this country on a very limited basis. Added to this is  the  fact  that
    they cannot meet the Rules.

36. I do not have a great deal of  evidence  relating  to  the  Appellants'
    ability to speak English, but I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  it  is
    reasonable.

37. As far as I can see, the  Appellants  have,  through  various  sources,
    supported themselves financially whilst here. Although it is said  that
    the second Appellant has certain conditions, there is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that she has had recourse to the NHS (at least  not  yet),  and
    there is no evidence of an NHS debt.

38. The Appellants have not been here unlawfully  and  so  section  117B(4)
    does not apply.

39. The  Appellants'  position  in  the  United  Kingdom  has  always  been
    precarious,  albeit  lawful.  Thus,  section   117B(5)   applies.   The
    limitation of weight attributable to the private lives also applies  to
    the family lives.

40. In order to succeed outside of the Rules, "compelling" or "exceptional"
    circumstances need to exist. In my view they do, although  their  scope
    is limited.

41. It is clear to me  that  the  origins  of  these  cases  disclose  very
    compelling circumstances.  The  Respondent  has  not  sought  to  argue
    otherwise. Indeed, the extension of leave  granted  to  the  Appellants
    indicates a ready  acceptance  that  the  situation  then  compelled  a
    favourable exercise of discretion.

42. I conclude that such circumstances remain in respect of  D.  It  is  of
    course right that she is undertaking a degree and that she  lives  away
    from home during term-time weeks. However, it is also right, as I  have
    found, that she continues  to  rely  heavily  on  the  support  of  the
    Appellants the whole time. She sees  them  every  weekend  and  clearly
    regards them as being a bulwark against her  emotional  struggles.  The
    compelling nature of these circumstances has subsided over time  to  an
    extent, and it will probably continue  to  do  so.  Yet  as  of  now  I
    conclude that they remain material and sufficient to satisfy the 'test'
    enunciated in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  Taking  matters  in  the
    round, I would therefore conclude that the Appellants' connections with
    and  support  for  D  constitute  "compelling  circumstances"  for  the
    duration of the  latter's  degree  course.  Beyond  this,  and  on  the
    reasonable  basis  that  D  will  avail  herself   of   other   support
    mechanisms/treatments, it is unlikely that the Appellants' claims  will
    retain their exceptional quality.

43. I conclude that the currently compelling nature of the cases  outweighs
    the adverse matters in relation to Part 5A of the 2002 Act, as set  out
    above.

44. As they relate to R, the Appellants' cases do not disclose sufficiently
    compelling circumstances.

45. Aside from the  circumstances  relating  to  D  the  Appellants'  cases
    clearly could not succeed on any other basis.

46. I therefore allow the Appellants' appeal on the  fairly  limited  basis
    outlined above.

47. I am aware that the usual grant of leave in such situations  is  thirty
    months. However, the Respondent's guidance allows for lesser periods of
    leave to be granted where appropriate. In my view, the present  appeals
    might well fall into the category of cases in which a shorter period of
    leave is granted.

Anonymity

48. I make no direction in these appeals. None were sought.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision  by  allowing  both  appeals  on  Article  8  grounds
outside of the Immigration Rules.

Signed                                       Date:  17 May 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeals  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, I have considered making a fee award and have decided  to  make  no
fee award because the relevant evidence on which the Appellants have  relied
on in the success of their cases has been provided  after  the  applications
and notices of appeal.

Signed                                       Date:  17 May 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

