
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05691/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |On 4 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE GREEN
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                               mahari gebersus

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Chen, Legal Representative, instructed by
Duncan Lewis
     & Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is a resumed hearing which followed on from the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal dated 27 March 2014 setting aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  upon  the  basis  that  the  judge  therein   had
    misapplied the correct legal test.  In this judgment  we  refer  to  Mr
    Gebersus as the "Appellant" and to the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department as the "SSHD".

 2. In the First-tier Tribunal  decision  the  judge  applied  a  test  for
    Article 8 which the Upper Tribunal has  subsequently  found  to  be  in
    error.  The Upper Tribunal  held  that  the  Judge  erred  in  applying
    Article 8 in  a  freestanding  manner  and  not  by  reference  to  the
    materially more constrained test laid down in case law  which  requires
    compelling or exceptional circumstances within a  proportionality  test
    where the facts relating to the individual application are assessed  in
    their own light and then weighed against the important public  interest
    objectives which underpin the immigration regime.

 3. In relation to the policy  objectives  that  an  individual's  personal
    circumstances have to be weighed against, these have been  referred  to
    in many cases.  So, for example, in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC  4
    the Supreme Court held that the  interests  of  the  children,  and  in
    particular with regard to his nationality, whilst very  important  were
    not trump cards over all other  policy  considerations  which  included
    "...the need to  maintain  firm  and  fair  immigration  control"  (see
    paragraph 33).  In other cases, for instance involving the  deportation
    of foreign nationals found guilty of criminal acts, there is  a  public
    interest of considerable potency in deporting criminals and  protecting
    society from criminality. (See for example SS (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 550).

 4. In the present case it has been,  until  the  present  hearing,  common
    ground that the Appellant did not meet the conditions for being granted
    leave to remain under the Immigration Rules including those  components
    of the Rules which were designed to make an assessment of the right  of
    the Appellant under Article 8.  At the outset of the hearing before  us
    today Mr Chen indicated that he wished to contend that, in actual  fact
    and contrary to the  formally  agreed  position,  his  client  met  the
    Immigration Rules.  We indicated that we would hear  the  appeal  first
    upon the basis of the decision as taken below and then,  if  necessary,
    we would consider any alternative arguments.  For the reasons  we  give
    below it has not been necessary to explore whether the Appellant did in
    fact meet the requirements in the Immigration Rules.

 5. The question which arises for us is whether the  particular  facts  and
    circumstances surrounding the Appellant and his  family  give  rise  to
    some compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  which,  when  measured
    within the proportionality test, give rise to an Article 8 right  which
    must be recognised.

 6. We note that the  Tribunal  Judge  heard  oral  evidence  and  received
    detailed submissions upon the facts.  We also note that the  Tribunal's
    fact-finding differed in material respects from those of  the  SSHD  in
    her decision of 11 January 2013.  However, the facts  have  been  found
    and it is not for us to seek to make findings afresh.  We hence seek to
    apply the corrected law to the facts as found in the Judgment below.

 7. On the merits of this appeal we have come to  the  conclusion  that  we
    should not disturb the ultimate conclusion  arrived  at  by  the  judge
    below.

 8. In this respect we would emphasise that this is a finding  on  specific
    facts, that it is in our view a marginal decision, and that we  do  not
    in any sense consider that this would be a precedent  for  other  cases
    involving Eritrea or Malta.

 9. We have essentially come to this conclusion because when viewed in  the
    context of the usual facts which go into  a  proportionality  balancing
    exercise we consider that the facts of this case, in  combination,  are
    towards  the  extreme  -  "exceptional"  or  "compelling"  end  of  the
    spectrum.  For the very reason that we do not view this as a  precedent
    or having resonance outside of its particular facts we  will  summarise
    our conclusions briefly.

10. First, the Tribunal found as a fact that the Appellant and his  partner
    had a longstanding, genuine and subsisting family life.   The  Tribunal
    accepted that a  subsisting  relationship  dated  from  2003  when  the
    marriage between the two was arranged but that it  was  prevented  from
    coming to fruition by the Appellant being "taken" by  the  military  in
    2005 and that they came back together in the United Kingdom and  had  a
    child here in 2013: See the judgment below paragraphs 16-19.

11. Secondly, the Tribunal also found as a fact that there was no realistic
    option for the partner to relocate to Malta:  See  judgment,  paragraph
    22.  There was no evidence that she could move to Malta  in  the  sense
    that the Maltese authorities would  accept  her  at  all.   In  written
    submissions the SSHD engaged in some  ingenious  speculation.   In  the
    grounds of appeal  it  is  argued  that  since  the  partner  used  her
    "resourcefulness" to move to the United Kingdom and to establish  here,
    she could in effect use that same resourcefulness  to  move  to  Malta.
    There is however no evidence to suggest that this would be possible and
    this is inconsistent with the Tribunal's findings.   It  is  well-known
    that Malta, as a very small island, already has a  substantial  problem
    of ever increasing numbers of immigrants chasing limited work.  In  any
    event, even if the partner was to relocate to Malta and  the  Appellant
    was then removed back to Eritrea there is no question of her  returning
    to Eritrea given that she has refugee status in the United Kingdom.

12. Thirdly, the partner has indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom by virtue of her  refugee  status,  as  does  the  child.   The
    position of the child is important, albeit that it is  not  a  decisive
    consideration: See the analysis of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v
    SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

13. Fourthly, it is argued by the SSHD that the family life  is  precarious
    because the Appellant has made his application and sought to  establish
    that family life whilst having no permanent lawful right to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  His family life in the  United  Kingdom  is  hence
    said to be described as to some degree precarious.  We accept of course
    that in  policy  terms  the  SSHD  is  entitled  to  treat  those  with
    precarious family lives as having weak Article 8 rights where otherwise
    it would reward breaches  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  provide  an
    incentive to ignore visa limits.  However,  in  this  case  we  do  not
    consider that the family or private rights are precarious on the  facts
    as they have already been found.  They are longstanding  and  were  not
    generated for the purposes of an application.   On  the  contrary  they
    predated the application by a number of years.

14. Fifthly, it is clear that the family has no connection with  Malta  and
    were the Appellant to be removed to Malta there would be no prospect of
    his family law rights and those of his partner being  maintained  in  a
    sensible or rational way as indeed, once again, was found by the  judge
    below.

15. Sixthly, and importantly, because the facts of this case  are  unusual,
    we are clear that this is not a precedent and it  would  not  harm  the
    integrity  of  the  immigration  system.   This  is  not  a   case   of
    criminality.  Nor is this a case  where  to  permit  the  Appellant  to
    remain would set a dangerous precedent about precarious family life  or
    rights.  Further, we do not consider that this  ruling  will  create  a
    precedent which can be used to create what we accept is always intended
    to be a limited route whereby Appellants may obtain  leave  to  remain.
    This is in our view simply a case where on  the  particular  facts  the
    family rights of the Appellant and his family  have  unusually  reached
    the level where  they  may  properly  be  said  to  be  exceptional  or
    compelling and where the harm to the  important  policy  objectives  of
    maintaining an effective and fair immigration system  is  limited,  and
    hence, just outweighed.

16. This is in our judgment a proportionate outcome.

17. We are grateful to Ms Pal, appearing for the SSHD  for  her  focus  and
    candid submissions and to Mr Chen, for the Appellant, for  his  helpful
    submissions as well.

18. The UT having already set aside the decision we now substitute our  own
    decision allowing Mr Gebersus's appeal.


Signed                                  Date; 19 May 2014

[pic]

pp for

Mr Justice Green

