








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05583/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2 July 2014                               |On: 28 July 2014             |
|Prepared: 17 July 2014                        |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 Mr Thilan Dinidu Sampath Deenipitiyage Don
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant's solicitors, Jade Law Solicitors, sent a letter to  the
      Tribunal dated 2nd July 2014 in which they stated that  they  are  now
      instructed that the appellant will not attend or be represented at the
      "permission hearing" and the application  should  be  decided  in  his
      absence on the basis of documents already submitted.


   2. Enclosed was a witness statement of the appellant dated 2nd July 2014.




   3. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 21st  February  1993.
      He entered the UK on 18th July 2011 in order to study. His leave as  a
      Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant expired on  24th  November  2013.  He
      applied shortly before that to vary his leave to remain, to  undertake
      a post-graduate diploma. That application was refused on  6th  January
      2014 as he had failed to meet the requirements of  paragraph  245ZX(c)
      as he  had  not  been  awarded  30  points  for  his  confirmation  of
      acceptance for studies (CAS).


   4. In addition, a decision was made  by  the  respondent  to  remove  the
      appellant from  the  UK  by  way  of  directions  under  s.47  of  the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. His appeal  against  the
      refusal of his application was dismissed both  under  the  Immigration
      Rules and on human rights grounds by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  a
      determination promulgated on 11th April 2014.


   5. The appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  I  F  Taylor,  was
      decided on the papers.


   6. At paragraph 10, Judge Taylor stated that  the  appellant's  case  was
      that when he applied for variation of  his  leave  to  enter  on  23rd
      November 2013, Bell's College was a Highly  Trusted  sponsor.  By  the
      time the Tier 4 Sponsor Register was checked by the respondent on 30th
      December 2013 (five weeks later), it was a Legacy Sponsor.


   7. The Judge accepted that the date of application  was  the  appropriate
      date and it was for the appellant  to  establish  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that on the date he applied for his leave to be  varied,
      the college in question was a Highly Trusted  sponsor.  There  was  no
      issue that the proposed course of study at Bell's College  was  a  new
      course of study at that institution.


   8.  However,  the  Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant   had
      established on the balance of probabilities that on the day he applied
      to vary his leave, the college was a Highly Trusted sponsor. The brief
      grounds of appeal merely asserted that the college was highly trusted,
      but there was no evidence to support that assertion, nor any  evidence
      to explain why that assertion had been made.


   9. On 21st  May  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Molloy  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal against that determination. Paragraph 2
      of Judge Molloy's decision noted the following: the  appellant  argued
      that because his provider of education had Legacy status at  the  date
      that the respondent made her  immigration  decision,  but  had  Highly
      Trusted status at the time his CAS was issued to him, the Judge  ought
      to have applied decisions such as Patel [2011] UKUT  2011  and  Thakur
      [2011] UKUt 00151 in his favour.


  10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor had also stated at paragraph 1 of his
      determination that it was reasonable to suppose that the s.47 decision
      under the 2006 Act had been withdrawn, given the Home Office policy on
      these matters in  response  to  recent  case  law.  However,  that  is
      incorrect as the law has subsequently been amended so as to  permit  a
      s.47 decision to be made at  the  same  time  as  the  refusal  of  an
      application under the Immigration Rules.


  11. Judge Taylor had regard to the appellant's response  to  the  refusal,
      which he set out at paragraph 9 of the  determination.  The  appellant
      contends that he applied for a visa on 23rd November 2013  at  a  time
      when his college was an HTS college. The respondent made the  decision
      on 30th December 2013 "and that it was not revoked, it was on Legacy."
      The immigration decision  should  have  been  made  "on  the  date  of
      application." He should have been given 60 days to get another  letter
      and not have been refused.


  12. The Judge accepted that the date of application  was  the  appropriate
      date, but that it was for the applicant to establish that on that date
      the college in question was a  Highly  Trusted  sponsor.  He  had  not
      established that apart from an assertion in his grounds of appeal.


  13. In his grounds for permission to appeal,  the  appellant  asserted  at
      paragraph 7 that his evidence was that Bell's College  held  a  Highly
      Trusted sponsor status at the time of the issue of the CAS.


  14. At paragraph  10,  it  is  submitted  that  taking  into  account  the
      testimony of the appellant, the college had a Highly  Trusted  sponsor
      licence at the time of the issue of the CAS, and that the Judge  erred
      in law in stating that the brief grounds of appeal merely assert  that
      the college was a Highly Trusted sponsor but that there  had  been  no
      evidence in support of that assertion.  He  had  been  precluded  from
      presenting additional evidence in view  of  his  application  being  a
      points based application.  Further,  the  First-tier  Judge  erred  in
      failing to consider and comply with common law fairness as set out  in
      Patel, supra and Thakur, supra.


  15. The appellant did not  attend  the  hearing  and  had  as  noted,  not
      attended the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  On  behalf
      of the respondent, Mr Tufan submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge directed  himself  appropriately.  He  relied  on  the  Rule  24
      response.


  16. The appellant asserted that the college was a Highly  Trusted  sponsor
      at the date of application. It was for him to make out that case.  The
      Judge erred in concluding that the material date for  considering  the
      status of the college was  that  at  the  date  that  the  appellant's
      application was made. The appellant had to meet the rules  as  at  the
      date of the decision and if the college held Legacy status  then,  the
      application must in any event fail.


  17. Whilst decisions such as Thakur might  have  been  applicable  if  the
      appellant had established the sponsor's  status  at  the  appeal,  the
      Judge had clearly found that he had not done  so.  The  appellant  had
      chosen  to  have  a  paper  hearing  and  therefore   restricted   the
      opportunity for the Judge to hear and receive evidence. It was for the
      appellant to establish that his college was a highly  trusted  sponsor
      at the date of application, and it had lost its status thereafter, and
      that he had not been advised and was not aware of this  change.  There
      was however no evidence to support that position.


  18. Mr  Tufan  also  referred  to  the  appellant's  very  recent  witness
      statement dated 2nd July 2014. He referred at paragraph 8 to the  Home
      Office's register of Tier 4 colleges, which he asserts is amended on a
      daily basis with no archived lists available. He stated  that  he  has
      "inquired from the college" and has been assured that the college  had
      a Highly Trusted sponsor licence when it issued the CAS.


  19. However, apart from that assertion, Mr Tufan submitted that no attempt
      had been made by the appellant either  at  the  date  of  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal or even now to produce  clear  evidence
      from the college. Accordingly, the appellant has again simply asserted
      that the college was a Highly Trusted sponsor.   It  is  not  disputed
      that it  was  for  the  appellant  to  establish  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that on the date of application the college in  question
      was a Highly Trusted sponsor.


  20. Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant does not dispute that he had not
      submitted or adduced evidence at the date  that  the  application  was
      made, in respect of the status of  the  college.  In  any  event,  the
      appellant has still not produced  evidence  such  as  a  letter  or  a
      written statement from the college  that  the  college  did  have  the
      necessary status at the date  that  the  appellant's  application  was
      made.


        Assessment


  21. As noted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, it was for the appellant to
      establish that his college had been a Highly Trusted  sponsor  at  the
      date of the application. The Judge considered the  evidence  presented
      in that respect and found that the appellant had not  established  his
      sponsor's status as at the date of application.  That  was  a  finding
      available to the Judge on the basis  of  the  documents  and  evidence
      before him.


  22. Decisions such as Thakur did not assist him as  he  has  not  produced
      evidence as to what the status of the college was at  the  appeal,  or
      indeed since.


     Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not  involve  the
making of an   error on a point of law and shall stand.


          No anonymity order made.


     Signed                     Dated:  17/7/2014


     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

