
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/05219/2012
                                                               IA/20240/2012
                                                               IA/20243/2012
                                                               IA/20244/2012
                                                               IA/20247/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12 November 2013                        |On 28 November 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                            TA, PA, CA, JA and IA
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
                            For the Appellants: Mr J Martin of
           counsel instructed by Raj & Co
          For the Respondent: Mr P Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The first  appellant  was  born  on  11  September  1980.  The  second
      appellant is his partner who was born on 26  August  1985.  The  other
      appellants are their children born in July 2008, July 2009 and January
      2011. The first appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone and  the  other
      appellants are citizens of Nigeria. The  appellants  have  been  given
      permission to appeal the determination of a panel (First-Tier Tribunal
      Judge K S H Miller and non-legal member Mrs J Holt) ("the panel")  who
      dismissed their appeals against the respondent's decision  in  respect
      of the first appellant dated 23 February 2012 to deport him  from  the
      UK under the provisions of Section 3 (5) (a) of  the  Immigration  Act
      1971 and in respect of the other appellants dated  11  September  2012
      refusing their applications for further leave to remain in the UK.


   2. The first appellant arrived in the UK in 2000 and claimed asylum.  His
      claim was refused but because of the state of upheaval in Sierra Leone
      he was granted four years exceptional leave  to  remain.  During  this
      period he was convicted of offences of theft and deception.  In  April
      2004 he was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment. He made  an  in  time
      application for indefinite leave to remain in April 2005 supplemented,
      in July 2009, by a further application for asylum. Shortly  afterwards
      he was convicted of another offence of deception and sentenced,  on  6
      August 2009, to 6 months  imprisonment.  The  asylum  application  was
      refused on 5 January 2012. His outstanding application for  indefinite
      leave to remain was refused on 23 February 2012. On 23  February  2012
      the deportation order was made.


   3. The second appellant claimed to have met the first  appellant  in  the
      summer of 2007. It is difficult to track the second appellant's visits
      to the UK through the stamps in  her  current  and  previous  Nigerian
      passports. However, it appears that she has had multiple  entry  visit
      visas and has travelled between Nigeria and the  UK  on  at  least  10
      occasions. Initially she travelled on her own but after  each  of  the
      children was born they accompanied her on some if not  all  occasions.
      If the passport is correct the last visit, with  all  three  children,
      was in September 2011. The last leave to enter was due to expire on 18
      April 2012 and the second to fifth appellants made their  applications
      for leave to remain on 17 April 2012.

   4. The appellants appealed and  their  appeals  were  heard  by  a  panel
      (Immigration Judge McIntosh and non-legal Member Mrs  M  Padfield  JP)
      ("the first panel") on 2 November 2012. The first  panel  allowed  the
      appeals of all the appellants. The respondent was  granted  permission
      to appeal and, on 14 March 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge McKee found that
      there were errors of law and set aside the decision. He directed  that
      the appeals be reheard in the First-Tier Tribunal. The  only  part  of
      the decision preserved was to allow the appeal of the second to  fifth
      appellants against the s47 removal directions.


   5. At the hearing before the panel on 10  June  2013  both  parties  were
      represented, the appellants by Mr Martin who appears before  me.  Oral
      evidence was given by the first and second appellants. The panel found
      that the first and second appellants were not credible witnesses.  All
      the appeals were dismissed both under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
      human rights grounds.


   6. The appellants sought and were granted permission to appeal by a judge
      in the First-Tier Tribunal. The grounds argue that the panel erred  in
      law because its findings of fact are insufficiently reasoned, fail  to
      take  into  account  all  of  the  appellants'  submissions  and   are
      irrational.


   7. I have all the documents which were  before  the  panel  including  Mr
      Martin's skeleton argument. At  the  end  of  the  hearing  Mr  Martin
      assisted by borrowing the second to fifth appellants'  passports  from
      Mr Nath and preparing a schedule of the  second  to  fifth  appellants
      visits to this country from Nigeria from the information  set  out  in
      the entry and departure stamps in the passports.


   8. Mr Martin relied on the grounds of appeal. In paragraphs 35, 40 and 41
      of the determination the panel found that all the appellants could  go
      to Sierra Leone or  Nigeria  and  stay  together  in  either  country.
      However,  the  panel  failed  to  deal  with  the  fact  that  removal
      directions for the first appellant were to Sierra Leone  and  for  the
      other appellants to Nigeria. The panel had failed to  give  sufficient
      reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  that  the  first  and   second
      appellants did not want to go to either Sierra Leone  or  Nigeria  and
      that conditions in both countries were either hostile  or  unsuitable.
      These objections had not been dealt with. I asked  Mr  Martin  whether
      his  submissions  about   these   matters   were   recorded   in   the
      determination. He said that they were not. He provided a copy  of  his
      skeleton argument before the panel but  accepted  that  these  matters
      were at best only touched on in paragraphs 18 and 22.


   9. Mr Martin accepted that the panel had made a broad adverse credibility
      finding against both the first and second  appellants  but  said  that
      this was not a blanket finding which removed the need  for  individual
      findings of fact. In paragraph 37 the panel erred by  considering  the
      first appellant in isolation from the other  appellants.  It  was  not
      correct to say that the first appellant's circumstances  and  offences
      were such that the public interest "greatly outweighs any argument  in
      favour of his being allowed to remain." Furthermore,  the  panel  only
      looked at the risk of  offending  in  a  historical  rather  than  the
      current risk context. However, Mr Martin accepted that this last point
      was not in the grounds of appeal and there had been no application  to
      amend the grounds.


  10. As to the  panel's  conclusion  that  the  second  appellant  had  not
      established that she was a member of the Benin Royal family Mr  Martin
      submitted that it was not correct for the panel to say that there  was
      nothing about this in the documentation. He accepted  that  her  birth
      certificate which was claimed to show that her father was a prince had
      been not been produced.


  11. In reply to my questions, Mr Martin accepted that  the  panel  reached
      conclusions as to whether all the appellants could go to Sierra  Leone
      or to Nigeria. He also accepted that the burden of  proving  that  the
      appellants could not go to a particular country fell on them and  that
      the test to be applied was whether it was reasonable to expect them to
      go there. This would also be the test  to  be  applied  if  the  first
      appellant was removed to  Sierra  Leone,  the  other  appellants  were
      removed to Nigeria and the question arose whether the family could  be
      reunited by the first appellant travelling to  Nigeria  or  the  other
      appellants travelling to Sierra Leone.


  12. I was asked to find that the panel had erred in law, to set aside  the
      decision and to direct that it be reheard (for  a  third  time)  by  a
      panel in the First-Tier Tribunal.


  13. Mr Nath relied on the two refusal  letters.  It  was  clear  that  the
      respondent had considered the first appellant on the one hand and  the
      second  to  fifth  appellants  on  the  other  both  individually  and
      collectively. There was no reason why the panel should  not  make  the
      assessment as to whether all of them  could  go  to  Sierra  Leone  or
      Nigeria and their assessments and conclusions were both  rational  and
      open to them on the evidence. It was open to  them  to  conclude  that
      there was no risk to anyone on return to  either  country.  The  first
      appellant was a repeat offender who had stolen large sums of money. It
      was for the appellants to establish that they  could  not  go  to  any
      particular  country.  He  accepted  that   the   test   was   one   of
      reasonableness. Mr Nath submitted that the panel did not  err  in  law
      and asked me to uphold the decision.


  14. In his reply Mr Martin  submitted  that  the  best  interests  of  the
      children needed to be considered and clearly this was that they should
      be with both parents. I reserved my determination.


  15. I find that it was open to the panel to conclude that both  the  first
      and second appellants were not credible  witnesses.  The  reasons  for
      this conclusion are set out in paragraph 42 to 45 which, in turn, need
      to be read with the determination as a whole. They are  broad  adverse
      credibility findings which impinge on all the evidence  of  the  first
      and second appellants except to the extent  that  the  panel  accepted
      aspects  of  their  evidence  either  specifically  or  by   necessary
      inference. It was open to the panel to find that the  first  appellant
      had not established that he had no family in  Sierra  Leone,  for  the
      reasons set out in paragraph 32.


  16. I find that there is no error of law in the panel's treatment  of  the
      psychiatric report at paragraph 33. The  panel  reached  a  conclusion
      open to it on the evidence and there is  no  flaw  in  the  reasoning.
      There is a false premise in paragraph 3 of the grounds of appeal where
      it is argued that; "given that he  was  granted  leave  following  his
      asylum claim it must have been accepted that  he  had  suffered  as  a
      result of the  fighting".  The  first  appellant's  asylum  claim  was
      rejected. He was only granted four years exceptional leave  to  remain
      because of the conditions in that country at that time, not because of
      any acceptance that he had suffered.


  17. By the time of the hearing  before  the  panel  the  second  to  fifth
      appellants' appeals  against  the  s47  removal  directions  had  been
      allowed in the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge McKee. There  were  no
      removal directions to Nigeria. However, as  both  representatives  now
      accept, it was not for  the  respondent  to  prove  that  any  of  the
      appellants could not go to either Sierra Leone or Nigeria. The  burden
      of proof falls on the  appellants  and  the  test  is  whether  it  is
      reasonable to expect them to do go to one country or the other. I find
      that it was open to the panel to  conclude  that  all  the  appellants
      could go to Sierra Leone or Nigeria. It has to be borne in  mind  that
      whilst the ultimate sanction is forced removal  there  is  nothing  to
      prevent other outcomes. For example all appellants making a  voluntary
      departure for one country or the other (or indeed somewhere else), the
      first appellant being removed to Sierra Leone and the other appellants
      accompanying or joining him, the  second  to  fifth  appellants  being
      removed to Nigeria and the first  appellant  accompanying  or  joining
      them, or if the first appellant is removed to  Sierra  Leone  and  the
      other appellants are removed to Nigeria for them to reunite in  either
      country.


  18. I find that the panel  did  not  fail  to  have  regard  to  the  best
      interests of the children. In paragraph 39  they  said;  "as  we  have
      stated above, with regard to the children, we conclude that, at  their
      ages, the most important matter is that they  should  continue  to  be
      with one or both of their parents."


  19. Whilst the panel was dealing with different appeals against  different
      decisions it is common ground that it  was  appropriate  for  all  the
      appeals to be heard together and the appellants to be considered as  a
      family group. However, it was also necessary and appropriate  for  the
      panel to consider the position  of  the  first  appellant  separately,
      which is what they did in paragraph 37. I find  that  when  the  panel
      said; "in our view, the first appellant's commission of  the  offences
      described above when considering whether it is proportionate  for  him
      to be deported, greatly outweighs any argument in favour of his  being
      allowed to remain", it was  looking  at  the  position  of  the  first
      appellant in isolation. Looked at in isolation this was  a  conclusion
      open to the panel. I find that it  was  not  a  conclusion  which  was
      intended to apply to the situation of the group, as  what  follows  in
      the determination makes clear.


  20. The point made by Mr Martin at the hearing, that the panel  failed  to
      consider the current risk of reoffending, is not a point raised in the
      grounds of appeal and there has  been  no  application  to  amend  the
      grounds. Furthermore, I can find no reference to it  in  the  skeleton
      argument before the panel. I have not been referred to any independent
      report dealing with the risk of reoffending.


  21. In paragraph 5 of the grounds of appeal it is argued  that  the  panel
      failed to take into account factors such as the  length  of  time  the
      first appellant had been in the UK, the grant of exceptional leave  to
      remain and the delay  in  making  decisions.  All  these  matters  are
      referred to in the determination and I can find no indication that the
      panel failed, as they stated in paragraph  42,  to  consider  all  the
      evidence. Whilst there was delay by the respondent in making decisions
      on the first appellant's applications for asylum and indefinite  leave
      to remain it has to be borne in mind that he was convicted of two sets
      of offences, one before the application for indefinite leave  and  the
      other shortly after the repeated application for asylum. I cannot  see
      that the first appellant has been prejudiced by the delay.


  22. On the evidence it was open to the panel to conclude that  the  second
      appellant had not established that she was connected  with  the  Benin
      Royal family. They did refer to the  evidence  submitted  by  her,  in
      paragraph 42. They did not say, as Mr Martin submitted, that there was
      no evidence.


  23. To  protect  the  interests  of  the  children  I  make  an  anonymity
      direction. I make an order under rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or  publication
      of any matter likely to lead members of the public to identify any  of
      the appellants.


  24. I find that the panel did not err in law and I uphold the decisions.














      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 13 November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

