
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05306/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 September 2014                          |On 13 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                RIZWAN ASHRAF
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr R Skynner, instructed by St Laws Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. Whilst this is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
  Department,  for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in   the
  determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal

2. The appellant,  a  national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
  Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  his
  application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
  under the Points Based System and to remove him from the  UK.  First-tier
  Tribunal Judge Samimi allowed the appeal and the Secretary of  State  now
  appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

3. The issue in dispute in this appeal is the failure of  the  appellant  to
  provide a valid English language certificate with his application. On  23
  August 2011 the appellant was granted leave to enter the UK as a  Tier  4
  general student until 4 April 2013.  He  applied  for  further  leave  to
  remain in that category on 4 April 2013; he  included  an  IELTS  English
  certificate  with  that  application.  He  said  in  the   letter   which
  accompanied his application that he was awaiting the results of a further
  English language test. The Judge accepted, and it is not challenged, that
  the appellant submitted the TOEIC certificates to the Secretary of  State
  on 17 April 2013. It is not disputed by the Secretary of State  that  the
  TOEIC  documents   submitted   meet   the   relevant   English   language
  requirements. The Secretary of State decided to revoke the licence of the
  appellant's college and on 1 November 2013 notified  the  appellant  that
  the decision was suspended for 60 days to enable him to  submit  a  fresh
  application which he duly did. The respondent refused this application on
  13 January 2014 because the IELTS certificate submitted did not meet  the
  English language requirements. The Reasons for Refusal  letter  makes  no
  reference to the TOEIC documents. The Judge allowed the  appeal  deciding
  that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law
  as she did not consider the TOEIC certificates.

4. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  contend
  that the Judge erred in considering documents submitted after the date of
  the application in accordance with the decisions in Rodriguez [2014] EWCA
  Civ 2 and Raju & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 754. Mr Whitwell  submitted  that
  the application was made on 4 April 2013  and  the  certificate  was  not
  submitted then.

5. Mr Skynner submitted that, although the appellant made an application  on
  4 April 2013, the Secretary of State invited him to submit an application
  to vary the grounds of appeal of his original application. The  appellant
  obtained a new CAS dated 27 December 2013 and his application was  varied
  on 31 December 2013. He submitted that a wholly new application form  was
  submitted and dated and submitted with the new  CAS.  He  submitted  that
  this is in effect a new application and that the date of this application
  is the relevant one. He  submitted  that  this  meant  that  all  of  the
  evidence was before the Secretary of State when making the decision.

6. On 17 April 2013 the appellant  submitted  two  TOEIC  certificates.  The
  Speaking and Writing score report states that the test date was 20/3/2013
  and the  Listening  and  Reading  score  report  gives  a  test  date  of
  22/3/2013. There is no  date  of  award  on  the  certificates.  It  must
  therefore be the case that the reports confirm  that  the  appellant  had
  reached the required standard on the test dates. These  were  before  the
  date of the first application made on 4 April 2013. The decision in  Raju
  relates to the achievement of a required qualification at the date of the
  application. It therefore seems that the TOEIC documents  submitted  show
  that the  appellant  did  meet  the  requirements  at  the  date  of  the
  application and that the Secretary of State should  have  considered  the
  TOEIC evidence.

7. In the alternative I accept Mr Skynner's submission that the new CAS  and
  application form made in December 2013 amounted to  a  fresh  application
  and the relevant date is 31 December 2013.  In  these  circumstances  the
  TOEIC documents again pre-date  the  application  and  should  have  been
  considered by the respondent.

8. It is not clear why the Judge allowed the appeal on the  basis  that  the
  decision is not in accordance with the law. Although I note that she  did
  not remit it to the Secretary  of  State  to  make  the  decision.  I  am
  satisfied on the basis of what I have said above that the decision is not
  in accordance with the Immigration Rules and can be allowed outright.

9. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the  Judge  made  no  material
  error of law in allowing the appeal.



Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.



Signed
                       Date: 12 November 2014



A Grimes


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


