

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05714/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 October 2013                             |On 11 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

                                   Between

                           NAJEM EZAD AZIZ ALHAMAL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C. Soltani instructed by IRIS Law.
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, who was born on 17 July 1972, is a citizen of Iraq. His
      immigration history and the not inconsiderable history of  proceedings
      that have resulted from the initial refusal of his claim for asylum in
      October 2005 is well known to the parties and there is no need for  us
      to set it out in this determination. In this appeal we  are  concerned
      with a decision of the First-tier Tribunal made by a panel  comprising
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Trotter  and  a  non-legal  member,  Mrs  E.
      Morton who, by a determination promulgated on 7 June  2002,  dismissed
      the appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent,  made  on
      16 February 2012,  to  refuse  to  revoke  a  deportation  order.  The
      appellant was liable to deportation as a result  of  a  recommendation
      for deportation made by a Crown Court  judge  in  February  2006  when
      sentencing the appellant to a term  of  imprisonment  for  an  offence
      involving his use of  a  false  passport.  Permission  to  appeal  was
      granted on 10 August 2012 by an Upper Tribunal Judge who said:


           "The panel does not appear to have determined the  issue  before
           it. The appeal was against a refusal  to  revoke  a  deportation
           order, but there is no reference to that in the  conclusions  of
           the Tribunal."


   2. It is readily apparent that the First-tier Tribunal did indeed make an
      error of law. They were required by section 86(2) of the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to determine  each  ground  of  appeal
      raised but, in doing so by purporting to dismiss the appeal on asylum,
      humanitarian protection and human rights  grounds,  they  appeared  to
      have overlooked the fact that the appeal before them was  against  the
      decision to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation  order  and  not  simply
      against the rejection of the  asylum,  human  rights  or  humanitarian
      protection claim. Because of that oversight they failed to  deal  with
      the challenge to the immigration decision that was in fact  the  focus
      of the appeal, although it may be thought that, given  their  findings
      in respect of the case raised by  the  appellant  in  his  attempt  to
      defeat the deportation  decision,  there  could  have  been  only  one
      outcome had they addressed the question they should have engaged with.




   3. On 19 September 2012 a review was carried out by Upper Tribunal  Judge
      Spencer who decided that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  as
      expressed, did indeed disclose an error of law so that  it  should  be
      set aside and re-made by  the  Upper  Tribunal.  It  is  important  to
      appreciate that in so doing Judge Spencer was not  setting  aside  the
      determination as a whole, simply the legally  flawed  and  incorrectly
      articulated decision as it was expressed at  the  conclusion  of  that
      determination.

   4. This  was  recognised  by  Upper  Tribunal  Coker  who,  having  heard
      submissions from both parties at  a  case  management  hearing  on  12
      February 2012, gave the following directions:

        "Although the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  panel  of  Judge
        Trotter and [Mrs Morton] has been set aside, there is no  challenge
        to the factual findings made which are, it was agreed before me, as
        follows:


        a. The appellant is not a Ba'athist sympathiser
        b. The appellant  has  not  been  the  subject  of  attack  by  his
           girlfriend's relatives
        c. The appellant has not been the subject of attack by the security
           forces
        d. The appellant is a Christian
        e. The appellant had no problems in relation  to  his  Christianity
           prior to his leaving Iraq
        f. The appellant had no overt Christian activity in Iraq
        g. The appellant had no profile in Iraq that would cause him to  be
           targeted."

   5. And so the matter comes before us now. Although we keep  in  mind  the
      provisions of the applicable immigration rule concerning the  approach
      to an application for  revocation  of  a  deportation  order,  we  are
      grateful to Mr Diwynicyz for the respondent and  Ms  Soltani  for  the
      appellant for narrowing the issues that we must address in the context
      of this particular appeal. The determinative issue in this  appeal  is
      whether the appellant can safely re-establish  himself  on  return  to
      Iraq not in his previous home area near Mosul, but in the KRG.


   6. For the avoidance of any possible doubt we record  that  there  is  no
      claim before us on grounds concerning article 8 of the ECHR. The First-
      tier Tribunal judge observed in his determination that the appellant's
      representative:

           "... specifically disclaimed any reliance on Article 8  European
           Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  made   no   submissions   on
           humanitarian protection"


      And the position is no different before us, Ms Soltani, quite properly
      and realistically, takes no point in this regard either.

   7. It is common ground and agreed between the  parties  that,  given  the
      country evidence now available, as a Christian, the  appellant  cannot
      safely return to live in his home area near  Mosul,  even  though  his
      father continues to live in that area together with his  wife  without
      experiencing any reported difficulty  other  than  his  own  declining
      state of health.  Nor can he relocate anywhere in central or  southern
      Iraq as throughout the country there are sufficient difficulties being
      experienced  by  Iraqi  Christians  as   to   make   such   relocation
      unreasonable.


   8. It is, though, also agreed that the appellant would face no real  risk
      of persecutory ill-treatment  or  of  being  subjected  to  any  other
      difficulty such as to require the grant of international protection if
      he re-establishes himself within any of the three  governants  of  the
      Kurdish Regional Government  ("KRG").  That  was,  perhaps,  the  only
      rational position to adopt in the light of the conclusions set out  in
      the expert report commissioned by the appellant's representatives  for
      this hearing from Dr George, whose opinion upon country conditions  in
      Iraq are deservedly to be treated with respect:

           "165. In my opinion, if returned to Iraq Mr Najem Alhamal  would
           be at real risk in central and southern  parts  of  the  country
           because of his Christian  religio-political  identity.  Also  in
           central and  southern  Iraq  he  would  face  a  risk  of  being
           kidnapped because of the perception that Iraqis who  have  spent
           considerable amounts of time in the West  must  be  wealthy.  He
           would also face more general risks as a result of the widespread
           violence in Iraq.


           166.  I  do   not   consider   that   internal   flight   within
           central/southern Iraq to be a viable option for Mr Alhamal.  The
           Baghdad based authorities would be unable  and/or  unwilling  to
           extend him effective protection.


           167. I consider it highly  likely  that  he  would  be  able  to
           relocate permanently to the KRG,  where  the  local  authorities
           would be able to protect him.


           168. In my opinion, the risks that Mr Alhamal would  face  as  a
           Christian and from the general violence would  be  real.  In  my
           view, he would presently face only low risks as a returnee  from
           abroad."

   9. But, there are two issues raised by  Ms  Soltani  on  the  appellant's
      behalf: First, assuming that the appellant could make his way  to  the
      point of entry to the KRG, would he  in  fact  be  admitted,  being  a
      person who had not previously resided there and having  no  family  or
      social links with the area? Second, could he travel to the KRG without
      encountering on his journey to that area a level of risk  such  as  to
      make it unlawful to require him to attempt to do so?


  10. The second of those issues, concerned with the risks associated with a
      journey within Iraq to the point of attempted entry to the KRG can  be
      broken down in to a series of constituent parts:

   a. The evidence established that it is now open to the appellant to  take
      a direct flight from Gatwick airport to Sulaymaniyah within  the  KRG.
      However, such a route is open only to those who are willing to  return
      voluntarily. This appellant has made plain that he has no intention of
      doing so, as he wishes to resist removal  and  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom;


   b. If the appellant declines to  make  a  voluntary  departure  from  the
      United Kingdom on a direct flight to the KRG he  will  be  removed  to
      Baghdad. His onward journey to the KRG could,  if  he  chose,  involve
      taking a flight to the KRG without leaving Baghdad airport provided he
      is in possession of the documentation that would need to be  presented
      in order to be admitted to the KRG.

   c. If the appellant needs to obtain such documentation, or to make  other
      enquiries or put in place any other  arrangements  to  facilitate  his
      entry into the KRG, it may be that would have to be done in  his  home
      area, which may involve a stay of some weeks or even months  while  he
      deals with those matters,  unless  it  can  be  established  that  the
      appellant could secure that documentation and make those  arrangements
      before his departure. We will examine this issue in more detail below.



Would the appellant be admitted to the KRG?

  11. The first question we address is  whether  the  appellant,  presenting
      himself at the point of entry  to  the  KRG  would  be  admitted.  His
      request for entry would be assessed on the basis that he was a  single
      Arab male claiming to be a Christian, but who had not previously lived
      in the KRG and who had no relatives there either. Dr George made clear
      that there would be a two-stage process.  Even  though  the  appellant
      would be seeking permission to settle within the KRG  he  would  first
      have to apply for entry for 30 days as a  visitor  and,  if  admitted,
      would subsequently make an application for  permanent  residence  from
      within the KRG.  There are two issues likely to arise in the  case  of
      someone such as the appellant seeking entry, he having no family links
      with the KRG, those being whether he has  the  required  documentation
      and sponsorship.


  12.  Dealing first with the question of documentation, in the case of this
      appellant that presents no difficulty. As Dr George confirmed  in  his
      oral evidence, the two crucial documents are the Civil Status Identity
      Document, usually referred to as a CSID,  and  the  Iraqi  Nationality
      Certificate. The appellant has both  of  these  and  photocopies  were
      produced to us.

  13. During the course of the hearing before us two issues were  raised  in
      respect of these documents. First, where were the  originals?  Second,
      were these genuine documents?

  14. It is unambiguously clear and agreed  between  the  parties  that  the
      appellant was in possession of the original documents, passed them  to
      his then representatives, the North of England  Refugee  Service,  who
      obtained a translation of the content of the documents and sent  them,
      with the translations, to the Home Office. Mr Diwnycz  looked  through
      the substantial file that had been provided to him for the hearing but
      was unable to find those documents on the file.

  15. We do not accept from that alone that the original documents have been
      lost and so cannot be returned  to  the  appellant.  It  seems  to  us
      reasonable to assume that important and original documents of identity
      such as these would be kept safe  by  the  Secretary  of  State  after
      having requested that they be submitted. The fact  that  Mr  Diwnycz's
      look through his court file did not produce these  original  documents
      is an insufficient basis to conclude  that  they  have  probably  been
      lost.

  16. If we are wrong about that, the photocopy available discloses all  the
      information that is required in order to  support  a  request  to  the
      Iraqi Embassy here for duplicates to be issued. Even if there were any
      problem with doing so from the United Kingdom, the appellant's  father
      remains available to make  such  an  application  on  the  appellant's
      behalf in his home area and to arrange for those replacement documents
      to be sent here. We are confident  about  that  because  the  evidence
      before us discloses no requirement for the appellant to be  personally
      present to make such an application and as  he  managed  to  obtain  a
      certificate of baptism from Mosul in December 2007, it is  plain  that
      he is able to have someone locally deal with the obtaining of official
      documents on his behalf. See  MK  (documents  -  relocation)  Iraq  CG
      [2012] UKUT 00126 (IAC).



  17. We are satisfied that  the  suggestion  that  the  documents  are  not
      genuine ones is entirely without merit  and  simply  unarguable.  This
      submission is based upon some comment offered by  Dr  George  who  was
      asked to look  at  the  photocopy  documents  immediately  before  the
      hearing. He thought the documents may be problematic for two  reasons.
      They appeared to be in the same handwriting and the serial  number  of
      one of them did not have the  sharp  or  crisp  appearance  one  would
      expect from the type of printing process usually employed  to  produce
      those documents.

  18. When asked about this in oral evidence Dr George was at pains to point
      out that he was not a handwriting expert; would not wish to  offer  an
      opinion upon the authenticity of  the  documents  without  seeing  the
      original and without having the  opportunity  to  examine  them  under
      magnification. He said also that the document about which he expressed
      concern because of the serial number was produced at a time when  Iraq
      was subjected to heavy trade sanctions, the consequence of  which  was
      that the quality of documents being produced would be  variable.  When
      one adds to this the fact that the appellant, who is  best  placed  to
      say whether or not the documents are genuine because  it  was  he  who
      obtained them before leaving Iraq, has never suggested that  they  are
      not genuine, we  are  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  no
      sufficient, rational or reasonable basis upon which to doubt that  the
      documents are indeed genuine ones and would be accepted as such by the
      KRG authorities.

  19. Thus, having established that the appellant  has  the  Iraqi  identity
      documents that he would be required to produce, the next  question  is
      whether he would be able to satisfy the other requirements of the  KRG
      authorities for admission. It is plain from the evidence of Dr  George
      that, generally, it would be difficult for a single Arab male with  no
      connections with the KRG to secure admission because of concerns about
      possible  involvement  in  terrorism,   just   as   there   would   be
      difficulties, generally, for single females because of concerns  about
      possible involvement with the sex industry. Further, his research into
      this uncovered conflicting evidence. At paragraph 141 of his report Dr
      George said this:

           "I am well aware that conflicting information has been published
           concerning the restrictions and conditions imposed  by  the  KRG
           authorities on individuals wishing to  enter  the  KRG,  whether
           temporarily or  permanently.  In  particular,  there  have  been
           conflicting reports as to  whether  persons  wishing  to  reside
           permanently in the KRG require a  local  sponsor  or  guarantor.
           During my visit to Iraqi Kurdistan in April 2011 I attempted  to
           clarify the position in interviews with  UNHCR  officials;  with
           Shokr Yaseen Yasen,  Director  of  the  Ministry  of  Interior's
           Bureau of Migration and Displacement; and with the Head  of  the
           Political Department of the  Security  Services  (Asayish).  The
           information  I  gleaned  proved  to  be  inconsistent  as   that
           presented in published reports. In particular the  Head  of  the
           Political Department of  the  Security  Services  asserted  that
           sponsorship was not required any more; while the UNHCR  asserted
           that it was still a requirement."

      Having examined that conflicting material, Dr  George  concluded  that
      sponsorship was now required. This was based upon his  preference  for
      the view expressed by UNHCR in the 2012 Guidelines  which,  he  noted,
      included this:

           "Christians, especially those who fled due to targeted  attacks,
           reportedly do not face difficulties in  entering  the  Kurdistan
           Region."

      And, it may be that the need for sponsorship  arises  not  on  initial
      entry but at the time of a second application from within the KRG  for
      permanent residence by someone who has been admitted on the initial 30
      day visitors permit. In the same Guidelines UNHCR say:

           " Persons who do  not  have  a  sponsor  will  not  be  able  to
           regularize their continued stay and may be forced to leave."

      However, Dr George was not asked about that in his evidence and so  we
      will carry out our assessment on the assumption that this is something
      the appellant would have to deal with at the point  of  initial  entry
      and not only when he makes the subsequent  application  for  permanent
      residence.

  20. Dr George has, though, made clear in his evidence  that  the  position
      for Christians seeking entry to the KRG is  less  demanding  than  for
      some others. At para 15 of his report:


           "I would stress,  meanwhile,  that  for  Iraqi  Christians  from
           outside the KRG sponsorship is usually not as problematic as  it
           can be for non-Christians, reflecting a political stance adopted
           by the KRG leadership. For Christians, a key advantage  is  that
           they can be sponsored by their churches in the KRG, rather  than
           by individual KRG residents. This does not mean  that  each  and
           every Christian automatically can relocate without hindrance  to
           the KRG. The local  authorities  do  require  sponsorship  as  a
           condition of entry, and this requirement is applied.  Generally,
           however,  Christians  -   although   not   necessarily   certain
           categories of Christians, such  as  lone  females,  -  can  gain
           permanent entry to the KRG without difficulty."


      And in the following paragraph of his report,  having  considered  the
      personal characteristics of this particular appellant and the problems
      they might otherwise present, Dr George said:


           "... As a Christian, however, Mr Alhamal would  be  much  better
           placed than a non -Christian (see my preceding paragraph). In my
           view, he would very likely be able to  relocate  permanently  to
           the KRG."


  21.  Dr George  provided  further  information  about  this  in  his  oral
      evidence. First, the KRG authorities would  act  upon  and  accept  an
      assurance by a church within the KRG that a person  seeking  admission
      was indeed a Christian. Second, the church in the KRG would co-operate
      with and respond to a request from the appellant's church outside  the
      KRG to do so in order to facilitate admission. Third,  this  appellant
      would be assisted further in that he was in possession  of  a  baptism
      certificate issued by his church in Mosul.


  22. Drawing together this part of the  evidence  we  reach  the  following
      conclusions.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  will  have  no
      difficulty in establishing that he is a Christian. He has his  baptism
      certificate from the church in Mosul. He will  be  able  to  ask  that
      church to provide to a church in  the  KRG  whatever  confirmation  is
      required of that which he  asserts,  his  father  being  available  to
      liaise with the local church if that is necessary. The  appellant  has
      current regular contact with church leaders  in  this  country.  They,
      having been happy to provide documentary  evidence  of  his  religious
      belief and activity in the United Kingdom for  the  purposes  of  this
      appeal will, plainly, be ready to provide similar confirmation to  any
      church in the  KRG  selected  to  act  as  a  sponsor  to  support  an
      application for admission to the KRG. There can be no  doubt  at  all,
      given the evidence provided by Dr George, that the appellant  will  be
      able to identify a church in the KRG willing and able to  provide  the
      authorities with the assurances they seek in order to  facilitate  the
      appellant's admission. Nor can there be any doubt, given  Dr  George's
      evidence, that the authorities would accept and act upon  such  church
      sponsorship, regarding it as equivalent to a sponsorship or  guarantee
      provided by an individual resident in the KRG.


  23. We are satisfied also that all of these arrangements  can  be  put  in
      place before the appellant undertakes the journey to the KRG in order.
      This is important because Dr  George  made  clear  that  there  is  an
      arbitrariness  about  the  process  of  dealing  with   the   official
      responsible for deciding whether or not to admit someone to  the  KRG.
      It is important to recognise that such arbitrariness is not to do with
      whether a person accepted  to  be  a  Christian  should  be  admitted,
      because the evidence clearly indicates that those accepted to be Iraqi
      Christians  will  be  admitted.  Rather,  it  is  to  do  whether  any
      particular  official  will  accept  that  the  evidence  offered  does
      establish that the individual is a Christian.

  24. Thus Dr George said in his evidence that while  an  individual  cannot
      resolve the whole  admission  process  in  advance,  it  is  certainly
      possible to "clear much of the way" in advance by making sure that all
      the confirmation  that  might  be  sought  is  immediately  available.
      Ideally, someone seeking  admission  would  arrange  to  have  someone
      representing the sponsor, in the  appellant's  case  a  representative
      from the sponsoring church, present and  available  to  speak  to  the
      official  to  avoid  delays  while  that  confirmation   was   sought.
      Alternatively, a letter should be provided from the sponsoring  church
      so that any further enquiry would be unnecessary as the official would
      readily accept what was said on behalf of the church.


  25. Thus, there can be no real doubt that the appellant could, if he chose
      to do so, take a direct flight from Gatwick airport to the KRG, having
      put in place arrangements to ensure that his admission for the initial
      30 day period would be unproblematic and in the confident  expectation
      that the subsequent  application  for  permanent  residence  would  be
      successful.

  26. But, as we have seen, the appellant says he  wishes  to  stay  in  the
      United Kingdom and so will not undertake such a  voluntary  return  to
      the KRG area of his country of nationality even though to do so  would
      be to eliminate any real risk  that  might  otherwise  be  encountered
      should he be subjected to a forced or involuntary return.

  27. This determined intention to frustrate  what  would  otherwise  be  an
      unproblematic return process does not, however, defeat the appellant's
      proposed removal as a consequence of  the  deportation  order  now  in
      place. That is because he has no need to expose himself  to  any  real
      risk by making an unnecessary journey by road from Baghdad airport  to
      the KRG and nor will he have any need to return to  the  area  of  his
      former residence where his father continues to live with his new wife.
       That is because there is nothing at all to require the  appellant  to
      leave the airport. He can simply take a connecting flight to  the  KRG
      from Baghdad airport. If he chooses instead to go to live in the  area
      where he previously lived with his father and other relatives that  is
      of course entirely a matter for him. But if he does so and if,  unlike
      his father who has lived without  difficulty  in  that  area  he  does
      experience problems himself, that will not be because of the  decision
      now under appeal but because he made an informed choice not  to  avail
      himself of the safe alternative option of relocation available to him.


  28. Before moving on, we should deal with the appellant's evidence,  found
      in a recent witness statement prepared for this hearing, that there is
      reason  to  believe  that  his  father  is  not  in  fact  living   an
      unproblematic life in the area near Mosul where he has always resided.
      The appellant says he has a cousin, Najeeb, who lives  in  the  United
      Kingdom but who visited Iraq "for a few weeks  in  the  summer".  That
      visit, the first for 20 years, was intended to extend to a few  months
      but was cut short because he was unable to travel freely within  Iraq.
      Najeeb  was  able  to  visit  the  appellant's  father  who  said  the
      conditions were very bad and the appellant should not return.

  29. On the basis of our analysis, even if that were correct it would be of
      marginal significance because it is not necessary for the appellant to
      return to that area.  But  we  do  not  accept  this  evidence  to  be
      truthful. There is no statement, letter or other written  confirmation
      from the cousin. He certainly did not offer to  provide  any  evidence
      for the hearing. The appellant has in the past made contact  with  his
      father by telephone yet made no attempt to do  so  after  he  says  he
      heard from this cousin, about 2 � months ago, how  the  situation  for
      his father was bad. We  have  no  difficulty  in  accepting  from  the
      appellant that telephone contact  with  his  father  in  Iraq  can  be
      unreliable, but we find it impossible to accept that he would  not  at
      least have attempted to make contact with his father on  hearing  this
      news from the cousin. The fact that he did not,  taken  together  with
      the failure to offer any statement or other evidence from the  cousin,
      considered in the context of the appellant's own  factual  account  in
      past appeals having been rejected as untrue, leads us to find that  we
      cannot rely upon the truth of this assertion either.


  30. We should deal also with another matter raised by  the  appellant.  He
      offers two reasons why he does not wish to re-establish himself in the
      KRG. First because he does not speak the language and  second  because
      he will not be accepted or welcomed  there.  Neither  reason  has  any
      merit or cogency to it. There is a not  insignificant  Arab  Christian
      community in the KRG and a well-established network of  churches  able
      and willing to provide support. It has to be said that  the  appellant
      has lived for some years in this country and yet gave evidence  to  us
      with the assistance of an interpreter and so is well used  to  dealing
      with such challenges  of  language.  The  appellant's  concerns  about
      acceptance and welcome are misplaced. The evidence clearly established
      both that he would be admitted to the KRG and that as a  Christian  he
      would receive an appropriate welcome from a well  organised  structure
      that has accommodated the arrival of significant numbers of others who
      have trod the same path as the appellant is  now  expected  to  embark
      upon.

  31. For all these reasons we  conclude  that  the  appellant  has  offered
      nothing capable of establishing any arguable challenge to the decision
      to refuse to revoke the deportation order now in place.

  32. Finally, we recognise that the challenge before the Court of Appeal to
      the current country guidance case of HM  and  others  (Article  15(c))
      Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC) is presently unresolved.  But,  having
      regard to the scope of the grant of permission in  that  case  by  the
      Court of Appeal and the  nature  of  the  issues  with  which  we  are
      concerned in this appeal, it is plain that has  no  bearing  upon  the
      determination of this appeal.

      Summary of decision


      The Panel of the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error  of  law  for
      the reasons given by Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer in his  decision  of
      19 September 2012 and the decision of that panel has been set aside.


      We re-make the decision by substituting a fresh  decision  to  dismiss
      the appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse to  revoke
      a deportation order.



                               Signed






                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 9 October 2013

