
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05013/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Field House               |Determination Promulgated |
|On:             9 July 2013            |On:                     25|
|                                       |July 2013                 |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD ASAD MAJEED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr S Nagra, SHN Solicitors
For the Respondent:       Ms E Martin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  15  March  1986.  He
    appeals against a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Pacey)
    dismissing  his  appeal  as  being  invalid  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-study  work)
    Migrant. The Respondent's decision was made on  25  September  2012  by
    reference to Appendices A and B of the Immigration  Rules  (HC395).  In
    making this decision the Respondent asserted that the Appellant had  no
    right of appeal because at  the  time  the  application  was  made  the
    Appellant did not have extant leave to remain.

 2. The basic details of the Appellant's immigration  history  are  not  in
    dispute. He arrived in the United Kingdom as a student  in  March  2006
    and was granted successive extensions of  leave  to  remain  eventually
    expiring on 14 January 2013. The Appellant made the  application  under
    appeal on 4 April 2012. However the Respondent had purported to curtail
    the Appellant's leave to remain on 6 March 2012. The  Appellant  denied
    having received notice of this curtailment and  the  issue  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was  primarily  whether  there  had  been  an
    effective curtailment. The Judge heard evidence and, finding that there
    had been an effective curtailment, concluded that there was no right of
    appeal and purported to dismiss the appeal as invalid.

 3. In his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the  Appellant  asserts
    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  by  failing  to  take  into
    account relevant facts in concluding that there had been  an  effective
    curtailment in particular by not requiring or  indeed  enquiring  about
    proof of delivery of the curtailment letter. It  is  asserted  that  by
    failing to do so the Judge misapplied the burden of proof in  that  the
    burden of proving that  effective  delivery,  and  therefore  effective
    curtailment, was on the Respondent. Permission to appeal was refused by
    the First-tier Tribunal but on renewal to the Upper Tribunal permission
    was granted on  the  basis  that  it  may  have  been  unclear  whether
    regulation 7(1)(c) of the Immigration (Notices)  Regulations  2003  had
    been complied with by  the  Respondent.  By  a  rule  24  response  the
    Respondent argues that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  directed  herself
    appropriately, notes that the question of  recorded  delivery  was  not
    raised in the grounds  of  appeal  and  submits  an  extract  from  the
    Respondent's  computer  record  system  showing  that  the  curtailment
    decision was served by recorded delivery.

 4. In submissions before us Mr Nagra on behalf of the  Appellant  referred
    to his written skeleton argument. He said that the curtailment decision
    was in fact handed to the Appellant at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing
    and that this was the first time he had seen it. If the  Appellant  had
    received the curtailment  decision  he  would  have  appealed  it.  The
    Appellant's former landlord has provided a statement to the effect that
    he never received any curtailment letter on behalf  of  the  Appellant.
    The extract from the  Respondent's  computer  record  now  produced  is
    insufficient to show  that  the  notice  of  curtailment  was  sent  by
    recorded delivery.

 5. For the Respondent Ms Martin referred to the rule 24 response  and  the
    extract from the Respondent's records. The recorded delivery number  is
    clearly shown along with the address to which it was sent.

 6. We reserved our decision.


DISCUSSION


 7. The issue that was determined by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    whether the curtailment decision of 6 March 2012 had  been  effectively
    served upon the Appellant. After hearing evidence  from  the  Appellant
    and submissions from his representative she found that the  curtailment
    decision had been properly served. In making  this  finding  the  Judge
    made various assessments of the credibility of the Appellant. She found
    that the Appellant's explanation that  the  college  at  which  he  was
    studying had informed the Home Office of his change of address was  not
    credible (paragraph 6). She did not find it credible that the Appellant
    met his former landlord in the street two or three days  after  a  Home
    office enforcement visit (paragraph 8). She did not  find  it  credible
    that the Appellant did not give his forwarding address  to  his  former
    landlord (paragraph 9). She did not  accept  that  the  Respondent  was
    notified in July 2011 of the Appellant's change of  address  (paragraph
    11). All of these credibility findings  were  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the making of  these  credibility  findings  discloses  no
    error of law.

 8. An examination of the facts shows that the Appellant's address  at  the
    time he obtained his leave to remain on 19 July 2010  was  22  Cromwell
    Road. The First-tier Tribunal found that this was the address that  the
    Respondent had on file for the Appellant at the date of the decision to
    curtail. It  was  at  that  time  the  last  address  provided  by  the
    Appellant. We take note of the fact that the application  made  by  the
    Appellant and acknowledged by the Respondent shows his  address  as  20
    Nelson Street but this application was not made until 4 April 2012 four
    weeks after the curtailment decision.

 9. The First-tier  Tribunal  having  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    notified the Respondent of a change of  address  by  the  time  of  the
    curtailment  decision  the  only  question  remaining  is  whether  the
    curtailment  notice  was  properly  served  in  accordance   with   the
    Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not consider method of service but to the extent that such  failure
    may have been an error of law that error could not in our judgement  be
    material because the respondent has now submitted  compelling  evidence
    by way of a contemporaneous minute and the recorded delivery number  to
    show that the curtailment notice was served by recorded delivery at the
    Appellant's last known address on 6 March 2012.

10. In our judgement the grounds of  appeal  as  clarified  by  Mr  Nagra's
    submissions do not disclose any error of law that could  be  considered
    material to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. In  reaching  this
    conclusion we are mindful of the  Upper  Tribunal  authority  of  Green
    (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00254 (IAC) at paragraph 41

         The existence of an error  of  law  is  a  necessary  condition  to
         setting aside a panel  decision  but  not  a  sufficient  one  (see
         Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 s.12 (2) (a)).  Where any
         error is not material to the outcome the Upper  Tribunal  will  not
         normally set aside the decision below and remake it.

Conclusion

11. The only arguable error of law was the failure to consider whether  the
    curtailment  notice  had  been  properly  served  in  accordance   with
    regulation 7(1)(c) of the Immigration (Notices) Regulations  2003.   We
    do not consider any such failure to be material or  capable  of  having
    any effect on  the  conclusions  for  the  reasons  we  have  given  in
    paragraph 9 above.

12. Consequently this appeal does not succeed. There was  no  valid  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.






J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal                            Date:
