
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05413/2014
                                                               IA/05419/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18th December 2014                     |On 30th December 2014            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                     Mrs EVA Simbillo (First appellant)
                    Mr renato Simbillo (second appellant)
                          (anonymity not retained)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Nasher
For the Respondent:    Miss Holmes


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first Appellant born on 5th April 1977  and  the  second  Appellant
    born on 2nd August 1966 are both citizens of the  Philippines  and  are
    married.  The Appellants had made application to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student and dependant.  The Respondent had  refused
    that application on 14th January 2014.  The Appellants'  appealed  that
    decision and their appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 3rd September 2014.  He  had  allowed  their
    appeals under the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Respondent had made application to appeal that  decision  providing
    Grounds of Appeal and dated 11th September 2014.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on
    18th November 2014.  Permission was granted on the basis that there may
    be substance in the Respondent's argument the Appellant had worked more
    hours than permitted, contrary to paragraph 245ZX(4) of the Immigration
    Rules.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Miss Holmes  relied  upon  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  submitted  and  we
    discussed the documentation  that  was  available  to  the  Immigration
    Judge.  I indicated I did not need to hear submissions on behalf of the
    Appellants from Mr Nasher and indicated that I found no  error  of  law
    but would provide  my  decision  with  reasons.   I  now  provide  that
    decision.

Decision and Reasons

 5. The Appellants had applied for leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  4
    Student Migrant and a dependant on 23rd October 2013.   The  Respondent
    had refused that application on 13th January  2014.   The  refusal  had
    been on one single ground namely the Respondent noted the Appellant had
    last been granted leave on 20th October 2011 as a student on  condition
    code 3 which prohibited work.  The first Appellant had been working and
    therefore the Respondent found her in  breach  of  that  condition  and
    refused  her  application  under  paragraph  245ZX  and  her  husband's
    application  in  line  with  the  decision  in  respect  of  the  first
    Appellant.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  noted  that  it  was  accepted  the
    Appellant had been working but that had been as part of her diploma and
    authorised by her Sponsor.  He had been provided with  three  documents
    referred to at paragraphs 14 to 15 of his decision in support  of  that
    assertion.  He further noted the Appellant was unsure whether  she  had
    sent the documents to the Respondent or indeed had a need to send  such
    documents.

 7. The Respondent's Grounds of  Appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision highlights a significant  shift  in  the  Respondent's
    position from the basis upon which the Respondent had initially refused
    the Appellant's application.   The  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal criticised the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for  not  deciding
    whether the first Appellant's accepted hours of work exceeded  half  of
    the total length of course undertaken and stated the  judge  failed  to
    engage with the Immigration Rules.

 8. Those Grounds of Appeal as set  out  implicitly  therefore  accept  the
    Appellant was entitled to work and the question was whether she  worked
    longer hours than permitted in terms of the course length.  That  is  a
    significant shift from the Respondent's original basis of refusal  that
    the Appellant was not permitted to  work  at  all.   That  raises  some
    concerns as to the consistency and level of  information  held  by  the
    Respondent.

 9. The documents placed before the judge are of assistance and helped  him
    reach the decision that he did.  The Appellant had enrolled on  EDEXCEL
    level 5 diploma in leadership, health  and  social  care  on  a  course
    lasting from  26th  September  2011  until  June  or  July  2013.   The
    programme of study was with Cahro Academy.  The first  document  before
    the judge was a letter from the managing director of Cahro  dated  24th
    November 2011.  That letter confirmed the Appellant was a student  with
    them, provided their Sponsor licence number and the fact that they held
    highly trusted status with UKBA.  The letter  noted  her  current  visa
    condition and current regulations and noted she must  not  exceed  more
    than fifteen hours per week  work  placement  during  term  time  which
    formed  part  of  her  course.   Further  she  was  entitled  to   work
    unrestricted hours as requested during holiday times.

10. The second document is a work placement agreement  dated  2nd  November
    2011 signed by Cahro and Fitzwilliam House.  The agreement  notes  that
    students cannot exceed 25 hours per week (fifteen hours work  placement
    and ten hours work) during term time and can  work  unrestricted  hours
    during holidays.

11. The third document is a work  placement  agreement  dated  3  Sep  2012
    between the same parties and notes that the student is entitled to work
    30 hours weekly during term time but if they miss schooling  then  they
    must work less hours to  keep  the  equilibrium  of  work/schooling  in
    balance.  The agreement  further  states  that  the  student  can  work
    unrestricted hours during holidays.

12. The judge found that those documents revealed that  the  Appellant  had
    not breached the agreements and conditions of her visa as  set  by  her
    Sponsor by the accepted hours of work she undertook.

13. Cahro is a highly trusted Sponsor with the Home Office. As such it acts
    essentially as a contractor or agent for the Home Office and  it  would
    be expected there would be communication and consistency between  those
    bodies.  The shift in the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal  suggest  they
    accept her entitlement to work which is consistent with the diploma and
    agreements in place with  their  highly  trusted  agent  namely  Cahro.
    Indeed the work forms an essential part of the diploma,  understandable
    given the nature of the diploma itself.  It also suggests the  original
    refusal of her application was based on a misunderstood premise.

14. The judge was entitled to conclude that the Appellant's  accepted  work
    levels did not  breach  her  visa  conditions  or  the  work  placement
    agreements with her Sponsor college.  It does not seem to me that there
    was any onus necessarily on the Appellant to  forward  copies  of  such
    documents even if she had access to them to the Home Office.  It should
    be expected that such documentation relating  to  visa  conditions  and
    student's work placement agreements  would  be  passed  by  the  highly
    trusted Sponsor, college or company to the Home Office or alternatively
    the Home Office as a matter of routine would  seek  such  documents  to
    ensure they had an accurate and up-to-date  database  of  students  and
    their conditions within the UK to  maintain  an  efficient  immigration
    control.

15. The Appellant had leave to remain on her visa until 28th  October  2013
    and prior to that date had applied for a further  higher  level  course
    for which she was  awaiting  a  decision,  namely  the  application  in
    question.  Any work she may have done post  June  or  July  2013  until
    November 2013 was done in holiday times  and  in  accordance  with  the
    conditions of her work placement and whilst awaiting  a  decision  from
    the Home Office in respect of her application to remain in the UK as  a
    student continuing her course of study and  chosen  subject  but  at  a
    higher level.

16. The judge was entitled to find in favour of the Appellant in this  case
    having seen the  documentation  available.   It  is  perhaps  a  little
    regrettable that  the  not  insignificant  shift  in  the  Respondent's
    position between the refusal letter and the Grounds of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal may demonstrate a less than full or  up-to-date  picture
    of  circumstances  which  may  reflect  potentially  a   breakdown   of
    communication between themselves and their highly trusted Sponsor agent
    or some other fault.  However the Appellant  has  acted  at  all  times
    within the terms and spirit of her course of study and  work  placement
    and the judge was entitled to allow her appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error of law made by the judge  in  this  case  and  I
uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 30th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

