
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05227/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 July 2014                                 |On 30 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              KINGSLEY AGYEMANG
                        (NO anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Mr Agyemang is a citizen of Ghana born in 1979.  He appealed against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 11 January 2014 to refuse to
    issue a residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in  the  UK
    as the family member (spouse) of an EEA national (Portuguese) under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (Regulation 7).

 2. Although in the proceedings before me the Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Appellant, for the sake of convenience I will refer to the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  thus,  Mr  Agyemang  is  the
    Appellant and the Secretary of State is the Respondent.

 3. The basis of the Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  was  entitled  to  a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA  national  (Portuguese)  who  is
    exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  The Respondent was  not  satisfied
    that the Appellant was able to meet the requirements of the Regulations
    in that the Appellant had failed to show that he is the  family  member
    of an EEA national.  The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant's
    customary marriage by proxy to  the  Sponsor  was  valid  under  either
    Ghanaian or UK law.

 4. He appealed.  The matter was dealt with at  his  request  'on  papers',
    thus, without a hearing. In a determination promulgated on 8  May  2014
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Lagunju  allowed  the  appeal.   She
    considered that the issue was whether the marriage was valid in  Ghana.
    If so, in her view, it was valid in the UK.

 5. She considered that under Ghanaian law there was no requirement  for  a
    customary marriage to be registered for it to be valid. If there was no
    requirement to register a marriage for it to be valid, then the need to
    provide a statutory declaration which  contains  specific  information,
    fell  away:  '...  neither  a   marriage   certificate   (obtained   on
    registration of the marriage) nor a statutory declaration (used for the
    purpose of obtaining a  marriage  certificate)  is  required  before  a
    customary marriage is considered valid and lawful' [10].

 6. The Tribunal went on (at [12]) to note  that  despite  there  being  no
    legal  requirement  to  provide  one,  the  Appellant  had  provided  a
    statutory declaration.  Also, a 'notarised document from the Legal  and
    Consular Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration Office and a  further
    document from the High Court of Justice attesting that  the  stamp  and
    signatures of the  notary  public  on  the  statutory  declaration  are
    genuine'.  She found 'in the absence of any evidence to  the  contrary,
    that these documents are recognised  and  acceptable  by  the  Ghanaian
    authorities'.

 7. She concluded (at [16])

         'In light of my findings above, I am satisfied that  the  Appellant
         has proved to the requisite standard that  his  customary  marriage
         conducted in Ghana by proxy is a valid marriage.   Accordingly  the
         Appellant has shown  that  he  is  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
         national, thus he meets the requirements of  the  regulations.   In
         light of this I need not consider Regulation 8(5).'

 8. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted on 11 June
    2014 a judge stating:




         '...

         2.   The grounds of appeal argue that the Judge failed to  consider
             the case of Kareem (Proxy marriage - EU  law)  Nigeria  [2014]
             UKUT 24.  Consequently, the Judge failed to  consider  whether
             the proxy marriage was recognised in the  EEA  Sponsor's  home
             state of Portugal and fell into error.

         3.   It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  did  not  correctly  apply
             prevailing case law with regard to eligibility for a Residence
             Card as a spouse for EEA free movement  purposes.   The  Judge
             did not refer to Kareem and arguably fell into  error  by  not
             considering the status of proxy marriage  of  this  nature  in
             Portugal.'

 9. At the error of law hearing  before  me  there  was  no  appearance  or
    response by or on behalf of the Appellant.  Being satisfied that notice
    of hearing had been sent to both the Appellant and his  representatives
    on 18 June 2014, I proceeded in absence.

10. In brief submissions Mr Whitwell simply sought to rely on  the  grounds
    seeking permission.  The First-tier Judge had failed to have regard  to
    Kareem.  In determining the validity of the marriage the  judge  should
    have first established whether this type of customary marriage by proxy
    was recognised in the EEA state of the Sponsor, namely,  Portugal.   As
    no evidence was advanced by the Appellant to support the recognition of
    the marriage in Portugal the Appellant  had  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden of proof.  The appeal should have been dismissed on that basis.

11. I agreed  with  that  submission.   In  Kareem  at  [11]  the  Tribunal
    recognised that the question of whether a person is married is a matter
    governed by the national laws of the individual Member States.

12. Moving forward to paragraph 16, the Tribunal once again observe that:

         '...where there are issues of EU law that involve  the  nationality
         laws of Member States, then the law that applies will be the law of
         the Member State of  nationality and not the host Member State...'

13. The reasoning continues in paragraph 18:

         'Within EU law, it is essential that Member States  facilitate  the
         free movement and residence rights  of  Union  citizens  and  their
         spouses.  This would not be achieved if it  were  left  to  a  host
         Member State to decide whether a Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
         marriage.  Different Member States would be able to reach different
         conclusions about that Union citizen's marital status.  This  would
         leave Union citizens unclear as to whether their spouses could move
         freely with them; and might mean that the Union citizen could  move
         with greater freedom to one Member State (where the marriage  would
         be recognised) than to another  (where  it  might  not  be).   Such
         difficulties  would  be  contrary  to  the   fundamental   EU   law
         principles.   Therefore,  we  perceive  EU  law  as  requiring  the
         identification of the legal system of which a marriage is  said  to
         have been contracted in such a way as  to  ensure  that  the  Union
         citizen's marital status  is  not  at  risk  of  being  differently
         determined by different Member States.  Given  the  intrinsic  link
         between nationality of a Member State and free movement rights,  we
         conclude that the legal system of  the  nationality  of  the  Union
         citizen must itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted.'

14. That such was the position was made clear  in  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).  The head note reads:

         'Following the decision in Kareem ... the determination of  whether
         there is a marital relationship for the purposes of the Immigration
         (EEA) Regulations 2006 must always be examined in  accordance  with
         the laws of the Member State from which the Union  citizen  obtains
         nationality.'

15. Whilst TA was promulgated in  June  2014,  Kareem  was  promulgated  in
    January 2014 thus before the First-tier Judge  considered  the  appeal.
    In failing to have regard to the relevant law the determination  showed
    material error.  I set it aside.

16. In the absence of any appearance or representations by or on behalf  of
    the Appellant I saw no reason why I should not proceed  immediately  to
    remake the decision.
    Mr Whitwell simply stated that in the absence of any evidence as to the
    relevant Portuguese law in respect of such a marriage the appeal had to
    fail.

17. I agreed.  There was no evidence  whatsoever  about  the  situation  of
    customary marriage by proxy under Portuguese law.  Having  no  evidence
    before me that the law of Portugal recognises the Appellant's  marriage
    as a valid marriage, and the burden of proving the fact that  it  is  a
    valid marriage is on the Appellant, I find that the Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor are not to be treated as being married for the purpose  of  the
    2006 Regulations and, therefore, the Appellant cannot establish that he
    is  a  family  member  for  the  purposes  of  Regulation  7  of  these
    Regulations.

18. That, though, is not the end of the matter.  Regulation 8 of  the  2006
    Regulations regulates  those  persons  who  can  be  considered  to  be
    'extended family members' of EEA  nationals.   Pursuant  to  Regulation
    8(5):

         'A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if the  person
         is the partner of an EEA national and can  prove  to  the  decision
         maker that he is in a durable relationship with the EEA national'.

19. 'Durable relationship' is not defined in the Regulations, and whether a
    person is in a durable relationship is a matter to be determined  on  a
    case by case basis.

20. The First-tier Tribunal having allowed the appeal  under  Regulation  7
    declined to consider Regulation 8.

21. Having dismissed the appeal on rehearing  under  Regulation  7  I  must
    consider Regulation 8.

22. The refusal letter noted that the Appellant had  provided  no  evidence
    that he and the Sponsor resided  together  as  a  couple  at  the  same
    address prior to the date of the  customary  marriage  certificate  and
    that he had provided no  evidence  to  show  if  they  reside  together
    currently.  Additionally, he had provided no evidence  that  they  even
    knew each other or had met prior to the date of the customary  marriage
    certificate being issued abroad.  As a result it was considered that he
    had provided insufficient evidence to show that he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship.

23. Again there is no evidence at all in support of this matter before  me.
    I notice, indeed, that it was not even raised in the  original  Grounds
    of Appeal.  I find, thus, that the Appellant fails to establish that he
    is in a durable relationship pursuant  to  Regulation  8.   The  appeal
    fails on this issue as well as under Regulation 7.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed material error  of  law.   It
is set aside and remade as follows: the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

