
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05699/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 December 2015                  |On 23 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                          NILAY DASHARATHBHAI PATEL
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Pennington-Benton instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Miles promulgated on the 24 June 2015, following  a  hearing  a
       Richmond on the 17 June  2015,  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the
       appellants appeal against the refusal of the respondent  to  issue  a
       Residence Card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
       Kingdom on the basis of a derived right of residence.

    2. The appellant who was born on the 11 September 1986 is a  citizen  of
       India.   The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  on  27
       February 2010 with leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  valid
       to 13 June 2012. On 8 June 2012 the appellant sought indefinite leave
       to remain outside the Rules which was refused on the 30 January 2013.
       An appeal against this decision was dismissed on the 1  October  2013
       and permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal eventually refused  by
       that tribunal on the 29 November 2013. On 27 June 2014 the  appellant
       sought leave to remain on the basis of his family and private life in
       the UK which was refused on the 28 August 2014. On  5  December  2014
       the appellant applied for a Derived Residence Card claiming to be the
       primary carer of a British  Citizen.  This  was  refused  on  the  28
       January 2015 as it is stated the  appellant  had  not  shown  in  the
       application that he met the relevant provisions of Regulation 15A and
       18A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulation  2006  (as
       amended) hereinafter referred to as 'the Regulations'.

    3. Regulations 15A and 18A provide:

           'Derivative right of residence 15A.

           (1)    A person ("P") who  is  not  an  exempt  person  and  who
           satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A)  or  (5)
           of this regulation is entitled to a derivative right  to  reside
           in the United Kingdom for as long as P  satisfies  the  relevant
           criteria.

           (2)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if- (a)  P  is
           the  primary  carer  of  an  EEA  national  ("the  relevant  EEA
           national"); and (b) the relevant EEA national- (i) is under  the
           age of 18; (ii) is residing in the United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
           sufficient person; and (iii) would be unable to  remain  in  the
           United Kingdom if P were required to leave.

           (3)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if- (a)  P  is
           the child of an EEA national ("the EEA national parent"); (b)  P
           resided in the United Kingdom at a time when  the  EEA  national
           parent was residing in the United Kingdom as a worker; and (c) P
           is in education in the United Kingdom and was in education there
           at a time when  the  EEA  national  parent  was  in  the  United
           Kingdom.

           (4) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if- (a) P is  the
           primary carer of a person meeting the criteria in paragraph  (3)
           ("the relevant person"); and (b) the relevant  person  would  be
           unable to continue to be educated in the  United  Kingdom  if  P
           were required to leave.

           (4A)   P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if- (a)  P  is
           the primary carer of a British citizen  ("the  relevant  British
           citizen"); (b) the relevant British citizen is residing  in  the
           United Kingdom; and (c) the relevant British  citizen  would  be
           unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA  State  if  P  were
           required to leave.

           (5)    P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if- (a)  P  is
           under the age of 18; (b) P's primary  carer  is  entitled  to  a
           derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom  by  virtue  of
           paragraph (2) or (4); (c) P does not have  leave  to  enter,  or
           remain in, the United Kingdom; and (d) requiring P to leave  the
           United Kingdom would prevent P's primary carer from residing  in
           the United Kingdom.

           (6)    For the  purpose  of  this  regulation-  (a)  "education"
           excludes nursery education; (b)  "worker"  does  not  include  a
           jobseeker or a person who falls to be regarded as  a  worker  by
           virtue of regulation 6(2); and  (c)  "an  exempt  person"  is  a
           person- (i) who has a right to reside in the United Kingdom as a
           result of any other provision of these Regulations; (ii) who has
           a right of abode in the United Kingdom by virtue of section 2 of
           the 1971 Act; (iii) to whom section 8 of the 1971  Act,  or  any
           order made under subsection (2) of that provision,  applies;  or
           (iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or remain in  the  United
           Kingdom.

           (7)    P is to be regarded  as  a  "primary  carer"  of  another
           person if (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that
           person;  and  (b)  P-  (i)  is  the  person  who   has   primary
           responsibility for that person's care; or  (ii)  shares  equally
           the responsibility for that person's care with one other  person
           who is not an exempt person.

           (7A)   Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer  of  another
           person  by  virtue  of  paragraph  (7)(b)(ii)  the  criteria  in
           paragraphs (2)(b)(iii), (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall  be  considered
           on the  basis  that  both  P  and  the  person  with  whom  care
           responsibility is shared would be required to leave  the  United
           Kingdom.

           (7B)   Paragraph (7A) does not apply if  the  person  with  whom
           care responsibility is shared acquired  a  derivative  right  to
           reside in the United Kingdom as  a  result  of  this  regulation
           prior to P assuming equal care responsibility.

           (8)    P will not be regarded as  having  responsibility  for  a
           person's care for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis
           of a financial contribution towards that person's care.

           (9)     A  person  who  otherwise  satisfies  the  criteria   in
           paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) will not be entitled  to  a
           derivative right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  where  the
           Secretary of State or an immigration officer has made a decision
           under regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1), 20A(1) or 23A.'

           ...

           Issue of a derivative residence card 18A.

           (1)    The Secretary  of  State  must  issue  a  person  with  a
           derivative residence card on application and on  production  of-
           (a) a valid identity card issued by an  EEA  State  or  a  valid
           passport; and (b) proof that  the  applicant  has  a  derivative
           right of residence under regulation 15A.

           (2)    On receipt of an  application  under  paragraph  (1)  the
           Secretary of State must issue the applicant with  a  certificate
           of application as soon as possible.

           (3)    A derivative residence card issued  under  paragraph  (1)
           may take the form of a stamp in  the  applicant's  passport  and
           will be valid until- (a) a date five  years  from  the  date  of
           issue; or (b) any other date specified by the Secretary of State
           when issuing the derivative residence  card.  (4)  A  derivative
           residence card issued under paragraph (1) must be issued and  as
           soon as practicable. (5)  But  this  regulation  is  subject  to
           regulations 20(1) and 20(1A).'

    4. A person cannot claim a breach of Regulation 18A unless they are able
       to prove they have a derivative right of residence  under  Regulation
       15A.

    5. It is conceded by the respondent in the refusal  that  the  appellant
       provides care for  his  father  Dashrathkumar  Mohanbhai  Patel  ('Mr
       Patel') but it was not accepted that there are  no  alternative  care
       provisions available in the United Kingdom.

    6. Having considered the evidence and submissions Judge Miles  made  the
       following  finding  at  paragraph  19  of  the  determination   under
       challenge:

           "19.   The appellant's submission is that if he had to return to
           India his father would feel compelled to join him and  therefore
           leave the United Kingdom. To establish that submission therefore
           the evidence must show that his father would choose to return to
           the country where he and his son would be homeless  and  without
           family support.  Furthermore, there is no evidence of what level
           of medical care, if any would be made available to the father in
           India, and the timescale of that provision.  If the  appellant's
           father remains in the United Kingdom there is no question, in my
           judgment, but that he would be provided with a  social  services
           package together with medical treatment appropriate for a person
           in his situation who does not have a  full-time  primary  carer.
           Those circumstances might well result in the appellant's  father
           having to be admitted to hospital  for  his  dialysis  treatment
           which would clearly not be as good as  the  current  arrangement
           where his treatment is provided essentially by his son at  home,
           but that treatment would  continue  to  be  provided  given  his
           father's status as a British citizen.  His father would also  be
           eligible for any additional welfare benefits appropriate to  his
           condition  and  taking  into   account   the   severe   mobility
           difficulties  of  his  wife,  which  I  also  accept.  In  those
           circumstances  the  comparison  between  the  situation  of  the
           appellant's father  if  he  went  to  live  in  India  with  the
           appellant, as opposed to remaining in the  United  Kingdom  with
           his wife but without the appellant can only be  resolved  in  my
           judgment by concluding that the notion of the appellant's father
           choosing or feeling obliged  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  is
           simply untenable, despite the detrimental  impact  on  both  his
           parents, which I accept if he were required to leave.  The  fact
           of the matter is that  the  medical  needs  of  the  appellant's
           father can only be secured with any confidence by  remaining  in
           the United Kingdom rather than going to India and  I  am  simply
           unable to accept his father (and mother) would not see  that  as
           the reality  of  his  situation.   In  all  those  circumstances
           therefore I am not satisfied the appellant had proved  that  his
           father would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom  for  the
           purposes of regulation 15A(4A)(c) of the 2006 regulation if  the
           appellant was required to leave. Accordingly this appeal fails."

    7. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
       by First-tier tribunal Judge Shimmin on 21 September 2015. Paragraphs
       2-4 of that grant are in the following terms:

           "2.    The grounds requesting permission to appeal to the  Upper
           Tribunal argue that the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  properly
           assess the issue of the appellant's parents being  compelled  to
           leave the UK.  It is arguable that the judge failed to  consider
           and  give  appropriate  weight  to  the  expert's   unchallenged
           evidence in relation to the appellant's father's condition. This
           grounds is arguable.

           3. It is further arguable that the Regulations (in Reg.16A)  set
           the threshold too high in requiring a finding to  be  made  that
           the parents would be 'unable' to remain in the UK.

           4. I grant permission to appeal."

    8. In a letter received by the Upper Tribunal on 30  November  2015  the
       appellants representatives, both his barrister  Mr  Pennington-Benton
       and   solicitors   Farani   Javid   Taylor,   make   the    following
       observation/request:

           "Whilst in the case of  unaccompanied  children  it  might  make
           sense to talk in terms of the EU child being unable to remain in
           the EU member state, it makes less sense when dealing  with  the
           wider effect of Zambrano and  its  application  to  other  adult
           dependants.

           The appeal raises an important issue as to the proper scope  and
           ambit of the case law from the CJEU  and  whether  the  domestic
           Regulations properly interpret and apply that case law.  It  may
           be that a reference is required to the CJEU which is matter that
           can  be  canvassed  at  the  appeal.   As  the   case   involves
           construction and  application  of  domestic  Regulations;  their
           compatibility with EU law and possible future reference  if  the
           conclusion is not readily apparent from  the  materials,  it  is
           requested that the  matter  be  reported  and/or  put  before  a
           reporting panel as appropriate."

    9. The composition of the Upper Tribunal is a matter for that  Tribunal.
       Panels are the norm for country guidance or other  cases  if  merited
       but the default position is for a single judge  of  the  Tribunal  to
       hear an appeal. Whether a case is reported is a matter than can  only
       be considered if it is shown there is good reason to do so such as to
       provide guidance to others in this area of law.

Discussion


   10. It is important to understand the history behind the  'derived  right
       of residence' provision.  The core issue in this case is the Zambrano
       principle. In Zambrano v Office of National de l'emploi  C-34/09  the
       Court of Justice of the European Union issued its  judgement  in  the
       case of Ruiz  Zambrano.  At  the  heart  of  that  judgment  was  the
       principle that:

           "45    ... Article 20 TFEU [Treaty on  the  Functioning  of  the
           European  Union]  is  to  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  it
           precludes a Member State from refusing a third country  national
           upon whom his minor children, who are European  Union  citizens,
           are dependent, a right of residence in the Member State..."

   11. In response the United Kingdom laid before parliament the Immigration
       (EEA) Amendment (No 2) Regulations  2012  which  came  into  force  8
       November 2012. The purpose of  the  amendments,  according  to  their
       Explanatory Note is, among  other  things,  to  give  effect  to  the
       Zambrano judgment:

           "... by amending regulations 11 and 15A of the 2006  Regulations
           in order to confer rights of entry and residence on the  primary
           carer of a British citizen who is residing in the United Kingdom
           and where the denial of such a right of residence would  prevent
           the British citizen from being able  to  reside  in  the  United
           Kingdom or in an EEA State."

   12. Regulation 15A is the central Regulation. It was  inserted  into  the
       Regulations  to  create  the  category  of  a  'derivative  right  of
       residence. The Explanatory Note of the Amendment Regulations 2012 (No
       1) tells us that this derivative right of residence  was  created  in
       order to give effect to the judgments of the CJEU  in  the  cases  of
       Chen [2004], Ibrahim [2010] and Teixera [2010].

   13. In order  to  give  effect  to  Zambrano,  the  derivative  right  of
       residence is acquired by a person defined in  Regulation  15A(4A)  as
       'the primary carer of a British citizen' where 'the relevant  British
       citizen is residing in the United Kingdom' and 'would  be  unable  to
       reside in the UK or  in  another  EEA  State  if  [the  person]  were
       required to leave.' Regulation 15A(7) defines a 'primary carer' as 'a
       direct relative or a legal guardian' of the  British  Citizen,  where
       the carer 'has primary responsibility' for the British Citizen's care
       or 'shares equally the responsibility' for the British Citizen's care
       with another person who does not have any right to reside  under  the
       Regulations nor any leave to enter or remain.

   14. Mr Pennington-Benton submits that the  proper  test  that  should  be
       applied when considering these issues is one of objectivity with  the
       judge having to find that the person would leave. This is contrary to
       domestic case  law  and  the  understating  and  application  of  the
       Zambrano principles to date.  In Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c)
       2006 EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT  89  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that  the
       principles established by the Court of Justice in Zambrano Case C-34-
       /09 [2011] ECR 1-0000 and subsequent cases dealing with Article 20 of
       the Treaty on the Functioning  of  the  European  Union  (TFEU)  have
       potential application even where the EEA national/Union citizen child
       of a third-country national is not a  national  of  the  host  Member
       State: the test in all cases is whether the  adverse  decision  would
       require the child to leave the territory of the Union. (My emphasis).

   15. There are more than Mr Pennington-Benton  who  take  issue  with  the
       approach of the UK government to the principles arising from the case
       law.  The problem with the UK's approach to  implementing  the  Chen,
       Ibrahim and Teixeira judgments in its national Regulations  has  been
       commented upon by Adam Weiss, Legal Director of the AIRE  Centre.  In
       relation to the delay in giving effect to the CJEU judgments and:

           "The second problem is how the Regulations reflect the case law.
           The Court of Justice - broadly applying  provisions  of  EU  law
           designed to encourage  the  free  movement  of  persons  and  to
           protect the rights of EU citizens - has found in these judgments
           that EEA nationals and  their  family  members  have  rights  to
           reside in the UK in circumstances the  UK  authorities  did  not
           anticipate."

   16. It is said the UK authorities' response was to grant rights  only  to
       people whose lives track the facts  of  these  cases  as  closely  as
       possible, and not to anyone else:

           "This conservative approach undermines the spirit of what EU law
           requires: a  flexible  approach  to  recognising  the  residence
           rights of EU migrants  in  unexpected  situations  where  EU-law
           citizenship and free-movement rights  are  engaged.  Giving  the
           authorities broader discretion would have been better. The  UK's
           case-by-case approach will inevitably lead to  people  who  have
           rights under EU law being refused recognition of those rights".

   17. A challenge based upon an argument that too restrictive  an  approach
       has been taken by the First-tier Judge in applying the Regulations or
       in claiming they are incompatible with the decision of  the  CJEU  in
       Zambrano needs also to consider the later decisions of the  Court  in
       Shirley McCarthy v Secretary of State for the Home Department Case C-
       434/09  [2011] and Dereci and others v Bundesministerium fur  Inneres
       (Case C-256/11) CJEU (Grand Chamber) in which the CJEU held:

           "European Union  law  and,  in  particular,  its  provisions  on
           citizenship of the Union, must be interpreted as meaning that it
           does not preclude a Member State from refusing to allow a  third
           country national to reside on its territory,  where  that  third
           country national wishes to reside with a member  of  his  family
           who is a citizen of the Union residing in the  Member  State  of
           which he has nationality, who has never exercised his  right  to
           freedom of movement, provided that such refusal does  not  lead,
           for the Union citizen concerned, to the denial  of  the  genuine
           enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred by virtue  of
           his status as a citizen of the Union, which is a matter for  the
           referring court to verify".

   18. This approach is reflected in the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Sanade
       and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012]  UKUT  00048
       (IAC). Mr Justice Blake when President of the Upper Tribunal  dealing
       with deportation cases under s32 of the UK Borders Act  2007  and  in
       the context of Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
       found the CJEU judgments are interpreted as follows:

           "Where in the context of Article 8 one  parent  ("the  remaining
           parent") of a British citizen child is also  a  British  citizen
           (or cannot be removed as a family member or in their own right),
           the removal of the other parent does not mean  that  either  the
           child or the remaining parent will be required to leave, thereby
           infringing the Zambrano principle, see  C-256/11  Murat  Dereci,
           BAILII: [2011] EUECJ C-256/11. The critical question is  whether
           the child is dependent on  the  parent  being  removed  for  the
           exercise of his Union right of residence and whether removal  of
           that parent will deprive the child of the effective exercise  of
           residence in the United  Kingdom  or  elsewhere  in  the  Union.
           [Headnote 6]"

   19. Further recent domestic decision include DH (Jamaica)  and  others  v
       SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 in which the Court of Appeal said that  the
       application of the Zambrano test required a focus on  whether,  as  a
       matter of reality, the  EU  citizen  would  be  obliged  to  give  up
       residence in the EU if the non-EU national was  removed.  If  the  EU
       citizen, be it wife or child, would not in practice be  compelled  to
       leave the country if the non-EU family member were to be refused  the
       right of residence, there was nothing in the jurisprudence to suggest
       that  EU  law  would  be  engaged  simply  because  their  continuing
       residence was in some sense affected, for example, in relation to the
       quality of life. The right of residence was a right to reside in  the
       territory not a right to any particular quality of life or particular
       standard of living and only if that was affected to  such  an  extent
       that it was likely to compel  the  EU  citizen  to  leave  would  the
       principle apply.

   20. In FZ (China) [2015] EWCA Civ 550 the  Chinese  appellant  sought  to
       rely on Zambrano by asserting that his wife had decided to  accompany
       him to China if he was deported and this  would  compel  his  British
       daughter to leave with her parents. The Court of Appeal held that the
       application of the Zambrano  principle  was  limited  to  exceptional
       cases.  A desire to preserve the family unit would not be enough  for
       the principle to apply. In the instant case, there was no  compulsion
       for the appellant's wife or child to leave.  The Tribunal  had  noted
       that after the Claimant's arrest the wife was the sole breadwinner of
       the family.

   21. In Ayinde and Thinjom (carers- Reg 15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT  00560
       it was held that (i) The deprivation of the genuine enjoyment of  the
       substance of the rights attaching to the  status  of  European  Union
       citizens identified in the decision in Zambrano [2011] EUECJ  C-34/09
       is limited to safeguarding a British citizen's EU rights  as  defined
       in Article 20; (ii) The provisions of reg.  15A  of  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended apply  when  the
       effect of removal of the carer  of  a  British  citizen  renders  the
       British citizen no longer able to reside in the United Kingdom or  in
       another EEA state.  This requires the carer to establish  as  a  fact
       that the British citizen will be forced to leave the territory of the
       Union; (iii) The requirement is not met by  an  assumption  that  the
       citizen will leave and does not involve a consideration of whether it
       would be reasonable for the carer to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   A
       comparison of the British citizen's standard of living or care if the
       appellant remains or departs is  material  only  in  the  context  of
       whether the British citizen will leave the  United  Kingdom'  (iv)The
       Tribunal is required to examine critically a  claim  that  a  British
       citizen will leave the Union if the benefits he currently receives by
       remaining in the United Kingdom are unlikely to  be  matched  in  the
       country in which he claims he will be forced to settle.

   22. It is accepted that the  Zambrano  principle  is  not  restricted  to
       children and there is no suggestion in the Regulations that  this  is
       so. Regulation 15A(1)  defines  those  entitled  to  benefit  from  a
       derived right of residence as a person who is not  an  exempt  person
       and who satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3),  (4),  (4A)  or
       (5) for as long as they satisfy the relevant criteria.

   23. In this appeal the respondent refused to issue a  Residence  Card  by
       reference to regulation (4A) which states that P (a person) satisfies
       the criteria in this paragraph if- (a) P is the primary  carer  of  a
       British citizen ("the relevant British citizen");  (b)  the  relevant
       British citizen is residing  in  the  United  Kingdom;  and  (c)  the
       relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the  UK  or  in
       another EEA State if P were required to leave.

   24. The test set out in the Regulations and applied by the Judge has  not
       been shown to be the incorrect test as per DH (Jamaica): 'whether, as
       a matter of reality, the EU citizen  would  be  obliged  to  give  up
       residence in the EU if the non-EU national was  removed.  If  the  EU
       citizen, be it wife or child, would not in practice be  compelled  to
       leave the country if the non-EU family member were to be refused  the
       right of residence, there was nothing in the jurisprudence to suggest
       that  EU  law  would  be  engaged  simply  because  their  continuing
       residence was in some sense affected, for example, in relation to the
       quality of life. The right of residence was a right to reside in  the
       territory not a right to any particular quality of life or particular
       standard of living and only if that was affected to  such  an  extent
       that it was likely to compel  the  EU  citizen  to  leave  would  the
       principle apply'.

   25. It has not  been  made  out  that  the  First-tier  Judge  failed  to
       appreciate the wider applicability of the provisions  or  misdirected
       himself in law in limiting the relevant provisions to minor children.
        The grounds fail to establish any arguable merit in the  claim  that
       the law should be interpreted or  applied  differently  when  dealing
       with an adult rather than a child. The issue is the protection of the
       right of free movement in European law for which the  provisions  are
       equally applicable to both groups.

   26. It is also argued the First-tier Judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
       medical evidence. A report  from  Veronica  Downing  Associates,  who
       describe themselves as Rehabilitation Costs Consultants, dated 1 June
       2015 was available  to  the  First-tier  Judge  [A's  bundle  16-41].
       Veronica Dowling is said to be an Occupational  Therapist.  The  care
       needs of the appellants father are set out at paragraph  2.2  in  the
       following terms:

           'Social Services undertook an assessment of Mr and  Mrs  Patel's
           current  care  and  support  needs  the  day  before  my  visit.
           Medications are supplied by the pharmacist in Dossette boxes and
           Mr Patel attends hospital for fortnightly injections which  have
           to be done by the hospital or by a District Nurse  from  the  GP
           surgery.

           As stated earlier, Mr and Mrs Patel have been assessed by Social
           Services for a care package in October 2014.  They  then  had  a
           financial assessment in November 2014 and since  then,  had  not
           heard from Social Services.  Nilay Patel therefore began chasing
           them and contacted Social Services 4 times in the past 6  weeks.
           The explanation was that the original assessor had gone  off  on
           long terms sick leave.  Mr Patel was re-assessed on 29 May 2015.



           Nilay Patel explained that if he was not available to  take  his
           father to the hospital, an alternative arrangement would have to
           be made.  However, the GP has advised that a District Nurse from
           the  surgery  cannot  be  made  available  to  do   Mr   Patel's
           injections. When Mr Patel has his next appointment on 10 June at
           the Royal London Hospital, they hope to determine whether or not
           a District Nurse can  attend  as  an  alternative  to  Mr  Patel
           travelling to the hospital.

           Also, on a daily basis, Mr  Patel  would  need  someone  who  is
           trained, to set up the dialysis machine.  Social  Services  have
           said they cannot assure Mr Patel that this  would  happen  on  a
           regular basis at the same time each day  and  similarly  in  the
           morning, he would have to stay connected to the dialysis machine
           until someone came to disconnect him, but timing  could  not  be
           guaranteed.   Mr  Patel  requires  someone  to  attend  to   his
           peritoneal dialysis every night  and  morning  and  also  to  be
           available on-call during this time to attend to the alarm  which
           goes off whenever there is a blockage problem.'

   27. Section 3 of the report headed "Identification of Needs  for  Care  &
       Support" draws together the various threads  of  the  assessment.  It
       sets out the practical arrangements for providing the care  required.
       It is said that according to the  appellant  Newham  Council  do  not
       provide domestic services and that persons requiring the same have to
       source them privately. In order to replace  the  care  the  appellant
       provides 3 or 4 specially trained cares would be required to work  on
       a rota.

   28. The repost also contains the following observation:

           'Psychologically and emotionally Mr and Mrs Patel would  not  be
           able to cope with strangers caring for them Culturally, this  is
           very difficult and in any case to date, their  son  as  provided
           for their care. Mrs Patel becomes distressed  and  tearful  with
           the prospect of not having their son living with them and  Nilay
           says that if he is unable to stay in this country, he will  take
           his parents back to India and care for  them,  even  though  his
           father would be unable to continue with his present treatment of
           Peritoneal Dialysis as the equipment  and  consumables  are  not
           available in India.'

   29. The report concluded with the  observation  that  'the  appellant  is
       relieving the obligation  of  Social  Services  to  provide  for  his
       parents and reducing the likelihood of further demands  on  Statutory
       Services'.

   30. The assertion the First-tier Judge failed  to  consider  the  medical
       evidence or misunderstood the same is not made out. It  was  accepted
       that the standard of care the appellant's father  may  experience  in
       his absence may not be the same [17] but  that  is  not  the  correct
       test. The submission by Mr Pennington-Benton that  the  Judge  should
       have applied a subjective test to the appellant's father  is  not  in
       accordance with the case  law  set  out  above  and  is  arguably  an
       unlawful expansion of the  Zambrano  principle  as  it  is  currently
       understood.

   31. It is noted that the source of the statements recorded in the  report
       about future care arrangements, the lack of the same, and  facilities
       in India, is the appellant himself. There is inadequate evidence from
       the Social Services, who have a statuary obligation to  provide  care
       for those assessed as requiring the same in their area, as recognised
       by the expert, that they are unwilling  or  unable  to  fulfil  their
       statutory obligations. The fact a number of services have  been  'put
       out' to private companies is in accordance  with  the  norm  of  many
       public services but it was not  shown  those  private  care  agencies
       cannot provide the required degree of care or that funding would  not
       be available for the same. The notes from Lewisham refer to the  need
       to make a contribution which, one assumes, was the  purposes  of  the
       financial assessment undertaken and mentioned  in  the  care  report.
       There is  also  an  overlap  between  the  medical  requirements  and
       community care. It was not shown that the organisations  as  a  whole
       cannot arrange a suitable care package as, arguably, they are require
       to do by law. This is the finding of the  Judge  that  has  not  been
       shown to be infected by arguable legal error.

   32. There is no removal decision against the appellant's parents and  the
       issue is that of a constructive expulsion argument. To hold the  fact
       that the parents want their son  to  remain  and  continue  with  the
       current family and care regime is determinative would be to base  the
       decision on subjective elements  only.  The  Judge  was  required  to
       "examine critically a claim that a British  citizen  will  leave  the
       Union if the benefits he  currently  receives  by  remaining  in  the
       United Kingdom are unlikely to be matched in the country in which  he
       claims he will be forced to settle". The Judge did so and  found  the
       claim  the  appellants  parents  would  leave  the  UK  not   to   be
       credible/plausible. That is a  finding  open  to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence.

   33. The Judge considered the evidence with the required degree of anxious
       scrutiny and has given adequate reasons for the findings  made.   The
       weight to be given to that evidence is a matter for the Judge.

   34. Mr Jarvis made the point the Zambrano issue was not raised before the
       First-tier Tribunal and is not a 'Robinson obvious' point. It  cannot
       be legal error for the First-tier not to consider something of  which
       they are unaware or not been asked to consider but the claim  has  no
       arguable merit as the case law set out  above  contains  the  correct
       position in relation to the test applied in any event. An application
       for a declaration  that  the  Regulations  are  not  compatible  with
       European  law  is  ordinarily  a  matter  for  the  High   Court   on
       application.

   35.  The  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  this  is  not  an
       exceptional case and that there is no compulsion for the  appellant's
       father and mother to leave the UK has not been shown to  be  infected
       by arguable legal error on the basis of the evidence made  available.
       The fact the appellant states he will take his father with him is not
       the issue.  That  is  a  matter  of  his  or  family  choice  not  of
       compulsion.

Decision

   36. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   37. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16 February 2016

