
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05826/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th April 2016                        |On 15th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            mr JOSHUA ATO ANNOBIL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by Hodders Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to Mr Annobil as the Claimant.  He is a citizen of  Ghana
    who applied for indefinite leave to remain here as someone who had been
    a work permit holder for 5 years, that he was entitled to  remain  here
    on the basis of 10 years continuous residence and also that  to  remove
    him would be a breach  of  his  rights  under  Article  8  ECHR.   That
    application  was  refused  and  his  subsequent  appeal  to  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clapham was allowed under the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State raised grounds of application.

 2. It was said that the appeal was allowed (at an earlier date) as not  in
    accordance with the law by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thanki.   It  had
    been remitted to the SSHD as the SSHD  had  failed  to  acknowledge  in
    their initial decision that the considerable delay  in  concluding  the
    Appellant's request for reconsideration had  been  attributable  to  an
    administrative error on her part.  The SSHD had corrected that.

 3. In the instant appeal Judge Clapham found  at  paragraph  38  that  the
    reasons for refusal letter (RRFL) issued as a response to the  remittal
    by Judge Thanki did not  appear  to  proceed  on  the  basis  of  Judge
    Thanki's findings - he was wrong to conclude that.

 4. The SSHD had acknowledged within the refusal letter  that  it  was  her
    error which  had  caused  the  delay  in  response  to  the  Claimant's
    application for reconsideration of his 2006 application.  She therefore
    went on to consider her discretion on the issue again  as  directed  by
    Judge Thanki.   However,  as  detailed  in  the  RFRL,  reconsideration
    requests do not extend leave under the provisions  of  Section  3C  and
    even if they did the  Claimant  had  no  leave  to  extend  under  such
    provisions having not been given a right of appeal on 10 February  2006
    decision.  The Claimant had not  made  a  fresh  application.   A  more
    timely decision by the SSHD would still have resulted in  the  Claimant
    having a gap in continuity of over 28 days.  As such it was  said  that
    by failing to take into  account  that  discretion  had  already   been
    exercised, Judge Clapham had made a material error in law.

 5. In granting permission to the Secretary of State,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Holmes pointed out that the Claimant's leave expired in  February
    2006.  Thus the appeal under the Immigration Rules  arguably  ought  to
    have been dismissed.  Furthermore, the judge had not made a decision on
    the Article 8 "private life" appeal.

 6. There was no Rule 24 notice lodged by the Claimant nor  was  there  any
    cross-appeal.

The Hearing

 7. For the Secretary of State reliance was placed  on  the  grounds.   The
    delay had been unfortunate and was the fault of the Secretary of  State
    but nevertheless, for reasons given, the appeal could not succeed under
    the Immigration Rules.

 8. In terms of Article 8 Judge  Clapham  had  not  carried  out  a  276ADE
    assessment, there was no mention of insurmountable obstacles and  there
    were no proper findings made under Article 8.  I was asked to  set  the
    decision aside and re-make the decision dismissing the appeal.

 9. For the Claimant it was said that the judge had given his reasoning  as
    to why the Secretary of State  should  have  exercised  her  discretion
    differently.  If an error of law was  found  then  there  was  a  fresh
    bundle from the Appellant so that the  Tribunal did now  have  all  the
    bank statements necessary for the appeal to be allowed under  the  work
    permit scheme which tied in with his claim that to return him to  Ghana
    would be unlawful.

10. It was clear that the judge fell into error in not dealing with Article
    8 properly but I was asked to send the  case  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on all matters.

Conclusions

11. It has to be said that it is not very clear from the  judge's  decision
    what the contentious issues in this appeal were and he appears to  have
    been distracted by the  procedural  history  and  wrongly  focussed  on
    whether the Secretary of State had dealt with the points taken by Judge
    Thanki.

12. Both parties were critical of  the  judge's  decision  particularly  in
    relation to his findings on Article 8 ECHR where he seems to  say  that
    the Claimant should succeed under Article 8 without actually  making  a
    judicial finding to that effect in the notice of decision.  That is  an
    error in law in itself - and  could  be  easily  corrected  -  but  the
    reasoning to allow the appeal under Article 8 is extremely limited.  It
    takes no account of the Immigration Rules, the weight to  be  given  to
    them, the issue of proportionality and  the  public  interest.   It  is
    deeply flawed and both parties agreed it could not stand in its present
    form.

13. There was also no serious dispute, as I understood it from  Ms  Ofei  -
    Kwatia that  the  Appellant's  leave  had  expired  some  time  ago  as
    indicated by Judge Holmes. It is clear enough that  on  any  basis  the
    Judge's decision cannot stand.

14. I have come to the view that the case should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The Appellant's  case  seems  to  be  that  he  has  now
    presented the necessary documentation to succeed under paragraph 134 of
    the rules in relation to his claim for indefinite leave to remain as  a
    work permit holder. Rather than try and separate what can and cannot be
    argued at the next hearing the safest course seems to me to  remit  the
    appeal in its entirety.

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard by any judge apart from Judge
    Clapham.













Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

17. I set aside the decision.

18. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

