
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05710/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JOSEPH LLOYD
                          (no ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bartram, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen  of  St  Lucia
    born on 6 November 1948. He entered the UK on 27 May 2014 as a visitor,
    with leave to remain until 27 November 2014. Shortly after arriving  in
    the UK, on 3 August 2014, he married a British citizen ("the sponsor").



 2. On 29 October 2014 the claimant applied, unsuccessfully, for  leave  to
    remain as the sponsor's husband. The Secretary  of  State  refused  his
    application on the basis that he was in the UK with leave as a  visitor
    and as such could not satisfy the requirements  for  limited  leave  to
    remain as a partner as set out in Appendix FM Section R-LTRP 1.1.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 25 June  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Widdup allowed the claimant's appeal. The Secretary of  State  is
    now appealing the FtT's decision.

 4. The factual background, as accepted by the FtT, is  that  the  claimant
    and sponsor were at school together in St Lucia. The  sponsor  came  to
    the UK in 1962. The claimant and sponsor would see  each  other  during
    visits by the claimant to St Lucia. They started  a  relationship  some
    time ago and became engaged in 2013. In March 2014 the sponsor  visited
    St Lucia and returned  with  the  claimant  to  the  UK,  the  claimant
    entering the UK on a visit  visa.  Notwithstanding  the  engagement  in
    2013, the claimant's position before the FtT was that the  decision  to
    marry was only made in July 2014, after he came to the UK. The marriage
    took place on 3 August 2014.  With regard to the evidence given by  the
    claimant and the  sponsor  about  the  timing  of  their  marriage  and
    engagement, the FtT stated at paragraph [23] that "it is  difficult  to
    reconcile their evidence that they were engaged in St Lucia from  about
    2013 but they only decided to marry in the UK in 2014."

 5. The evidence before the FtT was that the sponsor's health is  poor  and
    she had two eye operations in 2014. She and the claimant live with  her
    grandson, a UK citizen, who was born on 31 March 2003.   The  sponsor's
    grandson has contact with his father but lives with the sponsor and has
    done his whole life. The  FtT  found  that  the  grandson  has  a  good
    relationship with the claimant. He is also at an important stage in his
    education. It was also found that the  sponsor's  grandson  helps  look
    after the sponsor but the need for this has diminished because  of  the
    assistance provided by the claimant.

 6. The FtT found that the claimant was unable to satisfy the  requirements
    of Appendix FM because he entered the  UK  as  a  visitor.  The  appeal
    turned, therefore, on an assessment of Article 8 of  the  ECHR  outside
    the Immigration Rules. Having determined that Article  8  was  engaged,
    the FtT proceeded to consider proportionality. In finding that  removal
    of the claimant would not be proportionate,  the  FtT  gave  particular
    weight to (a) its finding that if the  claimant  were  returned  to  St
    Lucia his application for settlement would be highly likely to succeed;
    and (b) removal of the claimant would have a detrimental effect on  the
    claimant's grandson who is presently relived of the  burden  of  caring
    for his grandmother because of the assistance provided by the claimant.

 7. The Secretary of State's case, as set out in  the  grounds  and  in  Mr
    Staunton's submissions, is that the FtT,  having  correctly  recognised
    that the Immigration Rules were not met and  that  there  is  a  public
    interest in discouraging visitors from circumventing the Rules,  failed
    to follow established case law, as set out in SS Congo [2015] EWCA  Civ
    387, in relation to the weight that should be attached  to  the  public
    interest in such circumstances. Moreover, the Secretary of State's case
    is that FtT decided the case contrary to R(on the application of  Chen)
    v SSHD IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC) which makes clear that the  burden  is
    on the claimant to  show  temporary  removal  would  be  a  significant
    interference with family life and  that  entry  clearance  from  abroad
    would be granted. The claimant had not shown why a temporary  visit  to
    St Lucia would constitute a significant interference with  family  life
    or that an application from St Lucia would be successful.

 8. Mr Bartram acknowledged that the claimant could not satisfy the  Rules.
    He argued that the FtT had before it clear evidence that enabled it  to
    ascertain whether an application for entry clearance from abroad  would
    succeed and it had made a clear finding that it would. He  referred  to
    and relied on the High Court judgment R( on the application of Zhang) v
    SSHD [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin) and argued that it was not justifiable  to
    impose a separation of the claimant from the sponsor and  her  grandson
    merely to comply with formal procedures in particular  because  of  the
    negative  impact  on  the  grandson.  Mr  Bartram  advised  that  entry
    clearance from St Lucia would take  up  to  three  months.  He  further
    argued that in assessing proportionality under Article 8, the  FtT  had
    explicitly referred to and taken into consideration the public interest
    in immigration control and in discouraging visitors from  circumventing
    the Immigration Rules.

Consideration

 9. The FtT has followed the structured and sequential approach set out  in
    Razgar. It starts by finding that the claimant  enjoys  a  family  life
    with the sponsor and her grandson and that the decision to  remove  him
    has consequences of sufficient  gravity  to  engage  Article  8.   This
    finding was clearly open to the FtT. The sponsor  and  claimant  are  a
    married couple living together and the genuineness of the  relationship
    was not in question. Nor was it  questioned  that  the  claimant  lives
    with, and has a good relationship with, the sponsor's grandson.

10. The FtT then - correctly -  found  that  the  decision  to  remove  the
    claimant was lawful and a legitimate aim of immigration control.

11. The FtT  then  -  also  correctly  -  identified  that  in  considering
    proportionality there must be a  balancing  of  the  interests  of  the
    claimant and other family members against the public interest.

12. In respect of the public interest, although reference is  not  made  to
    sections 117A-117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act") the FtT has identified the relevant interests; that of
    the maintenance of effective immigration control  and  of  discouraging
    visitors from circumventing  the  Rules.  At  paragraph  [45]  the  FtT
    properly identified that it is in the public interest "that  those  who
    wish to marry a UK citizen should apply in their  own  country  in  the
    normal way".

13. The judge balanced this against the interference with family life  that
    would result from a temporary  separation  arising  from  the  claimant
    relocating to St Lucia to make an application for entry  clearance.  In
    this regard the FtT noted that the impact would be felt by the sponsor,
    who relies on the claimant  for  help  with  her  mobility  and  health
    problems, and the  sponsor's  grandson,  who  would  have  to  take  on
    responsibilities in respect of his grandmother currently taken  by  the
    claimant. The FtT also made clear  its  view,  based  on  the  evidence
    before it, that an out of country application by the claimant would  be
    straightforward  (paragraph  [37])  and  highly   likely   to   succeed
    (paragraph [44]).

14. Mr Staunton drew my attention to paragraph [39] of R(on the application
    of Chen) v SSHD IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC)  and  it  is  instructive  to
    consider this appeal in light of that paragraph.

         "In my judgement, if it is shown by an individual (the burden being
         upon him or her) that  an  application  for  entry  clearance  from
         abroad would  be  granted  and  that  there  would  be  significant
         interference with family life by temporary removal, the  weight  to
         be accorded to the formal requirement of obtaining entry  clearance
         is reduced.  In  cases  involving  children,  where  removal  would
         interfere with the child's enjoyment of family  life  with  one  or
         other of his or her parents whilst entry clearance is obtained,  it
         will be easier to show that the balance on proportionality falls in
         favour of the claimant than in cases which do not involve  children
         but where removal interferes with family life between  parties  who
         knowingly entered into  the  relationship  in  the  knowledge  that
         family life was being established whilst the immigration status  of
         one party was "precarious". In other words, in the former case,  it
         would be easier to show that the  individual's  circumstances  fall
         within the minority envisaged by the House of Lords in Huang or the
         exceptions referred to in judgments of the ECtHR than in the latter
         case. However, it all depends on the facts."

15. The claimant has shown that on the  balance  of  probabilities  (a)  an
    application for entry clearance from abroad would be granted;  and  (b)
    that there would  be  significant  interference  with  family  life  by
    temporary removal, such interference, inter alia,  affecting  a  child.
    Accordingly, using the language of paragraph [39] in Chen, "it will  be
    easier to show that the balance on proportionality falls in  favour  of
    the claimant".

16. This is a case in which the FtT was required to undertake  a  balancing
    exercise in which there were strong interests on both  sides.  Weighing
    against the claimant was that he had entered the UK as a visitor (there
    is a specific preclusion in the Rules on persons who enter  the  UK  by
    this route, at paragraph E-LTRP 2.1 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules) and that he most likely intended to marry  the  sponsor  at  the
    time he entered the UK; that is, his circumvention of  the  Immigration
    Rules  was  intentional.  Accordingly,  the  public  interest  in   the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control,  as   stipulated   at
    paragraph 117B(1) of the 2002 Act, takes on a very  significant  weight
    in this appeal.

17. On the other hand, weighing in favour of the claimant  is  that  he  is
    very likely to succeed in an  application  from  abroad  and  temporary
    separation will negatively interfere with family life enjoyed not  only
    by him and the sponsor but also by a child.

18. I remind myself that the issue before me is whether the judge  made  an
    error of law and not whether I, or a differently constituted  tribunal,
    might have reached a different conclusion based on the same facts.  The
    FtT has engaged in the balancing exercise required under Article  8  of
    the  ECHR,  taking  account  both  of  the  public  interest  and   the
    interference with family life that  would  arise  from  the  claimant's
    removal. In these circumstances, although the FtT's conclusion might be
    considered somewhat generous to the claimant, I am  satisfied  that  it
    was a finding that was properly open to it based on  the  evidence  and
    therefore that the FtT has not made an error of law.

Decision

 a. The appeal is dismissed.

 b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law and shall stand.

 c. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 23 November 2015              |

