

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05411/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 21st August 2013                           |On 21st August 2013          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    M W M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Mikolajczyk - sponsor in person.
For the Respondent: Mr Spence - Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Clapham promulgated on 13th May 2013. There were four  linked
        appellants, all family  members.  The  appeals  of  the  first  two
        appellants  were  allowed  and  those  of  the  third  and   fourth
        appellants dismissed. This is an appeal against the  decision  made
        in respect of the fourth appellant a Polish national  born  on  the
        1st January 2002.


     2. All four appellants applied for  a  certificate  recognising  their
        right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom on the basis  of
        being EEA nationals who have resided in this country in  accordance
        with the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (as
        amended) for a continuous period of five years.


     3. In paragraph 8 of her determination the Judge finds:


     8.   In relation to the children and in  particular  the  second  named
          appellant being [JJM], I have seen evidence that she  has  resided
          continuously in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  relevant  period.
     However, there is no  such  evidence  for  the  third  named  appellant
   namely  [PMM]  who  appears  to  be  residing  in  Poland   at   present.
   Further in respect of [MWM] I have had sight  of  only  one  letter  from
     St Mary's Catholic  Primary  School  which  does  not  demonstrate  the
   relevant 5 year period.


     4. Within the bundle of papers submitted by the sponsor to the  First-
        tier Tribunal on 2nd February 2013,  by  recorded  delivery,  is  a
        letter from St Mary's Catholic Primary School stating that MWM  has
        been a pupil at that school since 8th April 2008.   The  letter  is
        dated 6th December 2012 and so  only  confirmed  four  years  eight
        months education in the United Kingdom, although by the date of the
        determination it would have been five years. What the  Judge  makes
        no reference of, however, is a second letter in the  bundle  (being
        the next letter in order), from St Joseph's Catholic Primary School
        confirming that MWM attended that school from 24th  September  2007
        to 7th February 2008. This evidence  demonstrates  that  the  total
        period in education was in excess of the five-year period that  was
        of concern to the Judge. There is no reference to the  document  or
        explanation  why  the  evidence  was  not  considered.  Failure  to
        consider all available evidence is an error of law. In this  appeal
        it is material as but for the alleged  lack  of  evidence  of  this
        nature the appeal would have been allowed.


     5. I set the determination aside. It was accepted by Mr Spence, on the
        basis of the evidence, that the appeal must be allowed.  I  do  so.
        Even if the letter from St Joseph's had not been available  one  of
        the findings made by the Judge was that the first appellant, who is
        this appellant's mother, has been in the United  Kingdom  exercised
        treaty rights for a period of five years and  so  was  entitled  to
        permanent residence. This appellant is her  dependent  minor  child
        and the Judge should of gone on to consider whether she was able to
        succeed under Regulation 7 as a dependent family member of the  EEA
        national exercising treaty rights (her mother)  and  whether  under
        Regulation 15 (1) (a) she was entitled to be recognised as having a
        right  to  permanent  residence  in  any  event.  There   is   also
        jurisprudence relating to the position of  an  EEA  national  being
        educated in a Member State which again was not  considered  by  the
        Judge. I do not need to consider either of these issues in light of
        the fact the appeal succeeds in any event.


Decision

     6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


     7. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make such an order as this appellant is a minor child  (pursuant
   to rule 14 of       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.


     8. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
        by allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award (rule
        23A (costs) of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
        Rules 2005 and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
        Enforcement Act 2007).


          I have had regard to the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee
   Awards in           Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


          I make a whole fee award.


          Reasons: the appellant has succeeded on appeal  on  the  basis  of
   documents      made available to the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21st August 2013









