
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05545/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 3 March 2015                          |             On 27 May 2015         |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                mohsAn afzal


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, instructed by M-R Solicitors
For the  Respondent:     Ms  J  Isherwood,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 6  November  2014
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hunter.  The  decision  of  Judge  Hunter
    dismissed the appeal against refusal  of  leave  as  a  spouse  and  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. Judge Hunter found for the reasons given  at  [32]  to  [35]  that  the
    documentary requirements relating to financial information set  out  in
    Appendix FM-SE were not met.

 3. As a result of the appellant's wife having been born  in  Pakistan  and
    living there until she was 11 years' old, having a number of uncle  and
    aunts there and having visited  the  country  in  recent  years,  Judge
    Hunter concluded at [37] that paragraph EX.1 concerning  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life being conducted outside the UK was not met.

 4. The requirements of paragraph 276ADE as to private life were not  found
    to be met at [38] where the appellant had been in the  UK  for  only  a
    limited period.

 5. At [40] Judge Hunter  considered  whether  a  second  stage  Article  8
    assessment was necessary and  concluded  that  it  was  not  where  the
    matters relied upon by the appellant and his wife were covered  by  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The written grounds of appeal argued in paragraph 2 that the First-tier
    Tribunal  judge did not make a decision on the Article  8  claim.  This
    ground merely picks a pointless technical argument with the failure  to
    state in terms under "Notice of Decision" at the end  of  the  decision
    that the Article 8 claim was refused. This ground has no merit where  a
    proper reading of Judge Hunter's decision shows entirely  clearly  that
    the Article 8 claim was refused.

 7. The grounds at paragraph 3 seem to argue that the  appeal  should  have
    been  allowed  under  the  Immigration   Rules   as   the   documentary
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE were met. Nothing before me showed  that
    to be the case and I found no error in Judge Hunter's decision on  this
    aspect of the appeal.

 8. Paragraph 4 of the grounds argues that the  judge  did  not  apply  the
    ratio of Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.  That  challenge  is  really  to  the
    conclusion at [40] that there was no need here to proceed to  a  second
    stage Article 8 assessment outside the Immigration Rules.

 9. The case of Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 at paragraph 66(2) states:

         "The statement that the decision-maker 'must be in  a  position  to
         demonstrate' that he or she has given the  necessary  consideration
         is simply a reflection of  the  ordinary  obligation  to  record  a
         material   decision.    If    the    decision-maker's    view    is
         straightforwardly that all the article 8 issues  raised  have  been
         addressed in determining the claim under the  Rules,  all  that  is
         necessary is, as Sales J says, to say so."

10. There is nothing in the materials before me indicating what it was that
    should have  led  Judge  Hunter  to  a  full  second  stage  Article  8
    assessment  beyond  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appellant's case under  the  Immigration  Rules  was  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being exercised in Pakistan and
    the judge had already found, sustainably, that  there  were  not.   The
    approach at [40] was sound and not in error.  The  reference  to  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11 at paragraph 6 adds nothing.

11. The argument at paragraph 5 of the grounds that the  appellant's  short
    time in the UK compared to that  in  Pakistan,  undisputedly  his  most
    important formative years being spent there, could amount to a  private
    life of any serious weight is without  any  merit.  This  paragraph  is
    otherwise only disagreement with the findings on the reasonableness  of
    the appellant and his wife being able  to  exercise  their  family  and
    private lives in Pakistan. The same is equally so for paragraphs [7]  -
    [9] of the grounds.

12. At the hearing Mr Turner sought to raise a number of points outside the
    written grounds. He submitted that weight should have  been  placed  on
    the wife having shown that she had the requisite  income  to  meet  the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM  and  the  failure  to  meet  the
    documentary requirements being very minor. That submission appeared  to
    me to a "near-miss" argument long since found to  be  an  impermissible
    approach to an Article 8 proportionality assessment.

13. The suggestion that the appellant's wife being  British  precluded  her
    circumstances being assessed through the prism of the Immigration Rules
    did not make sense to me where  the  Immigration  Rules  and  case  law
    require that to be the case.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
error on the point of law and shall stand.


Signed   [pic]                               Date: 19 May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
