
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/05906/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 May 2015                      |On 16 June 2015                   |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
 Appellant: Mr S Winter, of counsel, instructed by Gray & Co., Solicitors
 Respondent:     Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1.     The  anonymity  direction  made  earlier  in  these  proceedings   is
      preserved because the appeal focuses on the circumstances of two young
      children.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  (the  "SSHD")  brings
      this appeal but in order to avoid confusion the parties  are  referred
      to as they were in the First-tier Tribunal (the  "FtT).   This  is  an
      appeal by the SoS against a decision of FtT  promulgated  on  2  April
      2014, which allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  and  held  that  it  was
      contrary to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  (the
      "ECHR") to remove the Appellant and his family to Pakistan.

Background

3.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born  on  13  May  1982.  The
      Appellant and his wife (SA) arrived in the UK on  24  July  2006  with
      visit visas valid until 24 January 2007. They have remained in the  UK
      without leave since then. They have two children, RA born  on  11  May
      2007 and AA born 14  May  2009.  The  Appellant,  his  wife  and  both
      children are citizens of Pakistan.


4.    On 6 July 2012, the Appellant made an application for leave to  remain
      in the UK, claiming that removal would breach  Article  8  ECHR.   His
      application was refused on 20 January  2014,  when  the  SSHD  made  a
      decision to remove the Appellant as an illegal entrant.


FtT Decision


5.    The Appellant appealed to the FtT successfully. It was  conceded  that
      the Appellant could not fulfil the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. The judge considered the circumstances of the children, RA  and
      AA and found that the needs of the children were such  that  the  SoS'
      decision to remove the all members of the family unit infringed  their
      rights under Article 8.

6.    Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:


           "The judge has made clear findings as to the  current  state  of
           the elder child. The Article 8 case turned on the best interests
           of the children. An arguable error of law has arisen in relation
           to findings as to the children and the context of  the  spectrum
           of  objective  evidence  to  which  the  Respondent  has   drawn
           attention."

7.    In a determination dated 20 August 2014, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Dawson
      set aside the FtT's decision finding that a material error of law  had
      been made, stating inter alia

           "It seems to  me  that  the  judge  carried  out  an  incomplete
           exercise and permitted the best interests  of  the  children  to
           dictate the outcome of the appeal without a proper  analysis  of
           the factors militating against such an outcome".

      In other words, an inadequate balancing exercise had been conducted.
      It was further directed that the  decision  be  remade  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal. I am reminded by the error of law decision to give effect to
      Section 117B(vi) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
      (the "2002 Act") and I note further the statement:

           "RA will be a qualifying  child  by  virtue  of  his  length  of
           residence in the United Kingdom."

8.    Although the FtT's decision was set aside there was  no  criticism  of
      her findings of fact in relation to the children. In essence, they are
      that RA has been diagnosed with autism and that although RA's  parents
      have family members in Pakistan, none  of  those  family  members,  at
      present, has the skills necessary to communicate with RA and  "handle"
      him. The FtT noted that RA has difficulty relating to strangers,  that
      he would view his relatives in Pakistan  as  strangers  and  that  his
      quality of life would be adversely affected  if  he  was  returned  to
      Pakistan because of his  inability  to  understand  and  deal  with  a
      significant change in environment, culture and language. RA  has  poor
      communication skills. The FtT expressed  concerns  that  RA's  younger
      brother, AA, was too young to have  received  a  formal  diagnosis  of
      autism but has displayed developmental delays and early indicators  of
      an inability to settle, which indicate that he will require additional
      care and structured support to pursue the ordinary activities of daily
      living.


The Hearing


9     This case called just after 2pm  on  29  May  2015.  Counsel  for  the
      Appellant stated that there were two  problems  with  proceeding.  The
      first was that the Appellant and his wife were present and were  ready
      to  give  evidence,  but  the  Appellant's  wife  required   an   Urdu
      interpreter.  Although an interpreter had  been  requested,  none  was
      available. The second was that parties' agents anticipated that by the
      time an interpreter could be found, there would be  insufficient  time
      left in the day to deal with this  case.  Counsel  told  me  that  his
      intention was solely to have the Appellant and  the  Appellant's  wife
      adopt  the  witness  statements  which  were  before  the  first  tier
      tribunal, so that each  of  them  could  then  be  offered  for  cross
      examination of the Home Office presenting officer.

10    The Home Office presenting officer told me that it was her  hope  that
      she would be able to adduce certain  evidence  about  the  Appellant's
      family circumstances in cross examination.

11    When I reviewed the file, I could see that  both  parties  had  lodged
      Rule 15(2A) notices, but those Rule 15(2A) notices relate to documents
      in the inventories of productions now  lodged.  Those  inventories  of
      productions contain documentary  evidence,  case  law  and  background
      materials. They do not contain witness statements. No notice had  been
      given that either party intended to lead oral evidence,  nor  had  any
      Rule 15(2A) application been made for the admission of  evidence.  The
      SSHD had neither cited nor brought any  witnesses  to  court  and  had
      relied solely on the voluntary attendance of  the  Appellant  and  his
      wife. If they had chosen not to come today there would be no  prospect
      of cross examination.  The Home Office presenting officer argued  that
      as the FtT's decision had been set aside, the only way  to  carry  out
      the necessary fact finding exercise would be  to  take  oral  evidence
      from the Appellant and his wife.

12    I refused to delay this case any further. No Rule  15(2A)  notice  had
      been intimated to enable either  party  to  lead  oral  evidence.  The
      determination of Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson dated 20 August 2014  set
      aside the FtT's decision and found no error of law in its findings  of
      fact.  The error of law diagnosed lay in a failure "...to consider the
      interests  of  the  Appellant's  children  in   the   context   of   a
      proportionality assessment of all the factors weighing  in  favour  of
      the claimant against the public interest".

13.   I considered the documentary evidence which had been lodged  addresses
      the most important issues.  This consists of:

      (i)   The Home Office PF1 bundle;


      (ii)  The witness statements (for the Appellant and  his  wife)  which
           were before the first tier tribunal;


      (iii) Two inventories of  productions  for  the  Appellant,  addressed
           specifically to the Upper Tribunal;


      (iv)  A list of authorities for the Appellant; and


      (v)   An  inventory  of  productions  for  the  Respondent  containing
           background materials.

14.   Ms Johnstone reiterated the Secretary of  State's  challenge,  arguing
      that while the autism of the children is a compassionate factor in the
      childrens'  favour  this  does  not  equate  to   a   disproportionate
      interference with the right to respect for a private or  family  life.
      She argued that it would not be unjustifiably harsh for this family to
      remove to Pakistan - where there  is  already  a  network  of  support
      available from family members. She relied on background  materials  to
      say that assistance for families with children with Autism  exists  in
      Pakistan and would be available to the Appellant and his family.


15    Mr Winter relied on the findings of  the  Judge  in  relation  to  the
      children and argued that to carry  out  the  balancing  exercise,  one
      should start with the fact that RA is a qualifying child under Section
      117B(vi) of the 2002 Act; the Appellant is  not  a  person  liable  to
      deportation; because of his needs,  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
      expect RA to leave the United Kingdom; and would be  unduly  harsh  to
      force a young child with autism to face the distress of  the  upheaval
      of removal.  It was contended that the public interest  is  outweighed
      by  the  best  interests  of  the   children,   giving   rise   to   a
      disproportionate breach to a right to respect for private life.

Findings of Fact

16    The Appellant's oldest  child  (RA)  is  a  "qualifying  child"  under
      Section 117B(vi) of  the  2002  Act  because  of  the  length  of  his
      residence in the UK (he was born here and  has  never  lived  anywhere
      else). It is not  disputed  that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of either paragraph 276ADE nor  of  appendix  FM  to  the
      Immigration Rules.

17.   The Appellant and his wife entered the UK as visitors  in  2006.  They
      have not enjoyed any legal basis for remaining  in  the  UK  since  24
      January 2007. RA & AA are the children of the Appellant and his  wife.
      They were both born in the UK and have never  been  granted  leave  to
      either enter or remain in the UK.

18.   The documentary evidence establishes that RA (the eldest child) has  a
      diagnosis of Autism, he has an impairment in his use and understanding
      of spoken language, he is bilingual (Urdu and English) but relies on a
      combination of short phrases and  pointing  and  requires  support  to
      interact with other children. Although RA is in mainstream  schooling,
      he travels to school by taxi and  receives  significant  support  from
      adults which enables him to participate in ordinary primary education.
      He benefits from routine and consistency. Any change to his routine is
      likely to present a challenge.

19.   AA attends both mainstream and specialist nurseries  and,  although  a
      child of his age would have normally started primary  school,  he  has
      been held back and will not begin primary 1  until  August  this  year
      (one year later than would normally be anticipated). AA has benefitted
      from support not just of nursery staff  but  also  additional  support
      from therapists and psychological services for more  than  two  years,
      and has a special educational programme tailored specifically for him.
      He  has  had  support  from  speech  and   language   therapists   and
      psychologists. He is making progress, but the progress  is  slow.  His
      linguistic  development  is   delayed.   His   cognitive   development
      (communication, play skills and  co-ordination)  has  caused  concern.
      There is a real likelihood that AA has a learning disability.  One  of
      the consequences of  AA's  developmental  delay  is  that  he  becomes
      anxious in unfamiliar settings. It is likely  that  he  will  struggle
      with mainstream schooling. It may be that he will  require  specialist
      schooling.
20.   In Pakistan a few unstructured facilities and services  are  available
      for autism. Autistic children have (wrongly) been associated with Down
      syndrome sufferers or  those  suffering  from  mental  illnesses,  but
      attitudes are changing and,  recently,  autistic  children  are  being
      differentiated (because  of  awareness)  as  the  number  of  children
      diagnosed has dramatically increased. Although diagnostic facilities &
      resources are not as readily available in Pakistan as they are in  the
      UK, they do exist there.
21.   The Society for Children with  Autism  and  Learning  Differences  has
      developed a project (Pakistan Centre  for  Autism)  in  Pakistan.  The
      project started in 2012, and now has training staff/teachers available
      in Pakistan.
22.   The background materials indicate that care for autism in  the  UK  is
      better than the care for autism in  Pakistan.  However,  the  evidence
      supports the finding that non-governmental organisations are active in
      education about the  existence  of  autism  and  the  needs  of  those
      suffering from autism and that the programme of  training  extends  to
      rural areas. It is also clear, and I so find,  that care and treatment
      is now available in Pakistan for those suffering from autism and  that
      a specialist school and day care centre for autistic  children  exists
      in Islamabad.

Article 3 ECHR

23.   It is argued  that  the  rights  of  the  Appellant's  children  under
      Article 3 ECHR would be breached by return. The Respondent  relies  on
      GS and EO (Article 3 Health cases) India 2013 Imm AR 223 and GS  India
      and others SSHD 2015 EWCA Civ 14.

24.   In N v UK Application 26565/05 the Grand Chamber upheld  the  decision
      of the House of Lords and said that in medical cases  Article  3  only
      applied  in  very  exceptional  circumstances  particularly   as   the
      suffering was not the result of an intentional act or  omission  of  a
      State or non-State body.  The European court of Human Rights said that
      Article 3 could not be relied on to address the disparity  in  medical
      care between Contracting States and the applicant's state  of  origin.
      The fact that the person's circumstances, including his  or  her  life
      expectancy, would be  significantly  reduced  was  not  sufficient  in
      itself to give rise to a breach of Article 3.  Those  same  principles
      had to apply in relation to the expulsion of any person afflicted with
      any serious, naturally occurring  physical  or  mental  illness  which
      might cause suffering pain or reduced  life  expectancy  and  required
      specialist medical treatment that might not be  readily  available  or
      which might only be available at considerable cost.  Notably the court
      held that no separate issues arose under Article 8(2) in that case and
      so it was not even necessary to  consider  the  Claimant's  submission
      that would removal would engage her right to respect for private life.



25.   I take full account of the case of GS and EO and GS  (India),  but  in
      reality, a high threshold is set. RA suffers from Autism. AA  probably
      has a learning disability. I do  not  minimise  the  impact  of  their
      conditions but neither  of  the  boys  suffer  from  life  threatening
      conditions. Even on the Appellant's own argument, return  to  Pakistan
      has no impact on the life  expectancy  of  either  of  the  boys.  The
      argument is about the quality of life for the boys  and  the  services
      which are available to them. The argument, in reality, is a comparison
      of the psychiatric, psychological and support  services  available  to
      the two children. The background materials make it  quite  clear  that
      the quality of such services in the UK is better than the services  in
      Pakistan, but that is not the test for an Article 3 consideration.

26.   In Nacic and Others v Sweden (Application no. 16567/10)  ECtHR  (Fifth
      Section) 2012 it was held that aliens who were  subject  to  expulsion
      could not, in principle,  claim  any  entitlement  to  remain  in  the
      territory of a Contracting State in order to continue to benefit  from
      medical, social or other forms of assistance and services provided  by
      the expelling State.  The  fact  that  an  applicant's  circumstances,
      including his life expectancy, would be significantly  reduced  if  he
      were to be removed from the Contracting State was  not  sufficient  in
      itself to give rise to a breach of Article 3. The decision  to  remove
      an alien who was suffering from a serious mental or  physical  illness
      to a country where the facilities for the treatment  of  that  illness
      were inferior to those available in the Contracting State may raise an
      issue under Article 3, but only in a very exceptional case, where  the
      humanitarian grounds against the removal were compelling.  (As I  have
      already indicated, in N v UK Application 26565/05  the European  court
      of Human Rights said that Article 3 could not be relied on to  address
      the disparity in medical  care  between  Contracting  States  and  the
      applicant's state of origin).

27.   Whilst I have sympathy for both of  the  Appellant's  children,  their
      conditions do not approach the elevated threshold  for  engagement  of
      Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

Article 8 ECHR

28.   In MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
      EWCA Civ 279  the Court of Appeal noted that the courts  had  declined
      to  say  that  Article  8  could  never  by  engaged  by  the   health
      consequences of removal but they had never found such a breach and had
      not been able to postulate circumstances in which such  a  breach  was
      likely to be established. The only cases where the absence of adequate
      medical treatment in the country to which a person is to  be  deported
      would be relevant to Article 8 are those where  it  is  an  additional
      factor to be weighed in the balance with other  factors  that  engaged
      Article 8 (paras 17 - 23). This approach was endorsed by  Laws  LJ  in
      GS(India) and Others 2015 EWCA Civ 40 (para 86).

29.   I consider that this case turns on the  question  of  proportionality.
      In determining this issue I am bound to give effect to  the  governing
      statutory regime, to  which  I  now  turn.   The  Appellant's  central
      argument is that because RA suffers from autism, he cannot  return  to
      Pakistan. I have already found that that argument  and  the  facts  of
      this case do not engage Article 3. It is  not  realistically  disputed
      that Article 8 is engaged in  this  case  and  that  the  respondent's
      decision is an interference with the Appellant's right to respect  for
      both family and private life.

30.   Both parties' representatives made submissions concerning Section  117
      of the 2002 Act. Section 117 is a factor to be taken into  account  in
      determining proportionality. I appreciate that as the public  interest
      provisions are now contained  in  primary  legislation  they  override
      existing case law, Section 117A(2) requires me to have regard  to  the
      considerations listed in Sections 117B and 117C.  I am conscious of my
      statutory duty to take these factors into account when  coming  to  my
      conclusions.  I am also aware that Section 117A(3) imposes upon me the
      duty of carrying out a balancing exercise. In so doing I remind myself
      of the guidance contained within Razgar.

31.   By virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means a person  who  is
      under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a  British  citizen,  or  (b)  has
      lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years  or
      more.  If a child is a qualifying child for the  purposes  of  section
      117B of the 2002 Act as amended, the issue will generally  be  whether
      it is not reasonable for that child to return to the country of origin
      under scrutiny. Although R(on the application of Osanwemwenze) v  SSHD
      2014 EWHC 1563 was not specifically concerned with section 117B it has
      some relevance in terms of the reasonableness of a child  leaving  the
      UK. In this case, the Claimant's 14-year-old stepson from Nigeria  had
      been in the United Kingdom for more than 7  years  and  had  leave  to
      remain in his own right. It was held that this was  an  important  but
      not an overriding consideration and it was reasonable  to  expect  the
      Claimant's family including the stepson to relocate  to  Nigeria.  The
      parents had experienced life there into adulthood and would be able to
      provide for the children and help them to reintegrate.

32.   The focus in this case is on sub-section (6)  of  Section  117B.  What
      counts against the Appellant is  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
      immigration control is in  the  public  interest  (Section  117B  sub-
      section (1)). There is inadequate evidence for me to  make  a  finding
      about whether or not the Appellant is able to speak  English  (Section
      117B(2)). There is no reliable evidence before me that  the  Appellant
      is financially independent. The lack of such evidence has  the  effect
      in law of fortifying the public interest in  play  (Section  117B(3)).
      Section 117B(4) and (5) are irrelevant to this appeal.

33.   Section 117B(6)  is  in  two  parts  which  are  conjunctive.  Section
      117B(6)(a) weighs in  favour  of  the  Appellant  because  it  is  not
      disputed that he has a genuine and  subsisting  paternal  relationship
      with  a  qualifying  child.  It  is  Section   117B(6)(b)   which   is
      determinative of this case. It is reasonable to expect RA to return to
      Pakistan?


34.   The weight of reliable evidence in this case indicates that return  to
      Pakistan would form a period of upheaval  for  this  family  but  that
      upheaval is outweighed when balanced against the public interests  and
      the  Respondent's  interests  in  maintaining   fair   and   effective
      immigration control and keeping a watchful eye on the fragile  economy
      of the UK.

35.   The effect of the Respondent's decision does not cause separation  for
      this family. The family will remain together. I am mindful of  Section
      55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, and the  case
      of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.

36.   I remind myself of the cases of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
      affecting children; onward appeals), [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW  [2015]
      CSIH 36.  It is the intention of the SoS to ensure that the Appellant,
      his wife and their two  children  stay  together.  It  has  long  been
      established that it is in the interests of  children  to  remain  with
      their parents. The Respondent's decision maintains the unity  of  this
      family and does not  separate  the  children  from  the  parents.  The
      interests of the children are served  because  the  integrity  of  the
      family unit is not challenged.

37.   The impact of the SSHD's decision is that the Appellant, his wife  and
      their two children will return to Pakistan where  they  have  extended
      family members. The impact on RA and AA is that  their  education  and
      the help they are receiving from health services, care  and  treatment
      in the UK all come to an end - but the background  materials  indicate
      that education and healthcare is available (albeit at a  lower  level)
      in Pakistan. There is nothing before me from  which  I  can  draw  the
      conclusion  that  return  to  Pakistan  would  result  in  neglect  or
      destitution for either of the children. Housing, healthcare, education
      and  family  support  are  all  available   to   them   in   Pakistan.
      Furthermore, it is well settled that the "better v worse" prism is the
      wrong approach in law.

38.   New routines will have to be established for RA and AA.  It  may  take
      RA and AA some  time  to  adapt  to  new  routines  and  a  change  of
      environment but there is no reliable  evidence  placed  before  me  to
      indicate that either RA or AA cannot adapt; it is a fact of life  that
      changes occur and individuals have to  adapt  to  those  changes.  The
      needs of RA and AA may  be  different  to  the  needs  of  many  other
      children but, on the evidence placed before me,  their  conditions  do
      not deprive them of the ability to adapt. They will have the  enduring
      support of their parents and the wider network of  family  members  on
      return to Pakistan.

39.   I therefore conclude the SSHD'  decision  is  not  a  disproportionate
      breach of the Article 8 rights of the Appellants or the other affected
      members.



Decision

I dismiss the appeal under Articles 3 & 8 ECHR.







                       Signed:


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
                                                        Date:  2nd June 2015
