

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05737/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 22nd December 2014                | On 23rd December 2014               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             APENISA NABAINIVALI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Khan of SMK Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Miss Johnstone - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Freer, promulgated on 17 June 2014  following  a  hearing  at
         Birmingham, in which he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  on  both
         the immigration rules and human rights grounds against the  refusal
         of the Secretary of State to vary the Appellant's leave  so  as  to
         permit him to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  purpose  not
         covered by the Immigration Rules.


      2. The Appellant is a citizen of Fiji born  on  25th  April  1989.  He
         entered the United Kingdom lawfully with a visit  visa  granted  on
         17th May 2012. Whilst in the United Kingdom, on 4th September 2012,
         he applied to join the British Army. The variation application  was
         refused on 13 January  2014  under  a  general  ground  of  refusal
         paragraph 322 (1).


      3. The Judge noted that the Appellant applied  for  further  leave  to
         remain only and made no application under Article 8 ECHR.  The core
         of the Appellants case is that his application to join the  British
         Army is still 'in process', his having  completed  the  preliminary
         stages of the process including a pre-selection physical test  with
         the next stage being the final selection exercises. The Judge noted
         evidence provided by the Secretary  of  State  in  the  form  of  a
         schedule containing a number of names of individuals,  in  addition
         to the Appellant,  which  stated  that  his  application  had  been
         withdrawn on the 17 September 2013 as there was no valid visa.


      4. The Judge sets out his findings from paragraph 22  onwards  of  the
         determination. In this paragraph he states:


             22.  The appellant has not produced any letter or e-mail  from
                  the Army to back up his account  that  there  is  still  a
                  pending enlistment     application.  This  seems  an  easy
                  enough proof to obtain, if what he  says  about  his  most
                  recent Army contacts is true. I bear in mind  that  he  is
                  represented and that he knew there was an appeal and  that
                  he knew all depended on the outcome  of  that  appeal.  At
                  best he can point to a letter nearly 2 years old (dated  3
                  September 2012) stating that he was (at that date) in  the
                  process of applying.


      5. In relation to the schedule provided by the Respondent,  the  Judge
         noted that the Appellant's visit visa expired  in  September  2012.
         The Judge noted acceptance into the army was not automatic and that
         the enlistment application was not shown on the evidence  still  to
         be pending and that the weight of evidence showed it to  have  been
         withdrawn with effect from 17 September 2013.



Discussion


      6. The grounds of appeal raise the issue of delay  and  challenge  the
         Judge's findings with regard to  the  reason  the  application  was
         found not to be  proceeding  further.  Mr  Khan  confirmed  in  his
         submissions that the two core challenges to the  determination  are
         (1) that there was no evidence that the application was " dead" and
         (2) that the delay in processing the application by the  Respondent
         has created the problem for which  the  Appellant  himself  is  not
         responsible; in that his visa expired leading to  the  decision  to
         withdraw the application by the Army.


      7. In relation to the first matter the word  'withdrawn'  when  giving
         its ordinary meaning is to remove or take away (something)  from  a
         particular place or position or discontinue or  no  longer  provide
         (something previously supplied or offered).  In  this  case  to  no
         longer permit the Appellant to be involved in a particular  process
         or activity such as his application to join the British  Army.  The
         Appellant was aware of  the  reason  why  the  Secretary  of  State
         refused his leave application and in his witness statement comments
         upon efforts he claims  to  have  made  to  obtain  information  to
         support his claim  that  the  application  was  still  pending.  In
         paragraph 13 of the determination the Judge  notes  that  the  Army
         Careers Office had moved from  Stoke  to  Newcastle  and  that  the
         Appellant contacted the office on 22nd May 2014 and was told  by  a
         sergeant on duty that a letter would  be  provided  confirming  the
         application is under the process of a final decision, but  no  such
         letter had been provided. This  evidence  was  clearly  taken  into
         account by Judge Freer and his factual findings  that  no  material
         had been provided from the Army to back up the account  that  there
         was still a pending enlistment application appears to be  the  only
         finding the Judge could make on the available evidence.


      8. The reason for the withdrawal decision  dated  17  September  2013,
         that the Appellant had no  extant  visa,  is  conceded  before  the
         tribunal today.  The Army has its policies  in  relation  to  those
         seeking to join who are not British nationals and one of  those  is
         the requirement for a valid visa. The decision of the Army  is  not
         the subject of separate judicial review or other such challenge. In
         light of the lack of evidence of a pending  application  the  Judge
         made no legal error in concluding as he did.


      9. In relation to the  assertion  that  delay  rendered  the  decision
         unlawful, for  had  the  decision  being  made  shortly  after  the
         application or prior to 17 September 2013,  the  application  would
         not have been withdrawn, this is not a  matter  that  was  advanced
         before the First-tier Judge and it cannot be an error  of  law  for
         Judge Freer not to consider a ground not advanced  or  relied  upon
         before him on these facts.


     10. In any event, the  ground  has  no  arguable  merit.  Although  the
         application was made on 4 September 2012 but not refused  until  31
         January 2014 it is not been established that the period of delay is
         such as to make the decision unlawful. The schedule referred to  by
         the Judge is one prepared by the Secretary of  State  containing  a
         number of  names,  twenty  in  total  on  this  document  which  is
         described as spreadsheet 5, sent to the Army together with  details
         of dates of birth and nationalities.  The  Army  completed  columns
         four and five setting out applications that are withdrawn or  which
         have been deferred.  The fact there are a number of names  relating
         to similar enquiries indicates that at some  part  in  the  process
         such applications have been grouped together or passed to a central
         case work unit. It is said the schedule was sent  to  the  Army  in
         October 2013 and the decision made upon  receipt  of  the  schedule
         shortly there after.  Taking  into  account  the  total  number  of
         applications the Respondent receives, the issue of  resources,  the
         fact that it does appear that the application was being  processed,
         and the lack of evidence of a specified time in  which  a  decision
         must be made in such cases, I do not find it established  that  any
         delay that has occurred is such as to render the decision unlawful.


     11. On the basis of the case as pleaded before the First-tier Judge and
         on the evidence provided in support of the Appellant's claim, I  do
         not find the Appellant has substantiate his claim  that  the  Judge
         made any legal error material to the decision.


Decision

     12. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


    Anonymity.


     13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005.  I make no such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22nd December 2014

