

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05679/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|on 15 June 2015                       |            On 24 June 2015          |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR VALDES GENYS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    JC  Grant-Hutchison,  promulgated  on  1  April  2015,   allowing   the
    appellant's appeal against deportation under the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. The first ground of appeal runs that it is clear from  the  appellant's
    evidence that he lied in  the  Sheriff  Court  about  his  offence,  as
    compared  with  his  evidence  recorded  in  the   determination;   the
    determination contains no finding on his credibility, and the effect of
    his dishonesty is not integrated into the assessment  of  future  risk;
    the finding that he is  unlikely  to  re-offend  is  thus  inadequately
    reasoned.

 4. Further to this ground, the Presenting Officer said the Judge failed to
    engage with the appellant's disavowal of his guilt and her findings  on
    his reform were therefore deficient.

 5. Ground 2 is  posed  as  inadequate  reasoning  or  irrationality.   The
    respondent's decision letter finds  that  the  appellant's  offence  of
    breaking into a home and assaulting a party there would have  had  long
    term traumatic effects on the victim  (more  accurately,  perhaps,  the
    victim's partner who was then pregnant).  The Judge  is  said  to  have
    speculated and wrongly to have  required  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    provide evidence on this point.

 6. Further to ground 2, Mrs O'Brien said that the Judge  should  not  have
    looked for further evidence and that the matter spoke for itself as  to
    the likely effect on those affected by the offence.

 7. Ground 3 says that it was wrong for the Judge  to  rely  on  protective
    factors militating against further offending, when at  least  three  if
    not all four  of  those  factors  applied  prior  to  the  most  recent
    offending.

 8. Mrs O'Brien said that this ground showed  that  the  Judge's  reasoning
    fell away.

 9. Mr Winter submitted that the grounds aimed essentially at a finding  of
    irrationality, which was a very demanding target.  He  said  that  read
    fairly and as a whole the determination was not perverse or irrational.
     He went through the Judge's consideration of the appellant's  previous
    offences, accommodation, family support, wife's and mother's influence,
    employment record, situation in Lithuania, family and friends here, and
    so on.  The Judge balanced all the  relevant  factors  and  reached  an
    outcome which was well within the reasonable range.  On  the  specifics
    of the grounds, Mr Winter submitted on the first that although he  pled
    not guilty the appellant later expressed his regret for his  offending.
    There was no disavowal of his guilt.  It was not uncommon  for  someone
    to plead not guilty and go to trial yet later to acknowledge guilt.  As
    to ground 2, while it might well be inferred  that  the  offence  would
    have an adverse effect on those affected, the  Judge  was  entitled  to
    observe that there were no reports of injuries suffered or evidence  of
    the effect on the victim's pregnant partner.  That was simply a correct
    narration of the facts.  If the evidence was not there, the  Judge  was
    entitled to say so.  As to ground 3, the factors relied upon  had  been
    present before the offence, but the  Judge  acknowledged  that  in  her
    determination.  She looked at all the factors on both  sides,  did  not
    misdirect herself, had regard to the relevant case  law,  and  made  no
    material error.

10. I indicated that I was not satisfied that there was any error  such  as
    to require the determination to be set aside.

11. Broadly, I prefer the submissions  for  the  appellant,  as  summarised
    above.

12. There is sense in the passage in  the  decision  letter  regarding  the
    likely impact on those affected by the appellant's  offending,  but  it
    does go rather far in the absence of specific evidence.  The Judge  was
    entitled to point that out, even if  to  characterise  the  passage  as
    "pure speculation" went a bit far in the opposite direction.   This  is
    not enough of a point to overturn the determination.

13. The rest of the grounds do not amount to more than re-argument  on  the
    facts.  The decision is one which the Judge was entitled to reach,  and
    reading her determination fairly and as a whole she has  given  legally
    adequate reasons for coming down on the side she did.

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


            [pic]

            19 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




