
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05579/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 December 2014                        |On 23 December 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                              Mr Ahtsham Abbas
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khalid of Lords Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, Mr Ahtsham Abbas, a citizen of Pakistan, applied  on  23
    August 2013 for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student
    Migrant under the points-based system.  His application was refused  in
    a letter which does not bear  a  date  and  which  was  accompanied  or
    followed by removal directions dated 24 January 2014 citing Section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.   Citing correspondence between the Home Office and South  Quay  College,
    which was in the Respondent's bundle, in which the college stated  that
    a letter from it addressed to the Appellant had not been issued  by  it
    and was not genuine, the Refusal Letter stated that the  Appellant  had
    submitted a false document and refused his application under  paragraph
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  On the first page  it  stated  that:
    "YOU DO NOT HAVE A RIGHT OF APPEAL AGAINST THIS DECISION - SEE  SECTION
    C". On the third page, under the heading "SECTION C: RIGHT OF  APPEAL",
    it stated that: "There is no right of appeal against this decision".

3.   Acting through Lords Solicitors the Appellant gave notice of appeal  on
    26 January 2014.  The grounds of appeal narrated the history of  events
    and stated that the revocation of the college from the register of Tier
    4 was not the Appellant's fault.  The Appellant should have been  given
    sixty days to find a new Sponsor college.   The  decision  was  against
    common law fairness:  Thakur  (PBS  decision  -  common  law  fairness)
    Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC) and  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor
    licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).  The  Appellant  had
    not provided a false document.  He had genuinely studied at South  Quay
    College and successfully completed his course, for  which  the  college
    had issued him the course completion letter.  The  Refusal  Letter  did
    not explain how  the  Home  Office  had  verified  the  document.   The
    Appellant was a genuine student in the UK who had spent a lot  of  time
    and money on his studies and would be left with incomplete  studies  if
    removed from the UK which was  against  his  rights  under  common  law
    fairness.  When he made his application  he  had  had  valid  leave  to
    enter.  He should be given an opportunity to  address  the  grounds  of
    refusal.  A right of appeal was requested.

4.   In reply to the Notice of Appeal, the Respondent wrote  on  6  February
    2014 to the Duty Judge.  The  letter  stated  that  the  forms  IS.151A
    issued on 24 January 2014 under Section 10 of the 1999 Act  as  amended
    had the effect of invalidating all  previous  leave.   The  Appellant's
    application as a Tier 4 Student for leave to remain did  not  therefore
    attract a right of appeal and the decision to remove him  attracted  an
    out of country right of appeal.   The  Respondent  therefore  requested
    that the appeal be struck out as a preliminary issue.

5.   At the  hearing  I  gave  both  parties  copies  of  this  application,
    together with the decision of the Duty Judge on 17 February 2014  which
    is signed by Judge Freestone and which,  insofar  as  I  can  read  the
    judicial manuscript, reads as follows:

         "The Appellant is appealing the decision to  refuse  to  grant  him
         further leave.  At the date of the application he still had  leave.
         Therefore full ROA.  The Respondent is  saying  that  all  previous
         leave was invalidated on 24.1.14.  I take the view that  this  does
         not affect a previous ROA but if the Respondent wishes to (?) argue
         this it can be raised at the substantive hearing."

6.   I did not notice until after the hearing a similar manuscript  decision
    dated seven days earlier on 10 February 2014.  This reads:

         "A has a full right of appeal.  He applied for further leave.   The
         application was made whilst he has leave.  This is a 82(2)(d)  2002
         Act appeal.  Please proceed to listing.  10/2/14."

7.   This decision concludes with a squiggle which may be a tick or  may  be
    initials.  It is not signed in the box for signature by the Immigration
    Judge.  I suspect  that  it  is  a  draft,  perhaps  prepared  for  the
    attention of the judge.  If it is a judicial decision, it predated  the
    second decision, which therefore superseded it.  On any  basis  I  take
    the decision of 17 February 2014 as the operative one.

8.   On 20 February 2014 the appeal was listed for hearing at  Hatton  Cross
    on 22 August 2014.  Lords Solicitors LLP were acting for the Appellant,
    and notice was given to them as well as to the Appellant.  On 21 August
    2014 Lords Solicitors wrote to state that the Appellant  had  withdrawn
    his instructions so that they were no longer representing him.   On  22
    August 2014 the Appellant wrote  asking  the  Tribunal  to  decide  the
    appeal in his absence and summarising his evidence  about  his  studies
    and the closure of his college.

9.   The appeal came before Judge Samimi at Hatton  Cross  on  12  September
    2014.  Neither party was represented.  The judge recorded at  paragraph
    4 that the appeal had come before her as a paper appeal  in  accordance
    with Rule 15 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Procedure  Rules  (sic).
    Pedantically speaking this was not correct because there was a  hearing
    conducted in the absence of the parties.  Nothing turns on this.

10.  The judge did not address at all the issue of  jurisdiction.   Nor  did
    she refer to the judicial decision of 17 February 2014 nor the possible
    judicial decision of 10 February 2014.  Whether  she  took  these  into
    account, or relied upon the decision of 10  February,  can  only  be  a
    matter of speculation.  She did not refer  to  the  statements  in  the
    Refusal Letter that the Appellant did not have a right of  appeal,  nor
    refer to this matter.  Premised upon the existence of a right of appeal
    she considered the  evidence.   Citing  Shen  (Paper  appeals;  proving
    dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 00236 (IAC), AA (Nigeria) v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 773 and Patel (revocation of  sponsor  licence  -  fairness)  India
    [2011] UKUT  211  (IAC),  she  concluded  that,  without  any  evidence
    suggesting that the sixty day policy had been complied with in order to
    give the Appellant an opportunity to find a new college, the appeal was
    allowed to the extent of being remitted to the Respondent to allow  him
    this  reasonable  opportunity  to  make  a  new   points-based   system
    application.   Finding  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, she allowed the appeal.

11.  The  Respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal.   The  closely  argued
    application essentially submitted that  the  removal  decision  was  an
    immigration decision within the meaning of Section 82(2)(g) of the 2002
    Act and, by virtue of Section 92(1)  and  (2)  of  the  2002  Act,  the
    Appellant was not able to  appeal  against  it  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  So he had not had an  in-country  right  of  appeal  and  the
    Tribunal had materially erred in failing to establish jurisdiction.

12.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McDade on  13  November  2014
    in the following terms:

         "The  Respondent  has  applied  for  permission   to   appeal   the
         determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Samimi  in  which
         she allowed the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's
         refusal to allow him leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  under  the  points-based  system.
         The grounds of application for permission to appeal assert that the
         judge materially erred in law hearing an appeal for which no  right
         of appeal existed when  arguably  there  only  existed  an  out  of
         country right of appeal.  This point  is  arguable.   There  is  an
         arguable error of law."

13.  In readiness for the hearing Mr Khalid submitted  a  skeleton  argument
    and a number of authorities, very helpfully annotated, for which  I  am
    grateful.

14.  The Appellant  attended  the  error  of  law  hearing,  at  which  both
    representatives submitted  further  authorities.   The  hearing,  which
    lasted for an hour, took the form of submissions and discussion of  the
    issues.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.  I have
    taken into account the permission application,  the  skeleton  argument
    and the oral submissions.


Determination

15.  The discussion at the error of law hearing has assisted me to  identify
    the issues in the appeal.  These are concisely  stated  as  the  issues
    which engaged the Court of Appeal in Anwar & Adjo [2010] EWCA Civ 1275.
     As formulated by Sedley LJ, they are:

         "1.  These three appeals raise a common issue: if  the  immigration
             decision which is being appealed to the Immigration and Asylum
             Chamber carries no right of in-country appeal, but  the  point
             is not taken on appeal to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,  can  it
             thereafter be contended that  there  was  no  jurisdiction  to
             entertain the appeal?


         2.   Mr Adjo's case raises an important further issue: even if  the
             principal  ground  attracts  no  right  of  appeal,  does  the
             introduction of a human  rights  ground  carry  an  in-country
             right of appeal?"

    I address these issues sequentially.


Jurisdiction

16.  Addressing this issue, Sedley LJ said:

         "19. Was the AIT right in Ms Pengeyo's and Mr Anwar's cases to hold
             that the  respective  immigration  judges  had  acted  without
             jurisdiction?  In my judgment they had jurisdiction to  embark
             on the hearing notwithstanding that neither appellant had left
             the United Kingdom, but once the point was taken by  the  Home
             Office (and assuming it to be factually  correct,  since  they
             might have been absent from the hearing) it operated in bar of
             the proceedings.  Had the point not been taken in either case,
             the immigration judge would have been bound  to  proceed  with
             the appeal."

17.  Discussing his reasons, he concluded:

         "23. Any apparently absolute bar to justice has to  be  scrutinised
             very carefully.  The one contained in the 2002 Act is  not  of
             the kind which operates independently of the  will  of  either
             party so as to bind the  tribunal  regardless.   It  offers  a
             point which can be but need not be taken.  In the present  two
             cases, it was taken."

18.  The issue, therefore, was whether, at a hearing at which neither  party
    was represented, so that the judge was dependent upon the  papers,  the
    point about jurisdiction had been taken by the Respondent.

19.  For the reasons which I have stated,  I  do  not  regard  the  apparent
    decision of 10 February 2014 as an effective judicial decision.  Nor do
    I regard the judicial decision of 17 February 2014 as  having  resolved
    the matter, because it left the Respondent  to  raise  the  issue  and,
    albeit allowing the appeal to proceed, could not  bind  the  judge  who
    heard it.

20.  Miss Everett submitted that the issue had been clearly  raised  in  the
    two references in the Refusal Letter to there being no right of  appeal
    against the decision.  Mr Khalid responded that the Refusal Letter gave
    no reasons for stating that there was no right of appeal  and  did  not
    refer to Section 10 of the 1999 Act nor to Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

21.  Anwar was considered by the Court of Appeal  in  Nirula  and  Others  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1436.  In that case the notice of decision  stated
    that "the appellant had a right of appeal exercisable 'after removal'".
     Longmore LJ held at paragraph 33 that in so stating the Respondent had
    taken the jurisdiction point.

22.  As stated, the decision was made under Section  82(2)(g)  of  the  2002
    Act and, by reason of Section 92(1) and (2) may be appealed  only  from
    outside the UK.  Mr  Khalid  did  not  address  this  in  his  skeleton
    argument nor, despite my drawing his attention to it, cogently  at  the
    hearing.  The issue is whether the restriction on the right  of  appeal
    had been raised  at  the  hearing  before  the  judge.   I  accept  the
    submission of Miss Everett that it had been,  in  the  Refusal  Letter.
    The Refusal Letter states only that there is not  a  right  of  appeal,
    rather than that the right of appeal is exercisable only  from  outside
    the UK; but in the context of the hearing of  an  appeal  brought  from
    within the UK, nothing turns on this.  The Respondent placed the  issue
    before the Tribunal.  Following Anwar, the effect was to operate in bar
    of the proceedings.

23.  It follows that, in assuming a jurisdiction which  she  did  not  have,
    the judge materially erred in law.


Human Rights Grounds

24.  The second issue is whether, in this event, human rights grounds  carry
    an in-country right of appeal.

25.  The grounds of appeal do not explicitly invoke the  Human  Rights  Act.
    In their references to procedural fairness  and  the  effect  upon  the
    Appellant of the interruption of his studies, I construe them to  raise
    his qualified right to respect for his private life under Article 8  of
    the 1950 Convention.  However, in his application  form  of  23  August
    2013 I do not identify anything which  can  be  construed  as  a  human
    rights claim.

26.  In Nirula the court held at paragraphs 17 to 25  that  the  words  "has
    made ... a human rights claim" in Section 94(2)(a) of the 2002 Act mean
    that the claim must have been made to the Respondent at the outset,  to
    enable the Respondent to consider it, and not for the first time at the
    commencement of the appellate process in the Notice of Appeal.  This, I
    find, the Appellant did not do.  Hence  the  introduction  of  a  human
    rights ground at that stage does  not  carry  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal.

27.  Mr Khalid made submissions on matters  which  occupy  the  intermediate
    ground between an Article 8 human rights claim and procedural fairness.
     He submitted that the Refusal Letter did not state the reasons for the
    decision.  This I do not accept, because it  cited  the  correspondence
    with the Appellant's college.  He submitted that Section 10 of the 1971
    Act was discretionary, and that no  reasons  had  been  given  for  the
    exercise of this discretion.  In citing Basnet (validity of application
    - respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC) at paragraph 27 he submitted that
    the onus of proof in the present case rested upon the  Respondent,  and
    had not been discharged.  This  is  effectively  the  same  submission.
    Relying upon the authorities mentioned above, he submitted that  common
    law fairness required the Appellant to have been granted  a  period  of
    sixty days to attempt to find an alternative college.  He  produced  in
    evidence refusals of the applications of, doubtless, other  clients  of
    his firm under Section 322(1A) which had conferred a right  of  appeal,
    and argued that it was unfair and discriminatory for the Respondent not
    to have treated the Appellant in the same way.

28.  I have found that, since a human rights claim was not raised  with  the
    Respondent at the outset, the human rights ground now raised  does  not
    carry an in-country right of appeal.  That claim shades into issues  of
    procedural fairness by the Respondent.  Whilst there is no clear bright
    line  between  the  two  areas,  the  short  response  to  Mr  Khalid's
    submissions is that they are matters not for the Tribunal but  for  the
    Administrative Court on judicial review.


In Conclusion

29.  I have found that the Appellant did not have  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal.  In finding or assuming to the contrary, the  judge  materially
    erred in law.  I find too that human rights issues, if such they  were,
    did not carry an in-country right  of  appeal.   Thus  the  appeal  was
    considered without jurisdiction to do so.   The  determination  is  set
    aside.


Decision

30.  The original determination contained a material error  of  law  and  is
    set aside.

31.  For want of jurisdiction, the Appellant  has  no  in-country  right  of
    appeal.

32.  There can therefore be no fee award.



Signed   Dated: 23 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

