
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05897/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 1 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                              SAIFUL ISLAM KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Sharma, instructed by M A Consultants (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh, applied to  the  Secretary  of
    State for further leave to remain as a student.  He was refused on  the
    ground that a  bank  statement  he  had  produced  in  support  of  the
    application was false.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  He was
    represented by Mr R  Ugoh,  a  solicitor,  acting  as  agent  for  M  A
    Consultants, his representatives on record.  Judge Page considered  the
    evidence before him and dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  then,  by
    his representatives, sought permission to appeal to this  Tribunal,  on
    the ground that there was no Document Verification  Result  before  the
    judge and, in the circumstances, he was not entitled to find  that  the
    Secretary of State's allegation had  been  made  out.   Permission  was
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson, who  pointed  out  that
    the judge's note showed that the Document Verification Result must have
    been before the judge.  The application for permission was  renewed  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The application is completed and signed  by  Mr  M
    Afzal of M A Consultants.  The grounds were repeated.  In addition,  in
    manuscript on the application form, Mr Afzal has written as follows:

         "Also we wish to confirm that no attachment to  the  DVR  has  ever
         been served on us or the appellant"

 2. Permission was  granted,  specifically  only  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had not seen a copy  of  the  Document  Verification  Result.
    There was a response from the Secretary of State saying that  the  full
    Document  Verification  Result  was  submitted  by  the   Home   Office
    Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal; that the  appellant  and
    his representative had an opportunity to look at it and did not  object
    to its late submission.

 3. There have been substantial delays in this case.   The  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was on 17 July 2014.  His decision was sent out
    at the end  of  the  month.   Judge  Nicholson's  decision  was  on  18
    September 2014.  The renewed application for permission was received on
    6 October 2014 and determined on 19 January 2015.  The  response  under
    Rule 24 is dated 26 February 2015.  There was then a  delay  of  nearly
    ten months until the hearing before us.

 4. At that hearing, Mr Sharma withdrew  the  ground  of  appeal  on  which
    permission had been  granted.   He  had  taken  instructions  from  the
    appellant, who had confirmed  that  it  was  indeed  correct  that  the
    Document Verification Result had been produced at  the  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  We expressed our  concern,  not  in  any  way
    about Mr Sharma's conduct (he having been instructed only the  previous
    evening) but about the previous conduct of the appeal.  We  have  since
    received a letter from Mr Afzal.

 5. It is clear that the assertion of fact upon which the grounds of appeal
    were twice based, and which was made again in the  manuscript  addition
    to the application to the Upper Tribunal, was  wholly  untrue.   It  is
    also clear from  Mr  Afzal's  letter  that  it  was  made  without  his
    receiving any information  from  either  his  agent  Mr  Ugoh  who  had
    appeared at the hearing for him, or from the appellant himself.  It  is
    further apparent that Mr Afzal did not have any effective contact  with
    the appellant at any time  after  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Although Mr  Afzal  was  clearly  put  on  notice  that  his
    statement was untrue, both  in  the  refusal  of  permission  by  Judge
    Nicholson, and in the Rule 24 reply from the  Secretary  of  State,  he
    evidently made no attempt to see whether what he had said was the truth
    or not.  That remains a matter of considerable concern, and a  copy  of
    this determination is being forwarded to the office of the  Immigration
    Services Commissioner, who is responsible for Mr  Afzal's  professional
    standards.

 6. So far as concerns the ground upon which permission was granted, as  it
    has been withdrawn, we need say no more about it.

 7. Mr Sharma asked for permission to amend the grounds, to add the  ground
    that a reading of the determination suggested that the  judge  had  not
    taken into account submissions made on behalf of the appellant.   After
    hearing Mr Sharma's submissions on that point, we  refused  permission.
    The reasons are twofold.  First, there was no explanation for the delay
    in advancing this new  ground.   The  appellant  has  been  represented
    throughout, and the ground is one which falls to be identified  on  the
    face  of  the  determination  itself.   There  is  no  reason  why  the
    application to amend could not have  been  made  at  any  time  in  the
    previous fourteen months.  Secondly, the new proposed ground would take
    the matter no further.  Although a judge is of  course  bound  to  take
    relevant submissions into account, he is under no obligation to  record
    them in a determination.  His notes (which, if the amended  ground  had
    been available earlier, might well have been disclosed to the  parties)
    show that he had the submissions in mind, and indeed it is  clear  from
    the determination that he was primarily concerned with the weight to be
    attached to the relevant items of evidence before him.

 8. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 2 February 2016
