


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05533/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 12 June 2013                             |On : 13 June 2013            |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                SHOHEL AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Hosein of E1 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 8 October 1985.  He  has
   been given permission to appeal against the determination  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
   decision to refuse his application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
   (General) Student Migrant.

2. On 25 November 2009 the appellant entered the United Kingdom  with  entry
   clearance as a Tier 4 (General) student, valid until 28 October 2012.  On
   26 October 2012 he applied for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
   Student Migrant under  the  Points  Based  System.  His  application  was
   refused on 4 February 2013 under paragraph 245ZX(d)  of  the  immigration
   rules on the basis that he had  not  achieved  the  required  points  for
   maintenance under  Appendix  C  of  the  rules.  He  had  submitted  bank
   statements from Prime Bank Ltd as evidence of funds, but Prime  Bank  Ltd
   was listed as a financial institution with which the UKBA was  unable  to
   make satisfactory verification checks, a matter notified publicly on  the
   UKBA website. As such, the evidence from the  Prime  Bank  Ltd  had  been
   disregarded for the purposes  of  paragraph  39B(c)  of  the  rules.  The
   appellant was accordingly granted no points for maintenance  (funds)  and
   his application was refused.

3. In his grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant
   stated that the list of relevant banks did not exist at the time he  made
   his application and had only come into force on 13 December 2012. He  had
   spent money on his course and the decision to refuse his  application  on
   that basis was therefore unfair and in breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

4. In accordance with the appellant's request, his appeal was determined  on
   the papers, without an oral hearing, by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Judge
   Davies dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules on the basis that
   the appellant was unable to discharge the burden of proof upon him.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  the  grounds
   that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  understand   the
   appellant's case; that his  reasons  were  inadequate  and  his  findings
   vague; that he had failed to consider Article 8 of the ECHR; and that his
   decision was irrational.

6. Permission to appeal was granted on 8 May 2013, primarily on  the  ground
   relating to Article 8.

Appeal hearing and submissions

7. I put to Mr Parkinson, at the commencement of the hearing, the view  that
   this was a case that raises issues of common law unfairness, as in Thakur
   (PBS decision -" common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 151. However
   his view was that the circumstances were very different to  Thakur  since
   there had always been a requirement for  banks  to  provide  verification
   when requested by the UKBA and the fact that the bank could not do so was
   sufficient grounds for the application to be refused.

8. Mr Hosein then put his grounds to me and submitted that no such  list  of
   banks had existed at the time the appellant submitted his application and
   the bank had, in the meantime, been taken off  the  list  again.  It  was
   unfair to expect the appellant to have known about the list of banks  and
   the judge had erred by failing to consider that. Furthermore,  the  judge
   had failed to consider Article 8.

9. Mr Parkinson submitted that the fairness point had  not  been  raised  in
   the grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. The burden of proof
   was upon the appellant  to  show  that  the  funds  were  available.  The
   Secretary of State had  concerns  about  Prime  Bank  Ltd  and  had  thus
   included it in the  list  of  banks  with  which  they  had  difficulties
   verifying documents. The evidence before the judge in regard to Article 8
   was very limited. The decision was lawful.

Consideration and findings

Error of Law

10.  Whilst Judge Davies properly found that the  appellant  was  unable  to
   meet the requirements of the immigration rules as they stood at the  time
   the decision was made, this was a case where, in my  view,  he  ought  to
   have directed his mind to the question of common law  fairness.  Although
   the case of Thakur was not expressly  cited  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
   before him, the appellant had clearly asserted in his  grounds  that  the
   decision was not fair and was not in accordance with the law, given  that
   the list of banks had not been in existence  at  the  time  he  made  his
   application. Article 8 was also raised in the grounds. However the  judge
   gave no consideration to those matters and it is indeed not at all  clear
   from his determination that he appreciated the issues being raised.

11. In my view the judge erred in law by  failing  to  consider  potentially
   material matters, in particular the matter of common law fairness, and to
   make proper findings in response to the grounds raised by the  appellant.
   I therefore set aside his determination.

Re-making the Decision

12. In re-making the decision, I find  that  this  is  a  case  which  falls
   within the principles considered in Thakur, albeit  concerning  different
   circumstances.

13. The respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application  under  paragraph
   39B(c) on the  grounds  that  she  had  reasonable  cause  to  doubt  the
   genuineness of his bank statements from Prime Bank Ltd since she had been
   unable to verify them.  The  refusal  under  paragraph  39B(c)  was  with
   reference to paragraph 245ZX(d), which in turn,  although  not  expressly
   stated in the decision letter, was by reference to Appendix C,  paragraph
   1A(i), which states:
    "1A. In all cases where an applicant is required to obtain points under
    Appendix C, the applicant must meet the requirements listed below: ...
     (i) No points will be awarded where the specified documents show that
    the funds are held in a financial institution listed in Appendix P as
    being an institution with which the UK Border Agency is unable to make
    satisfactory verification checks."
14.  Appendix P provides a  list  of  financial  institutions  that  do  not
   satisfactorily verify financial statements, or whose financial statements
   are accepted. Paragraphs 4 and 5 of Appendix P states as follows:
    "4. An applicant will not satisfy any requirement in these rules which
    requires him to provide documents if those documents relate to a
    financial institution on a list of those that do not satisfactorily
    verify financial statements.
    5. Where stated in the lists below, the 'effective date' is the date
    from which the UK Border Agency will not accept financial statements
    relating to the stated institution."
15.  Paragraphs  7  (xi)  and  (xii)  of  Appendix  P  refer  to   financial
   institutions in Bangladesh; paragraph 7(xi) to financial institutions  in
   Bangladesh that do not satisfactorily verify  financial  statements,  set
   out in Table 11,  and  paragraph  7(xii)  to  financial  institutions  in
   Bangladesh whose financial statements are accepted, set in Table 12.

16. Whilst, contrary to the assertion in the grounds  of  appeal,  paragraph
   39B and Appendix C, paragraph 1A(i) came into  force  on  20  July  2012,
   namely prior to the date of the appellant's application, paragraphs 7(xi)
   and (xii) of Appendix P did indeed only come into force  on  13  December
   2012, the date referred to in the grounds. This is also confirmed in  the
   UKBA document at page 22 of  the  appeal  bundle  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, which gives that date as the "effective date"  from  which  the
   UKBA would not accept financial statements from Prime Bank Limited.

17. Therefore it is the case, as pleaded in the grounds of appeal,  that  at
   the time he submitted his application, the appellant's bank,  Prime  Bank
   Limited did not appear on any UKBA list, as a financial institution whose
   verification processes were of concern to the UKBA. Not only is that  the
   case, but it is also relevant to note that Prime Bank Limited was deleted
   from the list  of  financial  institutions  in  Bangladesh  that  do  not
   satisfactorily verify financial statements, set out in  Table  11,  on  6
   April 2013, and from that date the bank appeared in the list of financial
   institutions whose financial statements were  accepted,  as  set  out  at
   Table 12. Thus, there was a period of only four months, from 13  December
   2012 to 6 April 2013, in  which  the  UKBA  considered  that  Prime  Bank
   Limited did not satisfactorily verify financial statements. It was during
   that period that the respondent made their decision  in  the  appellant's
   application.

18. The only reason the respondent gave for  having  "reasonable  cause"  to
   doubt the genuineness of the appellant's bank statements was  that  Prime
   Bank Limited appeared on the list in Table 11 of Appendix P at  the  time
   his application was considered. Whilst it may be that  there  were  other
   reasons to doubt the reliability of the appellant's  evidence  of  funds,
   those were not articulated in the refusal notice. Neither did the refusal
   notice raise any other concerns as to the appellant's ability to meet the
   requirements of the rules and it appears that the funds shown in the bank
   statement, had the statement been accepted as reliable,  were  sufficient
   to meet the maintenance requirements of the rules. The appellant was  not
   advised of any concerns about the bank statement or the bank that  issued
   the statement, nor given any opportunity to transfer his funds to a  bank
   which did not appear in Table 11. It seems to me that that this is a case
   where, as in Thakur and Naved (Student - fairness  -  notice  of  points)
   [2012] UKUT 14, the appellant neither  knew  nor  should  be  treated  as
   having known of any problems with Prime Bank Limited and that an issue of
   common law unfairness therefore arose. As the Tribunal held in the head-
   note in Naved:

     "Fairness requires the Secretary of State  to  give  an  applicant  an
    opportunity to address grounds for refusal, of which he  did  not  know
    and could not have known, failing which the resulting decision  may  be
    set aside on appeal  as  contrary  to  law  (without  contravening  the
    provisions of s. 85A of the Nationality,  Asylum  and  Immigration  Act
    2002)."

19.  Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not   in
   accordance with the law and that the appeal  should  be  allowed  on  the
   limited basis that the matter is to be referred back to the Secretary  of
   State to make a fresh, lawful decision in the appellant's application.

DECISION

20. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside.  I
   re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it to the  limited  extent
   as stated above. The appellant  now  awaits  a  lawful  decision  in  his
   application.









                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
