
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05681/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th August 2015                  |On 8th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  TING TAO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss R Peterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Sheikh, Counsel, instructed on behalf of
                    Morgan Dias Immigration Consultants Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hindson)  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 13th May 2015 allowed the  Respondent's  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  to  grant  leave  to
    remain under Appendix M of the Immigration Rules HC 395  on  Article  8
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history is set out in the determination  at
    paragraph 12 (that the Appellant had entered the United Kingdom in 1999
    as a student but that subsequently her leave had expired and there  had
    been unsuccessful applications for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds in 2008 and 2009).  Reconsideration of decisions had been asked
    for in 2010 and also in 2011.  The Appellant had a child aged 5 with  a
    former partner who took no part in the child's life.  The Appellant had
    been in a relationship with a British national since early 2012  having
    lived together since March of that year and that the Appellant and  her
    partner were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

 3. The decision of the Secretary of State is also set out at paragraphs  9
    and 10 of the determination.  As the judge recorded at  [10]  that  the
    issue that he had to decide related to paragraph EX1 and in  particular
    EX1(b) and that "it is common  ground  that  the  requirements  of  the
    paragraph are satisfied save that the Appellant must  show  that  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  of  the
    UK."  Thus it was common ground between the parties that that  was  the
    issue to decide under the Immigration Rules.  Indeed both Miss Peterson
    and Miss Sheikh agreed before the Upper  Tribunal  that  that  was  the
    issue relating  to  the  Immigration  Rules  which  the  judge  had  to
    consider.

 4. The judge set out his Decision and Reasons for allowing the  appeal  at
    paragraphs 16 to 22 having reached the conclusion for the reasons  that
    he had given that  they  amounted  cumulatively  to  "very  significant
    difficulties" which the Appellant and her partner would  face  if  they
    were to  relocate to China and  what  he  described  as  "very  serious
    hardship" that would flow for both of them.  Thus he allowed the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.  He did not go on to  consider  Article  8
    outside of the Rules having reached that conclusion  on  the  issue  of
    "insurmountable obstacles".

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted on 10th July 2015.

 6. Before the Upper Tribunal Miss Peterson relied upon the written grounds
    and that the judge had not come to a balanced judgment in finding  that
    there were "very significant difficulties" which the Appellant and  her
    partner would face if they relocated to China or that they  would  face
    serious hardship.  In respect of language difficulties,  she  submitted
    that the fact that he did not speak Chinese would not in itself  result
    in the couple facing significant difficulties outside of  the  UK.   At
    [19] the judge made a reference to the  family  of  the  Sponsor  being
    deprived of his emotional and practical support  but  that  was  not  a
    consideration  under  EX1(b),  found   that   there   was   no   proper
    consideration as to  whether  the  family  would  face  dire  financial
    circumstances if they returned to China as it was not supported by  any
    objective evidence and there  was  no  attempt  made  to  explore  work
    opportunities in China or whether the Appellant could work to  overcome
    difficulties.   She  submitted  that  the  decision  was  based  on  an
    expression of preference and  that  the  parties  did  not  demonstrate
    insurmountable obstacles.  Furthermore, in relation to the  Appellant's
    child, he was 5 years of age and that his life in the UK was  therefore
    based around his mother and therefore he was at the  beginning  of  his
    education and there was no evidence he would be unable to learn Chinese
    and to be able to adapt to life in China with the help and  support  of
    his mother.

 7. Miss Sheikh made reference to the Rule 24 response provided by previous
    Counsel. However she identified that the decision of the judge was made
    under the Immigration Rules, not Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   Her
    submissions were to the effect that Judge Hindson  properly  identified
    the issue at [18] and that it was accepted by the  Secretary  of  State
    that both parties were in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  [14].
    The judge had the opportunity of  hearing  the  evidence  of  both  the
    Appellant and her partner and  found  them  both  to  be  credible  and
    reliable witnesses [at 17].  She submitted that the judge properly took
    into account and assessed the  evidence  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    partner's difficulties in relocation and therefore  made  reference  to
    the evidence that was before the judge, namely the Appellant's  witness
    statement at page 5 [paragraph  7]  and  references  to  her  partner's
    relationship with his parents, his established employment for the  last
    sixteen years and this was supported by the evidence from  her  partner
    [at page 11 of the bundle] referring to employment since  1998  equated
    to sixteen years of employment and that he would not be  able  to  find
    equivalent work in China for the reasons given and also that he had  no
    language skills and would not be able to acquire them at the age of  47
    to obtain a similar type of employment.  Thus she submitted  there  was
    sufficient evidence to support the determination and the  finding  made
    by the judge concerning insurmountable obstacles.

 8. She further submitted the judge was entitled  to  consider  the  impact
    upon the Appellant's partner by reference to the family members as  the
    impact on the partner  is  relevant  to  the  issue  of  insurmountable
    obstacles.  The role he played and importance of  the  relationship  to
    the Appellant's partner was  set  out  in  the  evidence  (the  medical
    evidence and also a power of attorney) and  the  inability  to  provide
    practical  and  emotional  support  to  his  father  was   a   relevant
    consideration.

 9. As to language, at page 11 the Appellant's partner had given an account
    concerning the difficulties of speaking the language,  not  having  any
    language skills, with emphasis upon his age and starting what would  be
    a new life in a country.  The judge properly took into account what  he
    described as "substantial cultural differences".

10. She further made reference to the grounds in which the finding at  [21]
    that they would face dire financial circumstances was  challenged.   In
    this respect she submitted that his employment opportunities  had  been
    set out at paragraph 11 and that the Appellant's partner had given oral
    evidence about making enquiries about potential job  opportunities  and
    whether it was feasible to work in China but that  was  negative.   She
    submitted the judge did not have to reference every piece  of  evidence
    to reach a conclusion on the particular factual circumstances.  In  any
    event the judge recorded that he  accepted  the  Appellant's  partner's
    evidence as reliable.  The judge in his  findings  properly  considered
    the evidence as to relocation.

11. As to the Appellant's son, she made reference to the  reports  at  page
    40, and 41 relating to his education and also a letter dated 12th March
    2015 (not in the bundle) but put before the First-tier Tribunal at  the
    hearing.  She emphasised that the judge took into account this evidence
    confirming his network of friends, that he was  ahead  of  his  current
    stage and that was consistent with the witness statement at paragraph 8
    (page 5) and that he had made friends at school, that he did not  speak
    Mandarin and that they would  be  worried  about  adapting  to  Chinese
    society.  Further, she made reference to the grant  of  permission  and
    that the head note in MK (Best interests of child)  India  [2011]  UKUT
    475, made reference to a short term disruption being taken into account
    and that Judge Hindson had considered that and bears this in mind  when
    assessing the circumstances and best interests in relation to children.
     As to Section 117, as this was a decision under the Immigration Rules,
    those considerations did not apply.  Miss  Peterson  agreed  with  that
    submission.  Consequently she submitted that the  judge  had  a  proper
    opportunity to both assess the Appellant and his partner,  he  accepted
    their  evidence  (see  paragraph  17)  and  made  positive  credibility
    findings in relation to their evidence and his assessment of the  issue
    of insurmountable obstacles.  She made reference to page  178  and  the
    country advice in relation to China and children born out  of  wedlock.
    She accepted that the judge did not specifically refer to that  in  the
    determination.  Furthermore, there was an extract from the  COI  Report
    but it  was  not  clear  whether  that  had  been  pursued  before  the
    Immigration Judge relating to difficulties on return.

12. I reserved my determination.

13. The judge identified the relevant issues under consideration at [10] of
    the determination noting that it was common ground between the  parties
    that the requirements of EX1(b) were satisfied save that the  applicant
    was required to show that there were insurmountable obstacles to family
    life continuing outside of the UK.  He made reference to EX2 as to what
    the term required.  It was further common ground between the  advocates
    before the Upper Tribunal that that was the issue to be  decided  under
    the Immigration Rules and therefore Section 117 had no relevance.

14. The grounds essentially  assert  that  the  judge  failed  to  reach  a
    balanced judgment when reaching his overall  finding  that  there  were
    "very significant difficulties" which the  Appellant  and  her  partner
    would face if they were to relocate to China and  would  face  "serious
    hardship" and therefore finding  that  there  would  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to  family  life  continuing  outside  of  the  UK.   Matters
    identified  and  relied  upon  in  the  grounds  relate  to   language,
    employment and establishing family life in China.

15. The judge's conclusions are set out at  paragraphs  16  to  22  of  the
    determination and there can be no doubt that they are  given  in  short
    brief terms and they give the reasons for reaching the conclusion  that
    he was satisfied that there were  insurmountable  obstacles.   However,
    the judge made a reference at [6] to the evidence before him  and  that
    he did not seek to reiterate the evidence before him in any detail.  As
    Miss Sheikh submitted, the judge does not have to set out  every  piece
    of evidence that he has had regard to when reaching findings of fact or
    the decision he ultimately reached.   It  is  further  plain  from  the
    determination at [17] the  judge  found  both  the  Appellant  and  her
    partner, who gave oral evidence before the  Tribunal,  to  be  reliable
    witnesses upon whose evidence he could place weight and  reliance.   It
    had been tested in  cross-examination  during  the  hearing.   In  this
    context I remind myself of the decision in Piglowska v Piglowska [1999]
    UKHL 27 where Lord Hoffmann said:-

         "The appellate court must bear in  mind  the  advantage  which  the
         first instance judge had  in  seeing  the  parties  and  the  other
         witnesses.  This is well understood on questions of credibility and
         findings of primary fact.  But  it  goes  further  than  that.   It
         applies also to the judge's evaluation of those facts ..."

    There is also a quotation from his decision  in  Biogen  Inc  v  Medeva
    Limited [1997] RPC1:-

         "The need for appellate caution  in  reversing  the  trial  judge's
         evaluation of the facts is based upon much more solid grounds  than
         professional courtesy.  It is because specific  findings  of  fact,
         even by the most meticulous judge,  are  inherently  an  incomplete
         statement of the impression which has been  made upon  him  by  the
         primary evidence.  His express findings are always surrounded by  a
         penumbra of imprecision as  to  emphasis,  relative  weight,  minor
         qualification and nuance ... of which  time  and  language  do  not
         permit exact expression, but which may play an  important  part  in
         the judge's overall evaluation."

16. With that in mind, I have considered the  conclusions  reached  by  the
    judge set out in the determination.  They can be summarised as follows,
    that if the Appellant returned to China her son would go with her  (his
    best interests would dictate that he  and  his  mother  should  not  be
    separated) and that if family life was to continue  her  partner  would
    have to leave the United Kingdom to ensure  family  life  could  remain
    intact.  Therefore he properly took into amount  the  consequences  and
    impact upon the Appellant's partner.

17. Whilst the grounds make reference to the finding at paragraph  19  that
    the partner's family members would be deprived  of  his  emotional  and
    practical support and that this was not a consideration and also in any
    event no detail was provided as to any alternative  forms  of  support,
    the judge was entitled to take that into  account  in  considering  the
    impact upon the Appellant's partner and  the  issue  of  insurmountable
    obstacles and his particular circumstances in the UK which  would  give
    rise to there being an "insurmountable obstacle".  The evidence in this
    regard is set out in the paragraphs referred to by the judge, who had a
    medical report setting out the diagnosis of Parkinson's disease and his
    associated care problems (at page 51 of the bundle).   The  Appellant's
    partner held power of attorney over his affairs (pages 49 to 50).  As a
    result of  his father's medical difficulties, both parties moved closer
    to that home to continue to provide the  care  and  support  necessary.
    Consequently, on that evidence which was unchallenged, it was  open  to
    the judge to take into account the impact  of  the  decision  upon  the
    Appellant's partner  which  would  require  him  to  leave  behind  the
    obligations that he had to his father and the particular  circumstances
    relating to the care and support he provided.  Whilst the grounds refer
    to there being no evidence about alternative support, it  was  open  to
    the judge to reach the conclusion that he accepted the evidence of  the
    Appellant and the Appellant's partner provided an  important   part  of
    the care given to his father and by reason of  the  decision  it  would
    deprive him of the ability to continue such care, support  and  contact
    with both  of  his  parents,  but  in  particular  the  nature  of  the
    dependency of his father.

18. The grounds also challenge the  finding  at  [21]  concerning  language
    difficulties and those of  employment.   However,  those  matters  were
    considered by the judge in accordance with  the  evidence  provided  by
    him, even if not referenced in the findings of fact.   The  Appellant's
    partner had established employment in the UK of sixteen  years  and  on
    all accounts had worked hard to realise his ambitions at the university
    despite having no degree (see letter at page 11).  He was 47  years  of
    age and at page 11 of the bundle set out what he described as the  very
    significant difficulties that he considered he would face  establishing
    family life in China.  This took into account that he would not be able
    to find equivalent work in China.  It referred to his  lack  of  degree
    and that he had built his career over a sixteen year period in spite of
    that and that his ability to obtain employment was  very  significantly
    reduced by his inability to speak Chinese, having  no  language  skills
    and in particular the emphasis on  his  age.   Miss  Sheikh  also  made
    reference in her submissions to the  oral  evidence  given  before  the
    judge as to  enquiries  made  in  establishing  employment  which  were
    negative.  There is no reference to that made by the judge and there is
    no reason to believe that that was not put forward when looking at  the
    determination at [21] where the submission of  the  Presenting  Officer
    was  recorded  relating  to  work  opportunities;  the  fact  that  the
    Presenting Officer was saying that there was  little  done  to  explore
    work opportunities does not mean that there was nothing  done  at  all.
    The judge recorded in any event that he accepted the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's partner as reliable.

19. At paragraph 21 the judge took into account the  issue  of  employment.
    As stated above, it is apparent there was a challenge to this aspect of
    the appeal at [21]  where  the  judge  made  reference  to  the  cross-
    examination although not setting out what evidence was given.  However,
    the judge had the opportunity to hear the evidence that the Appellant's
    partner be subject to cross-examination and accepted that evidence  for
    the reasons that he gave.  Therefore the grounds are not  made  out  in
    relation to employment prospects which were taken into account  by  the
    judge on the evidence before him.  Consequently  it  was  open  to  the
    judge to find on the particular  characteristics  of  this  Appellant's
    partner; his age, length of employment and in  light  of  the  language
    difficulties  and  what  he  described  as  the  "substantial  cultural
    differences" between the UK and China that the family would  face  dire
    financial circumstances.  The grounds take issue with that  finding  on
    the basis that there was no objective evidence in support  and  whether
    there was evidence of attempts to explore work in China.  However,  the
    finding at [21] is a composite one, taking into account  the  partner's
    age, lack of  relevant  qualifications,  lack  of  language  skills  in
    Chinese and importantly the substantial  cultural  differences  between
    China and the UK and cumulatively he was entitled  to  find  that  they
    would constitute very significant difficulties and  would  impact  upon
    their life in China as they would face dire financial circumstances if,
    as the judge accepted, the Appellant's partner would  not  be  able  to
    find employment for the reasons he gave.

20. The grounds also challenge the  finding  as  to  the  effect  upon  the
    Appellant's son at [20].  There appears to be  no  dispute  as  to  the
    circumstances relating to the Appellant's son.  He was approximately  5
    years of age at the date of the hearing and was at primary school.  The
    reports provided about his progress are set out in the bundle and  also
    a letter dated March 2015  referred  to  his  good  attendance,  having
    settled well, working above his level and having  a  good  relationship
    with his friends.  The judge referred to this evidence at [14] that  he
    was well established in school and at [13]  that  the  child's  natural
    father had played no part in his life.  The evidence before  the  judge
    in the bundle was that the Appellant's son  referred  to  his  mother's
    partner as his father and that they had  a  strong  bond  (see  witness
    statement of Appellant) and there was evidence at page 11 of the bundle
    from the Appellant's partner that he thought of the child  as  his  own
    son and there was a strong father/child bond as a result of the natural
    father having no involvement in his  life.   The  judge  therefore  had
    evidence before him as to the nature of the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant's son and  partner.   The  grounds  state  that  the  judge's
    findings at [20] and the effect upon the child of  being  removed  from
    school were not balanced with the consideration of his age and that his
    life was essentially based around his mother.  Whilst it may be so that
    a child of 5 years has yet to found a private life beyond that  of  his
    mother, it was open to the judge to find that there  was  some  private
    life established by her son through education, relying upon the reports
    but also on the evidence that he would face the consequences  of  being
    separated from the Appellant's partner  whom  he  considered  to  be  a
    father figure; his natural father having played no part  in  his  life.
    As Miss Sheikh submits, the judge was entitled to take into account the
    disruption to the child even if it  could  be  characterised  as  short
    term.

21. The phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used in EX1 of the  Rules  has
    been  described as significantly more demanding than  a  mere  test  of
    whether it would be reasonable to expect a  couple  to  continue  their
    family life outside of the UK.  The phrase "used in the Rules" is to be
    interpreted in a sensible and  practical  way  rather  than  an  overly
    literal way and in the decision of Gulshan (Article 8  -  new  Rules  -
    correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  it  was  held  that   the   term
    "insurmountable obstacles" in provisions such as EX1 are not  obstacles
    which are impossible to surmount and that they  concern  the  practical
    possibilities of relocation (see MF (Article 8  -  new  Rules)  Nigeria
    [2012] UKUT 393 and Izuazu (Article 8 - new Rules) [2013] UKUT 45.

22. There is no doubt that the judge's reasoning is in brief terms  and  he
    did not set out all the evidence before him that Miss  Sheikh  referred
    the Tribunal to which was relevant to the reasons  that  he  ultimately
    reached.  However, he made a point at [6] that he did not seek  to  set
    out all of the evidence that was being before him and he did  have  the
    opportunity to hear the evidence of  both  witnesses  and  found  their
    evidence to be of such quality that he could attach weight and reliance
    upon it (see [17]).  The observations of  Lord  Justice  Sedley  in  AB
    (Jamaica) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 1302 have some relevance although this
    was a decision that clearly predated the definition  of  insurmountable
    obstacles that I have set out  above.   However,  Lord  Justice  Sedley
    observed that:-

         "19. In adapting this reasoning to a case  like  the  present,  the
             Tribunal will be considering not returning someone to  his  or
             her country of origin but forcefully someone lawfully  settled
             here to choose between losing his  family  or  migrating  with
             them to a country which may not be his own.  [The  Rules],  it
             must be recalled, embraces a wide spectrum of  status  in  the
             word 'settled': it includes both British  citizens  living  in
             the UK and nationals of other countries  who  have  indefinite
             leave to enter or remain  here.   There  can  be  a  world  of
             difference,  depending  on  the   particular   case,   between
             expecting a foreign national,  albeit  now  settled  here,  to
             return with his family to his country of  origin  or  move  to
             another country, and expecting a British citizen who has lived
             here all of his life and has an  inalienable  right  of  abode
             here to live and work and find  accommodation  in   a  foreign
             country or forfeit his marriage."

    Those were, in essence, the circumstances that the judge considered  at
    [19] and in his reasoning thereafter.  Consequently  whilst  the  judge
    gave brief reasons, those reasons were supported by the evidence before
    the judge which he had accepted and therefore it was open to the  judge
    to reach the conclusion that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK and that  he  did  not  make  any
    error of law in that conclusion. Even if it could properly be said that
    it was a generous decision it was not  one  that  disclosed  any  legal
    error for the reasons set out above.  The decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not demonstrate an error of  law;  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

