
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05877/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 23rd February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                          miss Lisa Chisha Kapopole
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Yussefian (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zambia born on 13th September 1984.   The
    Appellant claimed to have entered the United Kingdom  on  19th  January
    2006 on a category C visitor's  visa  valid  from  22nd  December  2005
    expiring on  22nd  June  2006.   Thereafter  the  Appellant  became  an
    overstayer.  On 20th February 2013 the Appellant  sought  a  derivative
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence as  the  primary
    carer of a British  citizen.   That  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State by Notice of Refusal dated 13th January  2014.   The
    Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Designated Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Digney sitting at Hatton Cross on 6th August  2014.
    In a determination promulgated on  26th  August  2014  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 2. On 2nd September 2014 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 6th October Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McClure granted permission to appeal.  Judge  McClure  noted  that  the
    grounds of the application seeking permission asserted that:-

      a) That the judge made improper, unreasoned and  generalised  findings
         that, if the Appellant were required to leave the  United  Kingdom,
         her sisters would look after the child.  There  was  no  evidential
         basis for that finding and accordingly  the  judge  was  acting  on
         assumption and speculation.

      b) That the judge failed to put such  matters  to  the  witnesses  and
         failed to obtain evidence that they would look after the child.

      c) That the judge failed to give  sufficient  reasons  for  concluding
         that the Appellant's sisters had not been truthful when they stated
         that they would not be able to care for the British  citizen  child
         Jeremiah.

 3. Judge McClure noted that the Appellant  is  the  mother  of  a  British
    citizen child and that that child was 5 years old.  He  noted  that  it
    was claimed that in accordance with Section 15A and Section 4A  of  the
    2006 Regulations that the Appellant is entitled to a  derivative  right
    of residence and a residence card to acknowledge that.  He  noted  that
    the judge found that the fact that the Appellant's two sisters lived in
    the United Kingdom meant that they could and would look after the child
    if the Appellant were forced to leave the UK.  He concluded that it was
    arguable that in assessing the issue of  whether  the  British  citizen
    child would have to leave the United  Kingdom,  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to assess the evidence before him and made assumptions without
    the necessary factual basis.

 4. On 14th October 2014 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal.  The Secretary of State's response contended that the judge had
    found that the Appellant's child would not have to leave the UK on  the
    basis that there are people who could care for him in this country such
    as aunts and his mother's partner.  The Secretary of State  noted  that
    it was argued that these points were not put  to  the  Appellant.   The
    matter thereafter was referred to Judge McClure this time sitting as  a
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge on 9th December 2014 and he concluded  that
    there were material errors of law in the decision of  Designated  Judge
    Digney, set it aside and remitted the matter back for a  fresh  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The appeal thereafter then came back before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grant sitting at Hatton Cross on 8th July 2015.  In a decision
    and reasons promulgated on 22nd July 2015 the Appellant's appeal  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations was dismissed.

 6. On 3rd August 2015 further Grounds of Appeal were lodged to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:-

      i) That whilst the judge had placed a great deal of  weight  upon  the
         principles set out in the authority of Hines v the  London  Borough
         of Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660 the judge  had  properly  failed  to
         apply the case law and that he had made no  assessment  as  to  the
         welfare of the British child and whether the quality or standard of
         life would be impaired should the Appellant  be  removed  from  the
         United Kingdom.

     ii) The judge had erred in finding that the evidence of the Appellant's
         sisters should not be accepted without providing a cogent reason as
         to why this should be the case.

    iii) That the judge made findings without  clear  reasoning  which  were
         irreconcilable with the facts as set out at paragraphs 20 to 23  of
         the Grounds of Appeal.

 7. On 5th November 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Grimmett noted that the  grounds  asserted
    that the judge had failed to make an assessment of the welfare  of  the
    British child and whether his quality or  standard  of  life  would  be
    impaired should his mother be removed.  Judge Grimmett  indicated  that
    he was satisfied that that was  arguable  as  although  the  judge  had
    referred to Hines  v  the  London  Borough  of  Lambeth  there  was  no
    consideration of the impact on his quality or standard of life  due  to
    the absence of his mother.

 8. On 17th November 2015 a further Rule 24 response was filed  and  served
    by the Secretary of State opposing the Appellant's appeal.  In  summary
    the Respondent submitted that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    directed himself appropriately and that the judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for the finding that the Appellant's son could remain in the UK
    with his extended family of which it appeared from  the  evidence  that
    there was family life with the Appellant's partner and her sisters.

 9. It is against that extensive background that the appeal comes before me
    to determine whether or not there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellant  appears  by
    her instructed legal representative Mr  Yussefian.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Tufan.

The Authority

10. It is useful herein before referring to the submissions/discussions  of
    the legal representatives to give some consideration to the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in the case of Maureen Hines v the  London  Borough
    of Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660.  That authority addressed the test that
    a judge should ask himself when dealing with the question of whether an
    EU citizen child would be forced  to  leave  the  EU  as  a  matter  of
    practicality and whether the quality of life  of  the  child  would  be
    impaired by the removal of the non-EU citizen.

11. The test is set out at paragraph 22 in the judgment of Vos LJ where the
    learned judge states:-

         "22. In my judgment, however, the welfare of the  child  cannot  be
             the paramount  consideration  because  that  would  be  flatly
             inconsistent with the statutory  test  which  is  whether  the
             child would be unable to reside in the UK if the mother  left.
             It will, in normal circumstances, be contrary to the interests
             of a child for one of its parent carers, whether  the  primary
             carer or not, to be taken away from him or her.

         23.  I have no doubt that  the  test  applicable  under  Regulation
             15A(4A)(c)  is  clear  and  can  be   given   effect   without
             contravening EU law.  The reviewer has to consider the welfare
             of the British citizen child  and  the  extent  to  which  the
             quality or standard of his life will be impaired if the non-EU
             citizen is required to leave.  That is all for the purpose  of
             answering the question whether the child would, as a matter of
             practicality, be unable to remain in the UK.  This requires  a
             consideration amongst other things, of the  impact  which  the
             removal of the primary carer would have on the child, and  the
             alternative care available for the child.

         24.  There was much discussion  in  argument  as  to  the  kind  of
             alternative care that might be required in order to avoid  the
             conclusion that the child would be forced to leave.  It  would
             be undesirable, I  think,  for  the  court  to  lay  down  any
             guidelines in this regard, but it was, as I have said,  common
             ground that an available adoption  or  foster  care  placement
             would not be adequate for this purpose.  That is  because  the
             quality of the  life  of  the  child  would  be  so  seriously
             impaired by his removal from his mother to be placed in foster
             care that he would be effectively compelled to  leave.   I  do
             not, however, think that all things being equal the removal of
             a child from the care of one responsible parent to the care of
             another responsible  parent  would  normally  be  expected  so
             seriously to impair his quality and standard of life  that  he
             would be effectively forced to leave the UK."

Submissions/Discussion

12. Mr Yussefian submits that the guidance set out above in Hines  was  not
    applied.  He takes me to paragraph 31 of  Judge  Grant's  determination
    explaining that the judge has  made  no  reference  whatsoever  to  the
    quality of life of Jeremiah and that he has failed to apply the test as
    set out within paragraph 23 of Hines.  He  submits  that  there  was  a
    requirement upon the judge to assess these factors and that alternative
    care would affect the quality of life of the child.   He  submits  that
    the judge has approached the matter in the wrong way,  namely  that  he
    has focused on alternative care and has given no consideration for  the
    discernible care and the effect of the child being separated  from  his
    mother and that it is imperative that an assessment be carried  out  as
    set out as in paragraph 24 of Hines and that the judge has failed to do
    this.

13. Whilst Mr Yussefian acknowledges that no explanation  is  given  within
    Hines as to why the quality of life would be so  impaired  by  a  child
    being placed in foster care, he  emphasises  that  the  authority  does
    concentrate on the trauma of being removed from  the  mother  and  that
    that would affect the quality of  life  of  the  minor,  Jeremiah.   He
    submits that such trauma is not restricted to physical trauma but  also
    emotional and mental wellbeing and that he submits placing the child in
    the care of aunts could be construed as being similar  to  foster  care
    insofar as the aunts are not direct relatives or legal  guardians.   He
    takes me to the Home Office guidelines valid from  7th  April  2015  on
    derivative rights  of  residence  and  reference  therein  as  to  what
    constitutes direct relatives, pointing out that:-

         "If there is no evidence that there is another direct  relative  in
         the UK who is currently caring for the child, or is able to  assume
         caring responsibilities, for the purpose of the application you can
         accept there is no alternative care available."

14. He reminds me that the child was abandoned by his father  and  that  to
    put him in care of aunts would not be to his benefit,  submitting  that
    the contact he has had with his aunts is  very  limited.   He  contends
    therefore that it was incumbent upon the judge to assess the quality of
    life of the child if removed from his mother and that he has failed  to
    do so and that the judge has only looked at the practical  alternatives
    and that the failure to carry out the necessary assessment  constitutes
    a material error of law.

15. So far as other purported material  errors  of  law,  Mr  Yussefian  is
    content to rely on the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits that  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's sisters should not be accepted without providing  a  cogent
    reason as to why this is the case and that the judge has failed  to  do
    so, and that to find that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  sisters
    should not be believed simply because they provided witness  statements
    for the purpose  of  an  appeal  is  perverse,  otherwise  all  witness
    statements would be classed  as  "self-serving"  and  the  evidence  of
    witnesses could be dismissed as not credible on that basis  alone.   He
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  failed  to  take  into
    account the oral evidence  of  the  witnesses,  all  of  whom  answered
    questions directed to them by both the Respondent  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  Finally  he  relies  on  the  submission  set  out  at
    paragraphs 20 to 24 of the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  judge  made
    findings without clear reasoning and which were irreconcilable with the
    facts specifically as to the ability of  the  Appellant's  partner  and
    sister to look after the child.

16. Mr Tufan states that the  judge  correctly  noted  the  test  and  that
    paragraph 23 of Hines must be read in conjunction  with  paragraph  22.
    He submits that that analysis is  for  answering  the  question  as  to
    whether or not a child can remain in the UK and that at paragraph 23 in
    Hines the judge stated that a child could live  with  extended  family.
    He submits that the precise issue in this case is whether  or  not  the
    child can leave the UK and that the judge has addressed this.

17. In brief response Mr Yussefian accepts that the judge has quoted  Hines
    but he has  not  applied  it  and  that  quality  of  life  must  be  a
    consideration.  He submits the judge has not followed  Hines  and  that
    even if welfare is not  of  a  paramount  consideration  it  remains  a
    consideration and that the  judge  has  failed  to  address  this.   He
    submits that had the judge done so there may have  been  a  substantial
    difference in the finding at the end of the day and that the  error  of
    law is material.  He asked me to remit the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

The Law

18.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

19. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

20. This matter has a lengthy history which I have set out in some  detail.
    The guiding feature relates to the application of the test as  set  out
    within Hines v the London Borough of Lambeth and  whether  or  not  the
    judge has applied it.  It is clear the judge has given consideration to
    Hines but I agree that it  is  incumbent  upon  a  judge  to  give  due
    consideration to the extent to which the quality  or  standard  of  the
    child's life would be impaired if the non-EU citizen (in this case  the
    Appellant/his mother) is required to leave.  The judge  has  failed  to
    address this issue in his decision.

21. I acknowledge that the judge has said that the child  could  live  with
    his aunt despite testimony to the contrary given orally before him  and
    set out at paragraph 30 of his decision.  It is important to give  full
    and proper consideration to the Home Office  guidelines  on  derivative
    rights of residence.  The quote recited  above  that  if  there  is  no
    evidence that there is  another  direct  relative  in  the  UK  who  is
    currently  caring  for  the   child,   or   able   to   assume   caring
    responsibilities,  for  the  purpose  of  the  application,  then   the
    Secretary of State can accept there is no alternative  care  available,
    has not been considered and the Tribunal has not addressed  the  matter
    as to whether or not in the particular circumstances  of  this  case  a
    sister of the Appellant could be construed as being a direct  relative.
    My initial thoughts are that they are not.  Direct relatives  must,  by
    the very implication of the terms, make specific reference to a parent.
     However circumstances may well arise in specific cases such  that  the
    relationship with an extended family member that the  child's  physical
    and emotional needs would in some circumstances be met.  Each case must
    be fact-specific.

22. The judge in this instant case has failed to carry out  that  extremely
    detailed but necessary analysis.  He has made assumptions  contrary  to
    the evidence that was placed before him, imparting his own  views  over
    and  above  that  of  the  testimony  that  he  has  heard.   In   such
    circumstances the decision is unsafe.  Whilst I am reluctant  for  this
    matter to have to continue further, I agree with the  submissions  made
    by Mr Yussefian that it is necessary for  the  Tribunal  to  apply  the
    principles in Hines and give reasoning for them rather than  to  merely
    recite them, and that the judge in this instant case  has  not  applied
    the guidance nor  given  any  due  consideration  to  the  effect  that
    separation would have on the emotional and/or mental ties  between  the
    child and his mother.  In  such  circumstances  the  decision  contains
    material errors of law and is unsafe and I set aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal,  remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and give directions herein with regard  to  the  rehearing  of
    this matter.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

 2) That the matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of
    two hours to be heard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than
    Immigration Judge Grant.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle  of  subjective  and  objective   evidence   including   witness
    statements upon which they  intend  to  rely  at  least  fourteen  days
    prehearing.

 4)  That  in  the  event  that  the  Appellant's  solicitors  require   an
    interpreter to be present for any of their witnesses  then  they  must,
    within fourteen  days  of  receipt  of  these  directions,  notify  the
    Tribunal of this and give details  of  the  language  required  of  the
    interpreter.

No anonymity order was made and no application is made to vary that order.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
