
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/05072/2015
     IA/05073/2015
     ia/05074/2015
     ia/05075/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 August 2016                             |On 3 October 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                 madina [h]
                                  hasan [a]
                                     z A
                                     A A
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr N Ahmed of Counsel instructed by Warwick
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of  Bahrain.   The  first  two  appellants,
    hereafter referred to A1 and A2, are husband and wife.  The  third  and
    fourth appellants, hereafter referred  to  as  A3  and  A4,  are  their
    children born in April 2004 and September  2008  respectively.     They
    appeal against decisions  of  the  respondent  dated  22  January  2015
    refusing to vary their leave to remain and to remove  them  by  way  of
    directions under s.47 of the IANA 2006.  Their cases come before me for
    re-making of the decision because on 27 June  2016  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge concluded that an earlier decision made by a First-tier  Tribunal
    judge was vitiated by legal error and set it aside  for  re-hearing  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

2.   I mention at the  outset  that  the  appellants'  grounds  contained  a
    request to have them treated as amended so as to add the point that:

         "A1, A2 and A3 will complete 10 years lawful residence on 18.09.16.
          The  appellants  will  satisfy  the  requirements  under  Appendix
         FM/Immigration Rules and are entitled to leave  to  remain  on  the
         basis of 10 years' lawful residence.  The Home  Office  IDIs  allow
         consideration/grant of an application on basis of 10 years'  lawful
         residence [28 days or less before the required qualifying period is
         completed]".

3.   I decline to accept this request for amendment, not just because  there
    was ample time for it to have been requested earlier, but  because  the
    fact of the matter is that these three appellants have not even made an
    application under the relevant long residence provisions and the  Upper
    Tribunal is not seized  of  any  decision  made  in  respect  of  these
    provisions.

4.   The  appellants'  grounds  otherwise  asked  that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    consider the four appeals individually treating the appeals of the  two
    children as a "start point". For the purposes of this  appeal  I  shall
    proceed accordingly to treat the appeals of A3 and A4 as a start-point,
    although of course it is necessary to bear in mind that each  appellant
    is a member of a single family.

5.   As regards A3, it was submitted that she met the requirements  of  para
    276ADE(iv) in that at the date of application she was under 18 and  had
    lived continuously in the United Kingdom for over eights years.  It was
    submitted that it was unjustified  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  her
    application under this provision on the basis of a failure to show that
    "it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave  the  UK".
    At the date of hearing she was 12 years old and, in  contrast  to  many
    cases dealt with under this provision, she and her  family  had  always
    been in the United Kingdom lawfully.  A3 was  integrated  into  the  UK
    culture and society.  All of her education had been in the UK.  She had
    made excellent progression in her  studies.   Her  first  language  was
    English.  She was a "qualifying child" within the meaning of s.117D  of
    the NIAA 2002.   Further, it was submitted that "A4 who is the  sibling
    of A3 was born here and has also lived in the UK for over seven years".

6.   The appellants' submission took particular issue with the  respondent's
    assessment that the best interests of A3 would be to return to  Bahrain
    with her parents and to adjust to life in her own  country.   This  was
    said to be a misapplication of the  principle  since  if  one  were  to
    accept this argument every child applicant would fail under the Rules.

7.   The appellants' ground also contended that the  respondent  had  failed
    to apply her own IDIs which at the date  of  decision  stipulated  that
    where a child had been living in the UK  for  more  than  seven  years,
    strong reasons had to exist to justify refusal.

8.   The appellants' grounds also submitted that there was  ample  case  law
    to the effect that (as was stated by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  EM  and
    Others (returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC)) "in the absence of
    countervailing factors, residence of over 7 years with  children  well-
    integrated into the educational system in the UK is an  indicator  that
    the welfare of the child favours regularisation of the status of mother
    and children".  Also cited were SC (Article 8 - in accordance with  the
    law)  Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056 (IAC) and MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705.

9.   As regards A4, the submissions advanced in support of A3  were  adopted
    in their entirety and repeated, it being pointed out that she had  been
    born in the UK and had lived here continuously for almost eight years.

10.  In relation to the first two appellants, it was pointed out that  there
    were no provisions within the Immigration  Rules  to  cater  for  leave
    being  granted  to  both  parents  in  circumstances  where  a  child's
    application succeeds under para 276ADE(1)(vi), but as clarified by  the
    Upper Tribunal in PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined  family  claims)
    Sri Lanka ]2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC), such cases stood  to  be  considered
    under Article 8.  It was submitted that the parents' circumstances were
    compelling and exceptional because there was clearly an existent family
    life and decisions amounting to an interference with that  family  life
    and, as regards proportionality, the parents satisfied the criteria set
    out in s.117B(6): see Treebhawon &  Others  (section  117B)(6))  [2015]
    UKUT 674 (IAC) and MA (Pakistan).

11.  Mrs Pettersen for the respondent submitted that A3 and A4's cases  fell
    to be refused under the Rules because it had not  been  shown  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect them to return to  Bahrain  with  their
    parents.  Their parents were in the UK because the first appellant  had
    been granted limited leave to enter as a student, which was a temporary
    capacity.  Unless able to show unreasonableness of return, A3 could not
    succeed under either the Immigration Rules or s.117B(6).  Being  unable
    to show unreasonableness in respect of A3, the case of PD & Others  was
    of no assistance to the parents or indeed to A4 who did  not  have  the
    requisite seven years at the date of application anyway.

12.  It is clear that the cases of all four  appellants  hinge  to  a  large
    extent on whether A3 succeeds under para 276ADE since if she does, then
    this  would  be  a  very  strong  reason  for  finding   the   family's
    circumstances considered as a whole to be compelling. Conversely, if A3
    does not succeed under para 276ADE it will be more  difficult  for  the
    family to show compelling circumstances, not least because  failure  to
    establish eligibility under the Rules governing Article 8 adds  to  the
    weight that has to be attached to the public interest in the Article  8
    balancing exercise: see e.g. SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

13.   I  am  not  persuaded  that  A3  meets  the   requirements   of   para
    276ADE(1)(iv).  I do not consider A3 has shown that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect her to return to Bahrain with her parents.  It  is
    true that her immigration history is one of unbroken  lawful  residence
    but it was as the dependent of a student parent and carried with it  no
    expectation of being permitted to stay under the Rules.  The respondent
    was entitled to rely on the fact that A3 would be removed together with
    her parents and sibling and be then able to continue  to  enjoy  family
    life in Bahrain as a member of this family.  Whatever the  pre-existing
    policy was as regards seven years, the Secretary of State decided  when
    amending the Rules to incorporate the additional  requirement  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the children to return abroad.

14.  Mr Ahmed is correct to argue that in assessing such reasonableness  the
    respondent and now the Upper Tribunal is obliged to apply the principle
    of the best interests of the child and  to  apply  it  in  a  fair  and
    material manner.  The interconnected nature of these  two  matters  has
    been emphasised by the Court of Appeal in its MA  (Pakistan)  judgment.
    However, I cannot agree that  the  respondent  failed  to  assess  this
    matter correctly. In my assessment the assessment of the best interests
    of A3 (and A4) requires a balancing exercise taking account of  a  wide
    range of factors. On the one side, the fact that  A3  and  her  parents
    have been in the UK lawfully and that she has been in the UK for over 7
    years at the date of application are  weighty  factors  pointing  to  a
    conclusion that it would be in A3's best interests for  the  family  to
    remain in the UK. However, I consider factors  pointing  in  the  other
    direction  to  carry  considerably  more  weight.  In  this  connection
    factors I find to be  of particular importance include  the  following:
    that A's leave to remain has always  been  dependent  on  that  of  her
    mother and that leave has been limited leave for the temporary purposes
    of study; that A3 is still only  11  years  (that  is  relevant   given
    established case law emphasising that  the  child's  ties  outside  the
    family environment are not as formed at that  age  as  in  the  teenage
    years); that despite not speaking  Arabic  the  children  are  Bahraini
    nationals and that is their heritage; that it would not  be  compulsory
    for A3 to wear the Abaya; that the children's parents are likely to  be
    able to find work to support them there; and that the family  would  be
    returned to Bahrain together.

15.  I also attach significant weight to the fact that the  four  appellants
    had  travelled  back  to  Bahrain  on  a   holiday   in   circumstances
    demonstrating that they have strong family  ties  there  and  that  the
    whole family values its Bahraini heritage.   To  the  extent  that  the
    first two appellants sought to suggest before the First-tier judge they
    had had difficulties with the regime and feared that A would be  forced
    to wear the Abaya, the judge clearly did not accept their  evidence  to
    that effect and the appellants' grounds before me did not  furnish  any
    good reason why I should take a different view.

16.  Mr Ahmed's submissions included two general points about the Rules  and
    also about the respondent's assessment that the best interests  of  the
    children lay with staying with their parents by returning  to  Bahrain.
    As regards the Rules, Mr Ahmed  pointed  out  that  the  reasonableness
    requirement should be construed so that it  was  not  too  stringent  a
    test.  If it were applied stringently that would  be  contrary  to  the
    overall purpose of the Rules and the fact that for young  persons  over
    18 who had lived half their life in the UK there was no  reasonableness
    test.  Given that  Mr  Ahmed  accepted  that  he  was  not  mounting  a
    challenge to the vires of para 276ADE(iv), I need  not  address  why  I
    think such an a priori challenge must fail except  to  point  out  that
    there is clearly an objective basis  for  distinguishing  the  criteria
    relating to seven years and that  relating  to  half  a  person's  life
    since, for example, in the latter context it is a given that there  has
    been a period of residence outside the UK.  By definition someone  over
    18 who has spent half his or her life in the  UK  must  have  spent  at
    least two years longer than seven and that is explanation enough  at  a
    policy level for why this different provision  has  no  "reasonable  to
    expect" test.

17.  What of Mr Ahmed's submission that the  respondent's  approach  to  the
    best interests of the child assessment was legally  flawed  because  if
    that assessment always considered that the child's best  interests  lay
    with his or her parent(s), no one could ever succeed.   In my view this
    submission confuses assessment and outcome.  It is clear  from  leading
    authorities  such  as  AJ  (India)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ   1191   and   EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 that: (i) the best interests  of  the
    child assessment requires a balancing exercise taking  into  account  a
    number of factors; and (ii) that depending on the facts the outcome  of
    that assessment may be that the best interests  of  the  child  are  to
    remain in the UK with their parents  or  it  may  be  that  their  best
    interests lie with staying with  their  parents  in  their  country  of
    origin or elsewhere.  An example of the latter  scenario  arose  in  AJ
    (India).  In the instant case it was the respondent's assessment -  and
    it is also my assessment- that the balance of factors is such that  the
    child's best interests do not require them to remain in the UK but lies
    with them returning to Bahrain with their parents  as  a  family  unit,
    free to resume enjoyment of their family life there.

18.  The only point that has given me pause for  thought  in  re-making  the
    decision in this case is the one highlighted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce when granting permission regarding the fact that Home Office IDIs
    at the time of the decision required strong reasons for not considering
    seven years as a reason  to  allow  parents  to  remain.   Clearly  the
    refusal decisions made by the respondent do not express  themselves  in
    this language when arguably  they  should  have.   However,  I  am  not
    persuaded that the respondent's decisions were in conflict with decided
    authority addressing  the  significance  of  the  IDIs.   As  Elias  LJ
    conceded in MA (Pakistan) at [46] the position established by the Court
    of Appeal goes no further than stating that "the fact that a child  has
    been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant  weight  when
    carrying out the proportionality exercise" and it was that which he saw
    to be the essential effect  of  the  published  guidance  in  the  IDIs
    expressly stating that once the seven years requirement is  met,  there
    must be "strong reasons" for refusing leave.  Elias LJ pointed  out  in
    [47] that assessing reasonableness "will depend upon a careful analysis
    of the nature and extent of the links in the UK and in the  country  in
    which it is proposed [the affected person(s)] should return".  In  this
    connection Elias LJ  cited  the  guidance  in  EV  (Philippines).   The
    established position as set out by Elias LJ was also one that took into
    account such factors as the age of the children bearing  in  mind  that
    disruption becomes more serious as they get older.

19.  Assessing the appeal for myself, I am satisfied  that  there  are  very
    strong reasons for concluding that the best interests of A3  would  not
    be undermined or disrupted by returning with her  parents  to  Bahrain.
    The factors making it reasonable to expect the children  (both  A3  and
    A4)  and the parents to return to  Bahrain  together  clearly  outweigh
    those in favour of them being  granted  leave  to  remain.   To  decide
    otherwise would effectively be to say  that  a  student  family  should
    succeed under the Rules simply on the basis that one  of  the  children
    has been here lawfully seven years. There were no  other  factors  that
    point in any significant way to this family being able to remain on the
    basis of A3's best interests.

20.  To this point I have focused on the appeal of A3,  but,  as  recognised
    in the appellants' grounds, the  appeals  of  A4  and  A1  and  A2  are
    inevitably less strong because they cannot bring themselves within  any
    of the provisions of para 276ADE (in A4's case she did not  have  seven
    years residence at the date of application) and in substance  all  four
    appeals depended on the issue of whether it was  reasonable  to  expect
    all four to return to Bahrain together.

21.  In PD the reason why the parents had a strong case  outside  the  Rules
    was because one of their children met the requirements of para  276ADE.
    That is not the  case  here.   It  is  clear  that  not  only  did  the
    appellants all fail to meet the requirements of the Rules but that they
    have not established any compelling circumstance outside the Rules.

22.  For the above reasons I conclude:

As previously found, the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred  in  law
and his decision has been set aside;

The decision I re-make is that the appellants' appeals are dismissed.

I have made an anonymity order in respect of the two  children.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                               Date 3 October 2016

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
