


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/05153/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 4 September 2014                    |On 5 September 2014       |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MS NAATEKIE CLOTTEYFIO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Garrod, Counsel
      (instructed by Justice and Law Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted on 18 July 2014  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
           against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  F
           Walters allowing the Respondent's appeal seeking the issue of  a
           residence card under regulation 7, alternatively  regulation  8,
           of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as
           amended)  ("the  EEA  Regulations").   The   determination   was
           promulgated on 3 July 2014.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Ghana, born on 27 January  1980.
           She claimed that she was married by proxy  to  an  EEA  national
           exercising free movement rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
           Respondent had no other basis of stay in the United Kingdom.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Saffer  because  he
           considered it arguable that the judge had erred  by  failing  to
           apply TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014]  UKUT  00316
           (IAC).


      4.    By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
           in the form of a letter dated 25  August  2014,  the  Respondent
           indicated that she opposed the  application  for  permission  to
           appeal.


      5.    Mr  Tufan  for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  judge  had
           manifestly failed to apply Kareem (Proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)
           [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) and TA and Others (above).  The validity
           of the proxy marriage relied on depended on the  home  state  of
           the EEA national.  There was no finding on that central issue.


      6.    Mr Garrod for the Respondent relied on  his  skeleton  argument.
           He submitted that Kareem and TA and  Others  were  both  wrongly
           decided  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
           marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038  (IAC)  showed
           that the burden of proof of invalidity of a marriage  relied  on
           by the spouse of an EEA national fell on the Secretary of State.
            Papajorgji (above) had  been  cited  with  approval  elsewhere,
           e.g., in the High Court.  Kareem had other deficiencies but even
           it supported the judge's findings in the present appeal.  In any
           event, the judge  had  effectively  found  in  the  Respondent's
           favour on the Regulation 8(5) issue, the durable relationship.


      7.    The tribunal indicated at this  point  that  it  was  unable  to
           uphold the  judge's  findings  on  the  validity  of  the  proxy
           marriage relied on by the Respondent.  The judge had not had the
           benefit of TA and Others,  which  had  clarified  the  need  for
           evidence from the sponsor's EEA state as to the recognition  and
           status of the proxy marriage. There was an inadvertent  material
           error of law in his approach to the issue of recognition of  the
           marriage in question.  That part of his determination  would  be
           set aside and remade.  The appeal based  on  marriage  would  be
           dismissed.


      8.    As to the subsidiary or alternative claim  based  on  Regulation
           8(5), Mr Tufan submitted that there had been no adequate finding
           made and so that part of the appeal would have  to  be  reheard.
           Mr Garrod's position was that at [27] of the determination,  the
           judge had made it abundantly clear that, had he  been  asked  to
           consider the Regulation 8(5) claim, he would have said "I am  in
           little doubt that, given the evidence before me,  I  would  have
           found in favour of the Appellant".  Mr Garrod submitted that the
           tribunal should adopt the same approach as was taken in  TA  and
           Others and remit that part of the case to the Secretary of State
           so  that  the  discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)   could   be
           exercised.


        9.  The tribunal agreed with Mr Garrod.  On a fair  reading  of  the
           determination, the judge  had  indicated  what  his  alternative
           finding would have been on the durable relationship issue.   The
           issue had been addressed in the reasons for refusal  letter  and
           thus had to be  determined  by  the  tribunal.   The  result  of
           setting aside the judge's legal findings as to the  validity  of
           the proxy marriage  brought  into  play  his  clear  alternative
           finding.  No rehearing was necessary.


      10.   The tribunal finds that the judge found that there was a durable
           relationship akin to marriage between the original Appellant and
           her  EEA  national  sponsor,  a  finding  which  is  accordingly
           preserved.  There was no indication that  regulation  17(4)  had
           been considered by the  Secretary  of  State,  because  she  had
           denied that a durable relationship existed.    The  Respondent's
           application must accordingly be returned  to  the  Secretary  of
           State for that discretion to be exercised.




      DECISION


      There was a material error of law in part of the First-tier Tribunal's
      determination, which is set aside to  the  extent  that  the  original
      Appellant's appeal under Regulation 8(5) was not  finally  determined.
      The following decision is substituted:


      The original Appellant's appeal under Regulation 7 is dismissed


      The original Appellant's appeal under Regulation 8(5)  is  allowed  to
      the limited extent that the Secretary of State's mandatory  discretion
      under Regulation 17(4) has  not  yet  been  exercised.   The  original
      application is accordingly returned to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
      Regulation 17(4) to be applied in the light of the  findings  in  this
      determination.


      Signed                                  Dated


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
      FEE AWARD


      Although the original Appellant's appeal has succeeded  in  part,  the
      Appellant was responsible for the difficulties with her application to
      the Secretary of State.  There is accordingly no fee award.


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell






















































































































































































































































































