
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05677/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2016                |On 15th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                 MR ALEX [S]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Gunamal of Mentor Legal LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Fletcher-Hill promulgated on  5th  February  2016  in  which  she
    dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State on 22nd January 2015, to refuse leave to remain  the
    UK on the basis of the appellant's family and private life.



Background

 2. The appellant is a Brazilian national.  He entered the UK illegally  on
    20th October 2001  and  was  temporarily  released  by  the  respondent
    pending an interview.  The appellant failed  to  attend  the  interview
    that was to take place the following day,  and  did  not  come  to  the
    attention of the respondent again until 22nd March 2014.  On that  day,
    the appellant was arrested by Police, charged with common  assault  and
    criminal damage, and taken into custody to Brixton Police station.

 3. On 24th November 2014, the appellant made an application for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on human rights grounds under  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    appellant stated that he has been living in the UK for  over  13  years
    and that he has a son, who was born in the UK on 13th  September  2009.
    The appellant confirmed that he was not married to the  mother  of  his
    child, who is also a Brazilian national. By letter dated  13th  January
    2015, the appellant's representatives provided further  information  to
    the  respondent  about  his  relationship  with  his  son.   They  also
    confirmed that the appellant had been convicted, following a trial,  on
    29th December 2014.

 4. The appellant's application was refused for the reasons set  out  in  a
    decision dated 22nd  January  2015.   The  reasons  are  summarised  at
    paragraphs [3] to [10] and [12] to [24] of the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and I do not repeat them in this decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fletcher-Hill

 5. Both parties were represented at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Judge records the background to the appeal at paragraphs
    [1]  to  [24]  of  her  decision.   She  refers  to  the  evidence  and
    submissions before her at paragraphs [28] to [38] of her decision.

 6. The findings of fact are set out at paragraphs  [39]  to  [56]  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  A succinct summary  of  the
    appeal is to be found at paragraph [39];

         "In summary  the  appellant  seeks  leave  to  remain  outside  the
         Immigration Rules in primary reliance on the fact  that  he  has  a
         child born in 2009 both of whose parents are Brazilian citizens and
         with whom he lived as a family with his  mother  from  2009-  early
         2013. When the relationship between the parents broke  down  Marcia
         left the family home with their son who continued to live with  and
         be cared for by her. Since summer 2013 the appellant states that he
         saw his son by arrangement with his mother ..."

 7. At paragraph [39] the Judge also states that there was "no  documentary
    corroboration" of the  appellant's  claim  that  he  sees  his  son  by
    arrangement with his  mother,  before  the  Tribunal.   Insofar  as  is
    material to the appeal before me, the Judge also found:

         "41. The appellant seeks to remain in the UK on the  basis  of  his
         family life with G but I find that he has not lived with him  in  a
         family unit since early 2013 when he would  have  been  just  three
         years old. There is no likelihood that  he  will  re-establish  his
         relationship with his mother and therefore live with them again  in
         a family unit.

         42.  There is absolutely no satisfactory  documentary  evidence  of
         continued contact with G after leaving the family home at  the  end
         of April 2013.

         43.  Given that the appellant's son was born in 2009 and is  now  6
         years old, and had they been in contact over the last 2-3 years  it
         would be normal to expect there to be letters, cards  and  pictures
         drawn at school or  nursery  and  given  to  his  father.  No  such
         evidence of contact was before the tribunal. Furthermore, there  is
         no letter of support from the  son's  school  or  evidence  of  any
         participation in his life or attendance at school open evenings. In
         fact, there is no evidence that he has continued to play  any  part
         in his son's life in recent years.

         44.  Whether he is in the UK or in Brazil he will be able  to  keep
         in contact with G by modern means of communication if he chooses to
         contact him.

         45.  I do not find that this appellant has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with his Brazilian son. I find that he has  not  lived
         with him as a family unit since April 2013.

         46.  There was no evidence from the child or anyone on  his  behalf
         that he wished to see the appellant.

         47.  I find that insufficient evidence has  been  provided  to  the
         tribunal in relation to any contact order made and the exercise  of
         any current access rights and  more  importantly  there  is  little
         documentary evidence of  the  appellant  taking  and  intending  to
         continue to take an active role in the upbringing of children.

         ...

         49.  I find that the child affected by this  case  lives  with  his
         mother and always has done so and that the appellant's  involvement
         in his life is much less. I find that it is in the  best  interests
         of the child to remain living with his mother as he always has done
         and in terms of the appellant, he has failed to  provide  proof  of
         any contact and continuing active role in the  life  of  his  child
         with whom he has had no family life for an  appreciable  amount  of
         time.

         ..."

 8. The Judge went on to find that there are no good grounds for permitting
    the appellant to stay in the UK outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Judge states at paragraphs [55] and [56]:

         "55. When considering the five questions posed by Lord  Bingham  in
         Razgar, whilst I accept that there will be an interference with the
         appellant's right to family and private life and that Article 8 are
         engaged, I find that the interference is in accordance with the law
         because the appellant cannot meet any of the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules for leave to remain.

         56.  I am required to consider the provisions of section  117A  and
         117B of the Immigration Act 2014 to the effect that the maintenance
         of effective immigration controls is  in  the  public  interest.  I
         accept as per the provisions of section  117B  that  the  appellant
         speaks good English and that he has for  a  time  been  financially
         independent. I record that little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
         private life established by a person at a time  when  the  person's
         immigration status is precarious as  indeed  this  appellant's  has
         been since his arrival in October 2001. I further  find  that  such
         interference is necessary in a  democratic  society  both  for  the
         economic wellbeing of the country and for  the  protection  of  the
         rights  and  freedoms  of  others  and  that  the  interference  is
         proportionate to the legitimate public ends on the  facts  of  this
         appeal."

The Grounds of Appeal

 9. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First, the  Judge  erred
    in her assessment of the appellant's evidence and in particular  failed
    to have regard to documentary evidence that was  before  the  Tribunal,
    evidencing the role that the appellant continues to play in  his  son's
    life and the contact between the appellant and his  son.   Second,  the
    Judge erred in her assessment of the impact that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant  from  the  UK  would  have  upon  the  appellant's  son   in
    particular.  It is said that the removal of  the  appellant  to  Brazil
    would lead to the severance of his family ties with  his  son,  who  is
    settled in the UK.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 18th July 2016.  The matter comes before me to consider  whether  or
    not the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge involved  the  making
    of a material error of law, and if the decision is set  aside,  to  re-
    make the decision.

11. Before me, Ms Gunamal accepts that the appellant is unable  to  succeed
    in an application under Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  She drew my attention  to  the  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal that was set out in a bundle  comprising
    28 pages.  At paragraph [32] of her decision, the Judge refers  to  the
    matters set out in the appellant's witness statement that is  at  pages
    [2] to [7] of that bundle.  In that statement, at paragraphs  [11]  and
    [12], the appellant sets out the contact that he has had with  his  son
    since he separated from his former partner.  The bundle  also  contains
    at page [12] a 'bail Form' issued by the Camberwell  Green  Magistrates
    Court on 28th May 2014 confirming  that  it  was  a  condition  of  the
    appellant's bail that he should "not  go  to/enter  London  Borough  of
    Croydon unless for childcare to pick up/drop  off  son...".    At  page
    [17] of that bundle is a letter  dated  10th  December  2014  from  the
    school that the appellant's son attends.  The letter states:

         "This is to confirm that G... (DOB 13/09/09) of ... attends  Christ
         Church School.  G ... was admitted  into  Reception  Class  on  8th
         September 2014.

         G's dad Mr Alex [S] is known to the school.  Mr  [S]  brings  G  to
         school and picks him up at the end of the day."

12. At page [15] of that bundle is another letter dated 12th June 2015 from
    the school that the appellant's son attends.  That letter states:

         "I am writing to confirm that Mr Alex [S] is known to  the  school.
         Mr [S] is the parent of GS (13/09/09) who attend this school.    Mr
         [S] is involved in his G's schooling  attending  class  assemblies,
         parent appointments and Sports Day etc.

         Mr [S] also brings G to school and picks him up at the end  of  the
         school day."

13. Finally, at pages [18] to [20] of the bundle, there  are  a  series  of
    photographs of the appellant and his son and  at  pages  [21]  to  [28]
    there is a school report, attendance  records,  and  copies  of  awards
    presented to the appellant's son by the school in July 2015.

14. Ms Gunamal submits that the Judge fails to refer to  the  evidence  set
    out in the appellant's bundle and in stating at paragraph [43]  of  her
    decision, that there is in fact no  evidence  that  the  appellant  has
    continued to play any part in his son's life in recent years, the Judge
    has plainly failed to have regard to that evidence.  Ms Gunamal submits
    that whilst it is right to say that there was no formal evidence of the
    contact arrangements in the form of a contact order,  the  contact  has
    been arranged by mutual agreement by the parents and is  therefore  not
    recorded in an order of the Court.   Ms Gunamal submits that the  Judge
    was wrong to find at paragraph [49] of her decision that the  appellant
    has failed to provide proof of any contact and continuing  active  role
    in the life of his child, with whom he has had no family  life  for  an
    appreciable amount of time.  She submits that again, what  is  said  by
    the Judge demonstrates that the Judge failed to have any regard to  the
    evidence set out in the appellant's bundle.

15. Finally, Ms Gunamal submits that the Judge, having disregarded material
    evidence, failed to properly analyse the best interests  of  the  child
    and the impact that the removal of the appellant would have,  upon  his
    son.

16. In reply, Mr Duffy adopts the Rule 24 response filed by the  respondent
    and dated 2nd August 2016.  He submits that one has  to  read  what  is
    said by the Judge at paragraph [43] of her decision,  by  reference  to
    what is said in paragraph [42].  He  submits  that  reading  paragraphs
    [42] and [43] of the decision together, it is plain  that  rather  than
    finding that there was no evidence of the role that the appellant plays
    in  his  son's  life,  the  Judge  was  concerned  that  there  was  no
    satisfactory documentary evidence of continued contact.

17. Mr Duffy submits that in any event, any error in failing  to  refer  to
    the evidence that was in the  appellant's  bundle  is  immaterial.   He
    submits that it is common ground  that  the  appellant  cannot  succeed
    under Appendix FM and paragraph 276 ADE(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    He submits that as the appellant cannot succeed under the rules,  there
    is nothing additional that enables him to mount a successful Article  8
    claim outside the Immigration Rules.  There was a paucity  of  evidence
    concerning the best interests of the child  and  the  impact  that  the
    appellant's removal would have upon his son, and it was therefore  open
    to the Judge to find, as she did at paragraph [49], that it is  in  the
    best interests of the child to remain living  with  his  mother  as  he
    always has done.

Error of Law

18. I have carefully considered the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and I am satisfied that in  a  number  of  paragraphs  the  Judge
    proceeds upon the basis that there was no evidence before  her  of  the
    contact that takes place between the appellant and his son.  The  Judge
    found at paragraph [42]  that  there  is  no  satisfactory  documentary
    evidence of continued contact between the appellant and his  son  since
    the appellant left the family home at the end of April 2013.  The Judge
    found at paragraph [43] that there was no letter of  support  from  the
    son's school or evidence of any participation in his life or attendance
    at school open evenings.  That is to ignore the evidence set out in the
    two letters from the school that were before  the  Judge.   The  letter
    dated 12th June 2015 confirms that the appellant  is  involved  in  his
    son's schooling and attends class assemblies, parents' appointments and
    sports days etc.  Both letters from the school state that the appellant
    takes his son to school and picks him up at the end of the day.

19. The Judge found at paragraph [47] that insufficient evidence  has  been
    provided to the Tribunal in relation to any contact order made and  the
    exercise of any current access rights, but as set out at paragraph [39]
    of the decision, the evidence was that the appellant  saw  his  son  by
    arrangement with his mother.  Unsurprisingly, there  was  therefore  no
    contact order before the Tribunal.  In paragraph [47]  the  Judge  also
    states that there is  little  documentary  evidence  of  the  appellant
    taking and intending  to  continue  to  take  an  active  role  in  the
    "upbringing of the children".  That again, is to  ignore  the  evidence
    that was in the appellant's bundle of the contact  that  the  appellant
    has with his son, and the assistance that he provides.

20. The Judge did not refer to the evidence  set  out  in  the  appellant's
    bundle in her decision.  There was in my judgement, evidence of contact
    between  the  appellant  and  his  son,  that  appears  to  have   been
    overlooked.  That evidence should have been addressed by the  Judge  in
    her assessment of appellant's appeal.  In  my  judgement,  the  Judge's
    failure to consider the evidence that was  adduced  by  the  appellant,
    amounts to a material error of law and the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside.

Re-making the decision

21. In re-making  the  decision,  I  remind  myself  that  insofar  as  the
    appellant challenges the decision made  by  the  respondent  under  the
    Immigration Rules, it is for the appellant to discharge the  burden  of
    proof  and  the  relevant  standard  of  proof  is   the   balance   of
    probabilities. As to Article  8,  the  burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
    appellant to show,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  he  has
    established a family and private life in the UK, and that  his  removal
    from the UK as a result of the respondent's decision,  would  interfere
    with that  right.  It  is  then  for  the  respondent  to  justify  any
    interference caused. The respondent's decision must  be  in  accordance
    with  the  law  and  must  be  a  proportionate  response  in  all  the
    circumstances. I can take into account circumstances at the date of the
    appeal hearing before me.

22. The appellant, his son and his former  partner  are  all  nationals  of
    Brazil.  There was no evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    immigration status of the appellant's son and former partner and  so  I
    must assume that neither the appellant's son  nor  his  former  partner
    have any form of settled status in the UK.  Ms.  Gunamal  accepts  that
    the appellant  is  unable  to  succeed  in  an  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules, and as set out at paragraph [39] of the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant seeks leave  to  remain  outside
    the Immigration Rules in primary reliance on the fact  that  he  has  a
    child born in 2009, in the UK.

23. The immigration rules are said to  reflect  the  respondent's  view  of
    where a fair balance should be struck between the right to respect  for
    private and family life and public interest considerations relating  to
    the  maintenance  of  an  effective  system  of   immigration   control
    (paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM). The rules should be read in a way that
    reflects  a  proper  interpretation  of  Article  8  of  the   European
    Convention. However, there may  some  cases  where  the  rules  do  not
    address relevant Article 8 issues. In such cases it may be necessary to
    consider whether there are compelling circumstances to justify granting
    leave to remain outside the immigration rules: SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387. This should be assessed by reference to  the  five  stage
    test outlined by the House of Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar  [2004]
    3 WLR 58.

24. The appellant has a child that was  born  in  the  UK,  but  who  is  a
    Brazilian  national.   There  is  no  evidence  before  me   that   the
    appellant's son has any form of leave to  remain  in  the  UK.  In  his
    witness statement, the appellant explains that he does not  know  where
    his son and former partner are living, but that a friend of his  former
    partner, has assisted him in re-establishing contact with his son.  The
    appellant states at paragraph [12] of his witness statement that  there
    is now an informal arrangement whereby the appellant is  able  to  have
    his son stay with him overnight twice a week.  The days upon which  the
    appellant has his son are not fixed.

25.  I find that notwithstanding his birth in the UK, the  appellant's  son
    is a national of Brazil.  It is uncontroversial  that  the  appellant's
    son lives with his mother and that she is  his  primary  carer.   I  am
    prepared to accept that the appellant enjoys regular contact  with  his
    and that the appellant's son has overnight contact with him.  I am also
    prepared to accept, as set out in the letters from the school that  the
    appellant is known to the school that his son  attends,  and  that  the
    appellant plays  an  active  role  in  his  son's  education  attending
    important events at the school, and assisting with the arrangements for
    dropping his son off to school and picking him up at  the  end  of  the
    school day.    There is no  evidence  before  me  as  to  any  extended
    contact that the appellant has with his son during school holidays.

26. I bear in mind that following the decisions  in  AG  (Eritrea)  v  SSHD
    [2007] INLR 407 and VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 5, the threshold
    for showing an interference with an appellant's rights under Article  8
    is not particularly high. I find that it is likely that  the  appellant
    has established a family and private life in the UK with  his  son  and
    that in all the circumstances of this  case,  removal  would  interfere
    with that life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage  the  operation
    of Article 8 (points (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five  stage  approach
    in Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349).

27. Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to  family  and
    private life.  However,  it  is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
    interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law
    that the state has a  right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
    governing the entry and residence of people into the  country  are  "in
    accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference
    with the right to private or family  life  must  be  for  a  legitimate
    reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

28. s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  requires  the
    respondent to make arrangements for  ensuring  that  her  functions  in
    relation to immigration, asylum or nationality  are  discharged  having
    regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who
    are in the UK.

29. In Azimi-Moayed & Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal in considering the  case  law
    in relation to decisions affecting children stated;

         "13. It is not the case that the  best  interests  principle  means
         that it is automatically in  the  interests  of  any  child  to  be
         permitted to remain in the United  Kingdom,  irrespective  of  age,
         length of stay, family background or other circumstances. The  case
         law of the Upper Tribunal has identified the  following  principles
         to assist in  the  determination  of  appeals  where  children  are
         affected by the decisions:

             i)   As a starting point  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children to be with both their parents and if both parents are
             being removed from the United Kingdom then the starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

             ii)  It is generally in the interests of children to have both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

             iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social  cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts
             to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and  present
             policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

             iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.

             v)   Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
             leave or the reasonable  expectation  of  leave  to  enter  or
             remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to
             give rise to private life deserving of respect in the  absence
             of exceptional  factors.  In  any  event,  protection  of  the
             economic well-being of society amply justifies removal in such
             cases."

30. The best interests of the child are to be determined  by  reference  to
    the child alone without reference to the immigration history or  status
    of either parent.  In determining whether or not, in a case such as the
    present, the need for immigration control outweighs the best  interests
    of the child, it is necessary to determine the relative strength of the
    factors which make it in their best interests to remain here; and  also
    to take account of any factors that point the other way.

31. I have had regard  to  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and I have had regard to the best interests of the
    child as a primary consideration.  As I have said, I  accept  that  the
    appellant enjoys regular contact with his son, but I do not accept,  as
    is submitted on the appellant's behalf, that removal of  the  appellant
    from the country would have a significant impact upon  the  appellant's
    son.  There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that that is
    so. The primary carer for  the  appellant's  son  is  his  mother,  and
    neither the appellant's son nor his former partner have  any  leave  to
    remain in the UK. The appellant's son is of an age at which  he  relies
    upon his parents, and particularly in this case, upon his mother.

32. In the balance on the other side, there falls to be taken into  account
    the strong weight to be given  to  the  need  to  maintain  immigration
    control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the  country  and  the
    fact that neither the appellant, his son, nor his ex-partner  have  any
    entitlement to remain in the UK.  It is  also  to  be  noted  that  the
    appellant and his former partner have remained in the UK unlawfully for
    a number of years.  They entered into a relationship and  had  a  child
    together when they had no lawful basis to be in the UK.  It  must  have
    been obvious to both the appellant and his former  partner  that  there
    was every possibility that they might not be able to raise their son in
    the UK.  I accept that the removal of the appellant from the  UK  would
    cause the appellant's son some instability to begin with, but there  is
    no reason why the  appellant  should  not  be  able  to  maintain  some
    indirect contact with his son from Brazil.  There is every  possibility
    that the appellant's son and his mother will also be removed to  Brazil
    in the fullness of time.  If that were to happen, the  appellant  would
    be able to enjoy direct contact with his son, in Brazil, the country of
    which they are all nationals.

33. In assessing whether removal in consequence of the decision would be  a
    proportionate response I am required to take into  account  the  public
    interest considerations set out in section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). I take into account that
    it is in the  public  interest  to  maintain  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control (s.117B(1)).

34. At the time that the relationship between the appellant and his  former
    partner developed, and at the time the appellant's son  was  born,  the
    appellant's immigration status can only be described  as  "precarious",
    as specified in s117B(5) of  the  NIAA  2002.  The  appellant  made  an
    application for leave to remain in  the  UK,  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, and his application for leave to remain depended on  exceptional
    circumstances outwith the Immigration Rules. Section  117B  (5)  states
    that:

         '(5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious. '

35. Interpretation of this sub-section is to be found in AM (S117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), in particular at paragraph  32  whether  it  is
    said:

         "... To put the matter shortly, it appears to us  that  a  person's
         immigration status is precarious" if their  continued  presence  in
         the UK will be dependent upon their obtaining a  further  grant  of
         leave. It is precisely because such  a  person  has  no  indefinite
         right to be in the country that the relationships they  form  ought
         to be considered in the light of the potential need  to  leave  the
         country should that grant of leave not be forthcoming".

36. I consider that this is apposite to this appeal. In my  judgement,  the
    appellant must have known that there was  every  possibility  that  the
    appellant and his son, both of whom are nationals of  Brazil,  may  not
    secure leave to remain in the UK, and that would mean that  any  family
    and private life that they establish, may have to continue in Brazil.

37. The public interest considerations outlined in section  117B  are  only
    one part of the proportionality assessment and may still be  outweighed
    if the appellant  can  show  that  there  are  particularly  compelling
    circumstances that might justify granting leave to remain  even  though
    he does not meet the requirements of the immigration rules. I find that
    there is nothing in the circumstances of this case that could  properly
    be  described   as   raising   any   such   compelling   circumstances.
    Unfortunately, the appellant's understandable desire to remain  in  the
    UK does not equate to a right to do so under the law.

38. I do not accept that the decision to remove the appellant gives rise to
    hardship, beyond matters of "mere" hardship, "mere" obstacles or "mere"
    inconvenience as specified in the case of VW  (Uganda)  v  SSHD  [20091
    EWCA Civ 5.  I  find  that  on  the  evidence  before  me,  removal  in
    consequence  of  the  decision  would   amount   to   a   proportionate
    interference with the appellant's right to private life under Article 8
    of the European Convention (points (iv) & (v) of  Lord  Bingham's  five
    stage approach in Razgar).

39. It follows that the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  or  on
    Article 8 grounds is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

41. I remake the decision and the appeal is dismissed.

42. No anonymity direction is applied for, and none is made.


Signed                                  Date

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal, no fee award is appropriate.


Signed                                  Date

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

