
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05695/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 August 2014                              |On 20 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                             mr Hargobind Singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  India  and  his  date  of  birth  is  20
    October 1976.  He made an application for indefinite leave to remain on
    6 July 2012. His case is that he had been in the UK continuously for  a
    period of at least fourteen years, having entered illegally on 15  June
    1998.

2.   The appellant's application was refused by the Secretary of State in  a
    decision of 11 February 2013   The decision-maker concluded that  there
    was insufficient evidence that the appellant  had  been  here  for  the
    period of time claimed and noted that the documents that the  appellant
    had been submitted in support of his application were dated  from  2010
    save a photocopy of a letter dated 2006,  but  this  was  not  accepted
    because it was not an original.     There  were  before  the  decision-
    maker letters of support written  by  friends  and  associates  of  the
    appellant who claimed to have known him since 1998 and 2006.   However,
    the decision-maker concluded that there was insufficient evidence  that
    the appellant had resided continuously in the UK since 1998.

3.   The  appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cohen in a decision of  1
    April 2014, following a hearing on 28  February  2014.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted to the appellant by Judge Osborne in a  decision  of
    13 June 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The First-tier Tribunal heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  Sukhbir
    Kaur (the appellant's partner and a citizen of  India)  and  a  witness
    Jasbinder Singh Johal. The evidence was that the appellant lives in the
    UK with his partner Sukhbir Kaur and their daughter (date of  birth  30
    September 2009) who like her parents is also a citizen of  India.   The
    evidence was that the appellant last had contact  with  his  family  in
    India 2000. He left India as a result of a  land  dispute.  There  were
    witness statements before the First-tier Tribunal  from  other  friends
    and acquaintances.

5.   The First-tier Tribunal made findings at paragraphs 19  to  31  of  the
    determination:

         "19. The burden of proving that the decision of the respondent  was
             not in accordance with the law and  the  relevant  Immigration
             Rules rests upon the appellant.  The standard of that proof is
             the balance of  probabilities.   The  relevant  date  for  the
             purposes of this appeal is the date of the  hearing.   I  must
             therefore look at those facts in existence on that date.


         20.  The appellant has sought to  apply  for  indefinite  leave  to
             remain based on long residence claiming to have lived  in  the
             UK in 1998.  The earliest document provided by him relates  to
             2006 and there is then a gap until  2010.   The  documentation
             provided by the appellant in support  of  his  claim  to  have
             resided in the UK  for  15  years  is  substantially  lacking.
             There  is  no  suitable   explanation   for   this   lack   of
             documentation  and   I   would   expect   substantially   more
             documentation to support a claim to have lived in the  UK  for
             in excess of  14  years  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the
             appellant  was  not  here  legally.   I  find  the   lack   of
             documentary evidence to be indicative of  the  fact  that  the
             appellant simply has not lived  in  the  UK  for  the  claimed
             period.


         21.  As indicated above, I tested the appellant's English which was
             extremely poor and showed no comprehension.  I  find  that  if
             the appellant had lived in the UK for 15 years as claimed that
             his  English  and  level  of  comprehension  would  have  been
             significantly greater than that demonstrated.  I find the lack
             of the appellants English language abilities indicative of the
             fact that he is simply not resided in the UK for 14 years plus
             as claimed.


         22.  The appellant has  produced  a  letter  from  the  Gudwara  in
             support of his appeal indicating that he had  attended  for  a
             long period of time and was a problem but member  whereas  the
             appellant indicated that he was a simple member  who  attended
             on  occasions  was  not  prominent.   I  find  this  to  be  a
             discrepancy in the evidence before  me  and  damaging  to  the
             credibility of this appeal and indicative of the fact that the
             appellant has not resided in the UK for  the  claimed  period.
             In the light of discrepancy I attach  very  little  weight  to
             this document.


         23.  The appellant has produced witnesses stating clear reasons why
             they remember meeting the appellant in  1998  related  to  the
             purchase of a car at that time by find  that  evidence  to  be
             self-serving and  attach  limited  weight  to  it.   In  these
             circumstances I  do  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
             resided in the UK continuously for 14 years as claimed by  him
             and I find that the appellant's appeal under  the  Immigration
             Rules is bound to fail.


         24.   In  the  light  of  my  findings  above,  I  find  that   the
             respondent's decision herein is in accordance with the law and
             Immigration Rules applicable.  I therefore dismiss the  appeal
             under the Immigration Rules.


         25.  I have also considered whether the  appellant's  removal  from
             the United Kingdom would breach his human rights.


         26.  In respect of Appendix FM the appellant has not resided in the
             UK for 20 years.  He has sought to claim that he  has  severed
             contacts with India and that he has no one in that country who
             can assist him or support him and that he would be  destitute.
             The appellant's wife was unable to state why the appellant had
             lost contact with his family.  In these  circumstances  reject
             the appellant's claim to of lost contact with his family.  The
             appellant speaks Punjabi and lived in India for  the  majority
             of his life including his formative years.  His wife is Indian
             and does not have current leave to remain in the UK as she has
             an application outstanding.  There is no expectation that  she
             will gain the right to reside  permanently  in  the  UK.   The
             appellant showed speaks  Punjabi  as  well  as  English.   The
             appellant's child is very young and will easily adapt to  life
             in India.  The appellant's child has two sets of  grandparents
             in India and I find that it will be  in  the  appellant  shows
             best interest to return to India where they will  be  able  to
             have the love and support of grandparents and will accept them
             and for the child to remain with their parents.  I  find  that
             the appellant has not severed all links with India.  I  reject
             the appellant claims to have had a land dispute and note  that
             previous application by the appellant was refused and that  he
             did not appeal.  The appellant did not claim political asylum.
              India is a large country  and  the  couple  could  internally
             relocate if required by do not find this to be the case in any
             event.  I find that if the appellant returned to India that he
             would obtain valuable emotional and practical support from his
             parents,  siblings   and   in-laws   who   could   offer   him
             accommodation  until  he  found  his  feet.   I   reject   the
             appellant's claims of having severed links with India  in  the
             circumstances and find  that  his  appeal  with  reference  to
             Appendix FM is bound to fail.


         27.  In considering the appellant's case under Article  8,  I  note
             the questions that I must address as set  out  in  Razgar.   I
             accept that the appellant is in the UK where  he  has  resided
             continuously since 2006 at the earliest.  He has  produced  no
             evidence of lawful entry to the UK and had no  expectation  of
             being able to settle.  The appellant will return to  India  in
             greatly improved position having  gained  UK-work  experience.
             The appellant is living in the UK with his partner  and  child
             and I accept that he  has  a  family  life  in  the  UK.   The
             appellant's removal will cause interference to that right to a
             family life.  The appellant has lived, worked  and  socialised
             in the UK and I accept that he has established a private  life
             in this country.  I accept that the removal of  the  appellant
             to India would interfere with his  private  life.   However  I
             have to consider whether the interference with the appellant's
             family and private life would be a  disproportionate  response
             to the  requirements  to  maintain  an  effective  immigration
             control policy.


         28.  The appellant has established his family and private  life  in
             the UK in the full knowledge that he had no  continuing  right
             to remain here having entered the  UK  unlawfully  and  remain
             here since.  He has not resided here for  20  years.   I  have
             found the appellant to be other than a witness  of  truth.   I
             find that he has family members remaining in India  with  whom
             he is in contact with whom he may reunite upon return.


         29.  The appellant is a 37 year old man in  good  health.   He  has
             worked in the UK.  I find on return to India that he may  take
             up employment utilising the skills and experience which he has
             gained in the UK.  The appellant is relatively young and  will
             readily re-adapt to life in India where he spent the  majority
             of his life including the majority of his formative years.   I
             find  therefore  that  the  interference  to  the  appellant's
             private life in the UK would be a  proportionate  response  to
             the requirement to maintain effective immigration control.  He
             may maintain contact with  friends  through  modern  means  of
             communication.


         30.  There is nothing  preventing  the  appellant's  wife,  who  is
             currently without leaving the UK returning with the  appellant
             delivered him as part of a family unit in India together  with
             their child.  In these circumstances I find that  there  would
             be no interference caused to their right to a family life.  If
             the appellant's wife chooses not to return with him  to  India
             that is her choice.  It will mean that the interference caused
             with their private life is all the more justified.


         31.  I have addressed the appellant's child above but find it  will
             be in the chose best interest to return to  India  with  their
             parents and where they will have the love and  support  of  an
             extended family including grandparents and aunts and uncles."

The Grounds Seeking Leave to Appeal and Oral Submissions


6.   The grounds seeking leave  to  appeal  argue  that  the  Judge  made  a
    factual error. He recorded that the appellant's wife was in the UK on a
    student visa. At the date of the hearing she had been granted leave  to
    remain here as a Tier 2 Migrant and there was an expectation  that  she
    would be able to apply for settlement in 2016.

7.   It is argued that the  Judge  erred  when  making  adverse  credibility
    findings in relation to the appellant's English language  ability.   It
    is argued that paragraph 22 of the determination does not  make  sense.
    It is argued that the Judge failed to explain why he found the evidence
    of the witnesses to be self-serving and of no value.  It is argued that
    the Judge failed to consider the child's best interests and  failed  to
    consider the appeal in the context of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40
    and Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39.  Lastly it is  argued  that  the
    Judge failed to grasp the facts of the case.

8.   In oral submissions Mr Khan submitted that at the time of  the  hearing
    the appellant's partner was a Tier 2 Migrant working as a dental nurse.
     She had been in the UK since 2007 and had been granted leave as a Tier
    2 Migrant from 13 August 2013 to  16  August  2012.   The  Judge  erred
    because of the factual basis  of  the  proportionality  assessment  was
    flawed because he misunderstood the appellant's partner's status  here.
    He submitted that the Judge erred in testing  the  appellant's  English
    language ability and he did not give reasons  why  he  attached  little
    weight to the evidence of the witnesses.  Mr  Khan  conceded  that  the
    Judge had taken into account  the  best  interests  of  the  child  and
    withdrew the grounds of appeal relating to this.

9.   There was no response from the respondent pursuant to Rule  24  of  the
    2008 Procedure Rules. Mr Wilding indicated at the start of the  hearing
    that it was opposed. Mr Wilding accepted that the  Judge's  finding  in
    relation to English language was "unfortunate and unattractive" but  it
    did not amount to a material error of law.

10.  In the original grounds of appeal it is asserted  that  Ms  Kaur  is  a
    Tier 4 Migrant and this is consistent with her statement  of  evidence.
    It does appear to me that the Judge  recorded  the  status  incorrectly
    because at the date of the hearing it is clear to me that she had  been
    granted leave as a Tier 2 Migrant.  It is far from clear that the Judge
    was made aware of this.  I  do  not  accept  that  the  status  of  the
    appellant's partner in this case was material to the Judge's  decision.
    Ms Kaur is a citizen of India and is in the UK on  a  temporary  basis.
    Whether or not she may be able to make an application for settlement in
    2016 is not material to the appeal. The mistake did not play a material
    part in the Tribunal's reasoning.

11.  Paragraph 22 of the determination contains a  typographical  error  but
    it is obvious that the word "problem" should be "prominent" thus making
    perfect sense.   I refer to the letter from the Gudwara which the Judge
    referred to at paragraph 22.

12.  Contrary to the grounds seeking permission to appeal the Judge did  not
    find that the evidence of the witnesses was of no value but he attached
    limited weight to it and in my view this was  a  matter  for  him.  The
    Judge was entitled to conclude that the witnesses were self-serving  in
    the context of the evidence as a whole.  There were witness  statements
    but they were lacking in detail.  One witness gave oral evidence (other
    than the appellant and his partner).  There was in this case a lack  of
    documentary evidence, which was noted by the Judge.

 13. The Judge properly considered  the  child's  best  interests  and  this
    point was conceded by Mr Khan.  The appeal was dismissed on substantive
    Article 8 grounds (not procedural) and therefore in my view there is no
    merit in the challenge relating to Chikwamba.

14.  The Judge attached weight  to  his  observation  that  the  appellant's
    English was poor and stated that he had tested his English.  In my view
    this amounts to a procedural irregularity.  It was not the role of  the
    Judge to test the appellant's English.  However, this did not result in
    procedural unfairness.  The outcome of this appeal would have been  the
    same regardless of  this  irregularity.   I  am  confident  about  this
    because the Judge's overriding  concern  was  that  the  appellant  had
    produced very little evidence to establish that he had been in  the  UK
    for fourteen years and there were  credibility  issues  which  did  not
    relate to the appellant's language ability. The Judge had  the  benefit
    of hearing oral evidence from the appellant, his partner and  Mr  Singh
    Johal and he did not accept it.

15.  There  are  typographical  errors  within  the  determination  and  the
    reasons given by the Judge are brief, but this does  not  amount  to  a
    material error.   It  is  likely  to  have  resulted  from  a  lack  of
    proofreading by the Judge.  However, I am satisfied that the Judge  had
    a understood  the  case  and  properly  engaged  with  the  issues.  He
    adequately explained his reasons for his decision and it  is  clear  to
    both parties why the appellant's appeal was not successful.

16.  There was no material error of law and  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal under the Rules and Article 8 stands.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 19 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
