
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05440/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2015                          |On 27 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mrs sivatharsini sivasuntharam
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell, instructed by M Ns' Law LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mrs Sivasuntharam is a citizen of Sri Lanka  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 19 April 1980.

 2. On or about 14 November 2013 Mrs Sivasuntharam made application  for  a
    permanent residence card on the basis of retained right of residence in
    the United Kingdom following divorce.   The  application  made  to  the
    Secretary of State specifically stated that the reason being  contended
    for entitling Mrs Sivasuntharam to that retained right was  because  of
    divorce on 16 August 2013.

 3. On 11 January 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  refuse  the
    application having regard to Regulation  15(1)(f)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 with reference to  Regulation
    10(5) and 10(6).

 4. Mrs Sivasuntharam appealed and her appeal was heard on 10 November 2014
    by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  McDade  sitting  at  Stoke.   He
    allowed  the  appeal  specifically  making  reference   to   Regulation
    15(1)(f)(i) and (ii).

 5. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 21  November  2014  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.   The  grounds  submitted  that  the  judge  materially
    misdirected himself because in order to retain a right of residence  as
    the former partner of an  EEA  National  following  divorce  it  was  a
    requirement that Regulations 10(5) and (6) were also met.

 6. On 6 January 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Tiffin  granted
    permission thus the matter comes before me.

 7. There was no dispute that the judge erred in this case but the error of
    law came about because the Secretary of State in  making  the  decision
    did so by reference to Regulation 15(1)(f) in consequence of the nature
    of the application that was made in the first place.

 8. Regulation 15(1) provides:

         The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
         United Kingdom permanently -

         ....

         (b)  a family member of an EEA National who is not [herself] an EEA
              National but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the
              EEA National  in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
              continuous period of five years;

         ....

         (f)  a person who -

              (i)  has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with
                  these regulations for a continuous period of five years;
                  and

              (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family member  who  has
                  retained the right of residence.

 9. The definition of a  family  member  who  has  retained  the  right  of
    residence appears at Regulation 10 and it is there that one finds those
    matters in respect of which concessions were made by the  Secretary  of
    State as appears at paragraph 3 of the Decision and  Reasons  of  Judge
    McDade.  The entire focus of the appeal before Judge McDade was on  the
    remaining issue in respect of which no concession was  made  which  the
    judge defined  as  being,  "Whether  or  not  [Mrs  Sivasuntharam]  was
    required to exercise treaty rights herself in the United Kingdom."

10. Mr Tarlow for the Secretary of State  accepted  that  he  could  no  go
    behind the concessions that were made by the Presenting Officer in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He was right to  take  that  position  given  the
    guidance in NR (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2009] EWCA Civ 856.

11. However, the error in the Statement  of  Reasons  was  that  the  judge
    considered the appeal under the wrong part of Regulation 15. The Notice
    of Decision pointed to Regulation 15(1)(f) and the  Presenting  Officer
    did little to assist the Judge in not falling into  error.  However  on
    the facts of the case Mrs Sivasuntharam was entitled to  succeed  under
    Regulation 15(1)(b).

12. Mrs Sivasuntharam married on 28 November 2007 and divorced on 16 August
    2013.  Those were dates that were not in  dispute.   The  Secretary  of
    State had conceded  that  Mrs  Sivasuntharam's  former  husband  was  a
    qualified person for five years and that both he and Mrs  Sivasuntharam
    had been in the United Kingdom during  the  relevant  period.   Without
    more therefore the appeal was to  be  allowed  under  Regulation  15(b)
    without any need to consider any other factors.  In  the  circumstances
    the judge was right to allow the appeal under Regulation  15(1)  though
    not under  (f)  but  rather  under  (b).   The  error  of  law  in  the
    circumstances is not material but if it is then through an abundance of
    caution, in the alternative I make plain that I would have  remade  the
    Decision so as to allow the matter under the Regulation 15(1)(b).


Notice of Decision

The Decision and Statement of Reasons of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained
no material error of law. In the  circumstances  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal is dismissed. For the avoidance  of  doubt,  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.



Signed        Date 26 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
