
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/05012/2015

                                                    IA/05016/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th July 2016                         |On 27th July 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                  MRS EANJALA PANOURANGAN (FIRST appellant)
                 Mr VENKATESH SIVAGNANAM (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of India born respectively on 23rd November
    1988 and 12th August 1978.  The first  Appellant  was  granted  limited
    leave to enter the UK on 3rd October 2013 until 30th May 2015 as a Tier
    4 Student.  On 27th August 2014 a decision  was  made  to  curtail  her
    leave until 26th October 2014.  The second Appellant's leave was  as  a
    dependant of the first Appellant.  His leave was similarly curtailed.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Youngerwood on 24th  August  2015.   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 21st September 2015 the Appellants' appeals were
    allowed under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

 3. On 30th September 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  On 15th February 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Nicholson granted permission to appeal.  Judge Nicholson noted
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had allowed the appeals based  on  a
    private  life  connected  to  the  principal  Appellant's  studies  and
    employment.  He noted that a contention was made  that  the  judge  had
    erred in affording  weight  to  the  principal  Appellant's  employment
    because the Appellant was working illegally as she commenced employment
    after her leave as a student had been curtailed and at a time when  she
    was no longer studying.  He noted however that the judge  had  made  it
    clear at paragraphs 23  and  25  that  he  considered  the  Appellant's
    employment was a valuable service to the community  bringing  the  case
    within the guidance set out in UE (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 975.  Judge
    Nicholson considered that it was arguable that, if  the  Appellant  was
    working illegally, the judge erred in so doing and consequently granted
    permission to appeal on all grounds.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  However for the purpose of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process the Secretary of State is referred to herein as  the
    Respondent and Mrs Panourangan and Mr  Sivagnanam  as  the  Appellants.
    The Appellants appear  by  their  instructed  Counsel  Mr  Karim.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Tarlow.  There is no Rule 24 response served by the Appellants.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. Mr Tarlow relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits  that  there  is
    nothing exceptional about this case.  His first argument  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected himself in his  approach  to  the
    proportionality exercise and that he had failed to consider the  weight
    to be attached to the fact that the  Appellant  had  a  remedy  to  her
    predicament in the form of a fresh application from India.  He contends
    that the Secretary of State had allowed her ample  opportunity  in  the
    provision of granting her over the  required  60  day  period  to  find
    another Sponsor before her leave was  curtailed  as  evidenced  by  the
    letter of refusal.  He contended it was  a  proportionate  response  to
    expect her to apply again properly in order that her  circumstances  be
    assessed particularly in the  light  of  the  fact  that  she  was  now
    intending to complete a different course  of  study  with  a  different
    Sponsor than the one she was originally admitted to attend.  He submits
    that the judge had failed to provide reasons for why he considered  the
    case to be exceptional to the point it required  consideration  outside
    the Rules and that whilst at paragraph  20  of  the  determination  the
    judge has recorded that the  decision  was  of  sufficient  gravity  in
    relation to the particular Appellant's private life  so  as  to  engage
    Article  8,  he  has  failed  to  indicate  why  he  has  reached  this
    conclusion.

 6. He further contends that the judge has not followed  current  case  law
    and refers me to the lengthy extract from Nasim and Others v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2014] UKUT 0025 referred  to  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  He further contends that the Appellant's prohibited
    employment  was  not  something  which  should  have  weighed  in   the
    Appellant's favour when considering proportionality.

 7. Mr Tarlow acknowledges that the Appellant missed some induction classes
    which explain the  procedures  of  the  university  re  attendance  but
    contends that this is not an  argument  which  is  readily  sustainable
    because any  Appellant  must  understand  the  requirements  to  attend
    courses.  Further he submits that if employment is  taken  after  leave
    has been curtailed, then the balance falls in the Appellant's favour in
    any Article 8 assessment and that the case would  have  to  be  totally
    compelling to succeed.  He submits that this case did not  fall  within
    that criteria.

 8. Mr Karim opens by submitting that the  analysis  of  the  Secretary  of
    State is mere  disagreement  and  that  the  Secretary  of  State  must
    establish that the judge's decision was perverse and  that  this  is  a
    very high threshold.   He  relies  on  the  guidance  given  in  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

 9. He submits that the judge has directed himself properly.  He  takes  me
    through the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He  points  out
    that paragraph 2 sets out the history and that the judge was aware that
    the Appellant's leave had been curtailed.  He emphasises the difference
    between  curtailment  of  leave  and  cancellation  of  leave  in  that
    curtailment means that leave remains until  the  date  of  curtailment.
    Therefore any application made is in time pursuant to Section  3(C)  of
    the 1971 Immigration Act  and  therefore  leave  continues  during  the
    period of dependency of the "3(C) leave".  He submits  that  there  has
    consequently been a failure by the Secretary of State to show that  any
    work carried out by the Appellant was illegal.

10. He notes the evidence  in  particular  paragraphs  9  and  10  and  the
    exceptional circumstances of this case, emphasising the judge was aware
    as to the  reason  why  the  Appellant's  attendance  dropped  and  her
    application to the Home Office for  an  extension  for  leave  to  find
    another college or university to enable her to  continue  and  complete
    her Masters degree in nursing.  The judge had  noted  at  paragraph  10
    that the Appellant had every intention of  completing  her  course  but
    that this would only be possible if she was  given  an  opportunity  to
    find another college, and  that  since  September  2014  she  had  been
    working as a carer dealing with people with dementia and  old  age  and
    that the Appellant had been  advised  that  there  was  a  shortage  of
    qualified nurses in  the  UK  and  that  they  were  on  "the  shortage
    occupation list" of the Home Office.

11. He emphasised as the exceptional circumstances that the  Appellant  was
    supported by Dr Khan who had made a statement and was present at  court
    and gave evidence with regard to the Appellant's value to the community
    and that it  was  pointed  out  that  if  the  Appellant  obtained  her
    qualification it  would  be  a  management  qualification  at  level  4
    confirming she was highly skilled.  At paragraph 10 the judge notes the
    evidence of Dr Khan and the benefit that would accrue  to  the  general
    public through the Appellant being allowed to remain in the UK.

12. He points out that at paragraph 12 the judge  commences  his  findings,
    that the judge has looked at the authorities and reminded himself  that
    Article 8 is not a general dispensing power and, as  decided  in  Patel
    and Others [2013] UKSC 72, Article 8 must  be  related  to  private  or
    family life and not education as such, and that the opportunity  for  a
    promising student to complete their course  in  this  country,  however
    desirable in general terms, was not in itself a right  protected  under
    Article 8.  He points out the findings made by the judge at  paragraphs
    24 and 25 and that the decision is reasoned and set  out  at  paragraph
    26.  He submits that there is no material error of law in the  decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  he  asks  me  to  dismiss  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Case Law

15. I am referred to the decision in Shizad (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set
    aside) [2013] UKUT  00085  (IAC).   That  case  is  authority  for  the
    following propositions:

      1) Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation  of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

      2) Although  a  decision  may  contain  an  error  of  law  where  the
         requirements to give  adequate  reasons  are  not  met,  the  Upper
         Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the  First-tier
         Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of  law,  the  fact-
         finding process cannot  be  criticised  and  the  relevant  country
         guidance has been taken into account, unless  the  conclusions  the
         judge draws from the primary data were not reasonably open  to  him
         or her.

Findings

16. This is a well reasoned decision.  It is true that the Appellant is not
    free of blame.  She is highly qualified and came to the UK to pursue an
    MSc in nursing at  the  University  of  Worcester.   She  was  late  in
    attending her course by some three days as a result of difficulties  in
    entering the UK.  She missed some classes and  did  not  provide  a  GP
    letter confirming her illness.  As a  result  of  missing  classes  her
    leave was curtailed.  To a certain extent therefore, albeit that  these
    were matters that were heard by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the
    first Appellant is the author of her own misfortune.

17. However the judge has taken all this into account.  He has set  out  in
    considerable detail at paragraphs 9 and 10 the facts of this matter and
    has taken into account the supportive evidence of Dr Khan.   Thereafter
    the judge has gone on to make findings.   He  has  considered  the  law
    generally under Article 8 and given due and proper consideration to the
    authorities of Patel and Others and JK (India) [2013] EWCA Civ 1080 and
    has noted at paragraph 18 the very significant obstacle for students in
    the UK to argue that removal decisions will engage  Article  8  in  the
    first place, albeit that he notes that it is not an impossible  hurdle.
    It is fair to say therefore that the  judge  has  given  very  detailed
    consideration to the law and that his approach to Article 8 is not  one
    that shows any material error of law.

18. Having analysed the law and quite properly addressed it, the judge  has
    then gone on to consider the facts of this case and has  made  findings
    at paragraphs 24 and 25 which he was entitled to.  He took into account
    the significant evidence of Dr Khan and Dr Khan's note that there was a
    severe shortage of qualified nurses in the UK and that  the  Appellant,
    who had already obtained a qualification in India would, on  qualifying
    in the UK, be able to perform a valuable service to the community at  a
    relatively high management level.  Having considered all  the  evidence
    the judge made findings at paragraph 26 that the Appellant had  at  all
    times been a genuine  student  and  that  for  reasons  that  were  not
    necessarily all her own fault she was never able to  really  start  her
    course successfully.  Consequently he concluded that this is a  student
    who had not set out to evade immigration law (and indeed I do not think
    that is actually contended by Mr Tarlow) and that the  cogent  evidence
    as to her prospective value to the UK  taken  with  all  other  factors
    persuaded him that it was not in the interests of  immigration  control
    to remove her.  Those were findings that the judge was entitled to make
    and he has set out the basis upon which he has reached such findings in
    a very clear and straightforward manner and to challenge them  on  that
    basis amounts to little more than  disagreement  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.

19. There does remain the contention that the Appellant was working  and  I
    am referred by Mr Tarlow of the right to work by a Tier 4  PBS  migrant
    set out at paragraph 4 of the Grounds of  Appeal.   However  the  whole
    history of this matter has been considered by  the  judge  and  he  has
    exercised  full  and  proper   judicial   discretion   including   full
    consideration of the position with regard to the employment  undertaken
    by the Appellant.  It is not for the Upper Tribunal to  go  behind  the
    findings of a judge where the fact-finding process cannot be criticised
    and there has been no misdirection in law.  That I am satisfied is  the
    position in this instant case.

20. Consequently I find that there is no material  error  of  law  and  the
    appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.  This of course  is  not
    the end of the matter so far as the Appellant is concerned.  She  still
    does not have the higher level qualification in nursing that she sought
    to achieve.  It will of course be incumbent upon her now to ensure that
    steps are taken for her presumably to follow the relevant course and to
    obtain the qualification that she originally set out for.  That is  not
    a matter for consideration by this Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 27th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date 27th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
