
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/05644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision  Promulgated        |
|On 25 November 2014                           |On 31 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MS F S
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                    Claimant

                SET ASIDE DECISION & REASONS DATED 11.2.2015
                            And remaking decision

   1.   I set aside the decision and reasons dated  11th  February  2015  in
      accordance with the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
      Under Rule 43 the Upper  Tribunal  may  set  aside  a  decision  which
      disposes of the proceedings, and re-make the decision  or  a  relevant
      part of it,  if  it  is  in  the  interests  of  justice  and  certain
      conditions apply. The conditions include a procedural irregularity  in
      the proceedings. I find that there was such a procedural  irregularity
      in that the written submissions dated  30th January 2015 and  received
      at the Upper Tribunal on 3rd February 2015 pursuant to directions made
      on 15th January 2015, did not come to my  attention  until  after  the
      decision  had  been  remade  and  that  this  was  as  a   result   of
      administrative error.


   2.  I now have regard to the written submissions made  but  they  do  not
      cause me to alter my decision and reasons. The Claimant was  found  to
      be the primary carer.  The issue related to Regulation 15A(4A) of  the
      2006 Regulations.   On the evidence that  was  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal it was found that the child's father has a role in caring for
      his daughter but this was restricted by his working hours.  The  child
      has emotional ties with her mother and also with her  father  although
      she became fretful when with her father. There was no evidence to show
      that the child's life would be seriously impaired such that she  would
      be compelled to live with the non EU citizen outside the  UK.   As  to
      the practical arrangement I was satisfied that  the  father  would  be
      able to make adjustments to his working arrangements to enable him  to
      look after the child. In Sanneh R (on the application  of)  v  SSWP  &
      HMRC 2013 EWHC 793 (Admin) Hickbottom J held that ..."even where a non
      EU ascendant relative is compelled to leave EU territory, the  Article
      20 rights of an EU child will not be infringed  if  there  is  another
      ascendant relative who has the right of residence in the EU,  and  who
      can and  will  in  practice  care  for  the  child".   This  view  was
      emphasised in MA & SM(Zambrano:EU children  outside  EU)  Iran  [2013]
      UKUT 00380(IAC) and in which it was confirmed that: "  The  mere  fact
      that the sponsor cannot be as economically active  as  he  would  wish
      because of his care responsibilities to JM and FM, is  not  sufficient
      to support a conclusion that JM and FM would  be  denied  the  genuine
      enjoyment of their EU citizenship rights, nor would this be  the  case
      even if the sponsor were required to  stop  working  altogether."  The
      written submissions cite two unreported decisions  of  the  First-tier
      for which permission has neither  been  applied  for  nor  granted  in
      accordance with the Practice Direction No 11.  There was  no  evidence
      before the Tribunal to indicate that the  child  had  no  relationship
      with her father nor  that  the  bond  between  her  and  the  Claimant
      prevented the father from looking after his  daughter.   The  evidence
      was that he did have a role, albeit he was not the primary carer,  and
      that involved taking her to school on occasion. He could  be  expected
      to make adaptations to his working life to look after his child.


      Decision


   3. The Appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.


   4. I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 with
      reference to Regulation 18A.

Signed

Deputy       Upper       Tribunal       Judge        G        A        Black
                          Date: 30.3.2015


Anonymity order made because there is a child involved.

Signed

Deputy       Upper       Tribunal       Judge        G        A        Black
                           Date: 30.3.2015
