
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/05364/2015
                                                               IA/05371/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 14 March 2016                           |On 6 April 2016            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   1) C O
                                   2) D O
                         (Anonymity Direction made)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar (counsel) Instructed by Graceland
solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellants,  on  the  basis  of  the  minority  of  the  second
appellant, and to preserve the anonymity direction made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins, promulgated on  14  September
2015, which allowed the Appellants' appeals.

Background


3. The second  appellant  is  the  first  appellant's  daughter.  The  first
Appellant was born on [ ] 1975. The second appellant was born on [  ]  2006.
The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.

4. On 20 January  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants'
applications for further leave to remain in the UK (made on the  basis  that
removal would breach article 8 ECHR).


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Higgins ("the Judge") allowed the  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
decisions.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 26 January 2016  Judge  Colyer  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

   "The  respondent  submits  that  there  was  the  making  of  a  material
   misdirection of law on a material matter. It is arguable that  the  judge
   erred in law for the following reasons:


     a. At paragraph 39 the judge finds that  despite  the  fact  that  the
        second appellant is not due to take  any  exams  in  the  immediate
        future "the progress she has made so far might be jeopardised".  It
        is not clear what evidence this was based upon and it appears to be
        speculation on the part of the judge.


     b. At paragraph 40 the judge states "it is unclear to  me  or  support
        networks, if any, she might be able to  draw  on".  The  burden  of
        proof is on the appellant to satisfy the tribunal of the facts.  It
        is submitted that the judge found my findings on material matter.


     c. At paragraph 41 the judge finds that the second appellant's  sickle
        cell  is  a  factor  which  weighs  particularly  heavily  in   his
        considerations, this is despite the fact he  acknowledges  that  in
        2010 it was felt that her sickle cell would cause her few  problems
        in the future. It is not adequately explain  why  this  is  such  a
        weighting factor given that diagnosis.


     d. At paragraph 42 the judge finds that it would be beneficial to have
        contact with the second appellant's father,  but  the  evidence  is
        that she does not have regular contact and has not,  in  fact,  had
        any contact since 2014. This is a perverse finding.


     e. At paragraph 43 the judge states that the factor which  weighs  the
        heaviest is the length of time the second appellant has been in the
        UK. It is submitted that the judge fails to engage with any of  the
        case law on best interest  and  does  not  carry  out  an  adequate
        assessment. There is no suggestion in the  determination  that  any
        evidence of a private life beyond school and the home was  advanced
        on behalf of the second appellant. There is also no suggestion that
        the views of the second appellant was sought, nor were any  reports
        or assessments before  the  tribunal.  The  fact  that  the  second
        appellant has more than seven years  residence  is  not  enough  to
        gainsay the presumption that the best interests of the child are to
        remain with the parent in her home country.


      4. It is arguable that the judge has misdirected himself for the above
      reasons and the grounds submitted by the respondent on all points  are
      arguable. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted."

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Staunton, for the respondent, adopted the terms of the grounds  of
appeal. He told me that at [39] of the decision, the Judge's comments  about
the second appellant amount to speculation  rather  than  findings  of  fact
based on evidence placed before the Judge.

(b) Mr Staunton took me to [40] of the decision, where  the  Judge  prefaces
his comments by saying "... It is unclear to me ..." before making  findings
of fact. Mr Staunton told me that the Judge failed to make findings of  fact
on a material matter and, in effect, reversed the burden of proof.

(c) Mr Staunton was critical of the Judge's findings at  [40]  to  [42]  and
argued that the Judge makes contradictory findings. At [41] the Judge  finds
that the second appellant's  sickle  cell  disease  weighs  heavily  in  her
favour, despite earlier acknowledging that since 2010 the disease  has  been
brought under control & the second appellant has a good prognosis.  At  [42]
the Judge finds that it would be beneficial for the  second  appellant  have
contact with her father despite finding  that  there  has  been  no  contact
since 2014.

(d) At [43] the Judge makes findings based on the length of time the  second
appellant has been in the UK.  Mr  Staunton  argued  that  in  making  those
findings the Judge turned a blind eye to the cases of  MK  (bests  interests
of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC); E-A (Article 8 - best interests  of
child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC); Azimi- Moayad  and  others  (decisions
affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197  (IAC);   &   EV
(Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874

(e) Mr Staunton asked me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

8. Mr Jafar, counsel for the appellants, told me that the decision does  not
contain  any  errors  material  or  otherwise,  and  that  the  respondent's
submissions amounted to little more than a  disagreement  with  findings  of
fact and conclusions which  were  open  to  the  Judge  to  make.  Mr  Jafar
referred  to  the  documentary  evidence  produced  to  the  First-tier  and
suggested that the Secretary of State's criticism had  their  foundation  in
"cherry picking sentences" and taking them out of context. He  explained  to
me that the second appellant's father was present in court  today  and  that
the contact between the second appellant and  her  father  was  one  of  the
crucial factors to be considered. He reminded me that the  second  appellant
is approaching her 10th birthday and has been in the UK for more than  seven
years. He relied on section 117 of the 2002 Act and  the  cases  of  EA  and
Azimi Moayad. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

9. The focus in  this  appeal  is  on  second  appellant.  At  [27]  of  the
decision, the Judge  records  that  it  is  conceded  that  neither  of  the
appellants could succeed under appendix FM of the immigration rules.  It  is
common ground (and accurately recorded  by  the  Judge  at  [28])  that  the
appellants' cases were plead on the basis that  the  appellants  fulfil  the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE1(iv) of the rules.

10. Between [29] and [37]  the  Judge  sets  out  the  submissions  made  by
counsel for the appellant. Between [38]  &  [42]  the  Judge  sets  out  the
factors which he weigh in the second appellant's favour  before  concluding,
at  [43],  that  the  second  appellant  fulfils  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules because it would not be reasonable to expect her to  leave
the UK ".. at this juncture"

11. The factors that the Judge  found  weighed  in  the  second  appellant's
favour were

     i)       the length of time she has been in the UK;
    ii)       her participation in education in the UK;
   iii) that her sickle cell disease is monitored in this country;
    iv) that she now has contact with her British citizen father.


The Judge placed particular emphasis  on  the  length  of  time  the  second
appellant has been in the UK.

12. In EM and Others (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT  98  the  Upper
Tribunal stated:

      "2.  Guidance is also given on  the  assessment  of  the  private  and
      family life of a Zimbabwean national present in the United Kingdom for
      over 11 years with children born and/or resident most of  their  lives
      in the United Kingdom.


      "3.  In the absence of countervailing factors, residence of over seven
      years with children well-integrated into the educational system in the
      United Kingdom, is an indicator that the welfare of the child  favours
      regularisation of the status of mother and children".

13. Paragraph 276 ADE(1) (iv) of the Rules says:-
         "(1)    The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  leave  to
             remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at
             the date of application, the applicant ...

      (iv)  is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously  in  the
             UK for  at  least  seven  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK".

      14. Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides:


         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.


         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


             (a) a private life, or


             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

The second Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for nearly  ten  years,
so she has the status of "qualifying child" within the Part 5A regime.


15. In Treebhawon and others (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT  00674  (IAC),
section 117B(6) was analysed and construed in [12] -  [23].   This  Tribunal
expressed its conclusions in the following terms, at [20] - [21]:

         "20.      In  section  117B(6),  Parliament  has  prescribed  three
    conditions, namely:

           (a)   the person concerned is not liable to deportation;


              b)  such  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, namely a  person  who
                 is under the age of 18 and is  a  British  citizen  or  has
                 lived in the United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of
                 seven years or more; and


              c) it would not be reasonable to expect the  qualifying  child
                 to leave the United Kingdom.

             Within   this   discrete   regime,   the   statute    proclaims
             unequivocally that where these three conditions  are  satisfied
             the public interest does not require the removal of the  parent
             from the United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none.

         21. Giving effect to  the  analysis  above,  in  our  judgment  the
             underlying Parliamentary intention  is  that  where  the  three
             aforementioned conditions are satisfied  the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B(1) - (3) do not apply."

16. For the purposes of these appeals, the test in terms  of  paragraph  276
ADE(i)(iv) & (vi) and the test for consideration of article 8  ECHR  outside
the rules amounts to the same question.  Is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
second  appellant  to  leave  the  UK?  The  answer  to  that  question   is
determinative of the appeals of both appellants.

17. In PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016]
UKUT 00108 (IAC) it was held that when considering the conjoined  Article  8
ECHR claims of multiple family members, decision-makers should  first  apply
the Immigration Rules to each  individual  applicant  and,  if  appropriate,
then consider Article 8 outside the  Rules.  This  exercise  will  typically
entail the consideration and determination of all claims jointly, so  as  to
ensure that all material facts and considerations are taken into account  in
each case.

18. The second appellant was born in the UK and has lived in the UK all  her
life. She will soon celebrate her 10th birthday. Her  father  is  a  British
citizen. The evidence indicates that  there  is  some  contact  between  the
second appellant and her father.

19. The second appellant is a qualifying child in  terms  of  s.117  of  the
2002 Act. The first appellant  is  not  liable  to  deportation  and  has  a
genuine parental relationship with the second appellant. These appeals  turn
entirely on the question of whether or not it is reasonable  to  expect  the
second appellant to leave the UK.

20. Between [38] and [44] of the decision, the Judge makes findings of  fact
which relate directly to the private  life  established  by  the  first  and
second appellants in the UK. The Judge takes  account  of  the  impact  that
removal is likely to have on the second appellant. The Judge's fact  finding
exercise is not flawless, however, as I have already indicated,  he  clearly
identifies the crucial aspects of the established family  and  private  life
enjoyed by the appellants.

21. At [44] the Judge draws those  findings  of  fact  to  a  conclusion  by
applying the correct test in law. The Judge has regard to  part  5A  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In the final sentence of  [44]
the Judge draws the conclusion that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect
the second appellant to leave the UK. That  is  the  correct  test  in  law.
Although the fact finding exercise is not flawless it does  not  contain  an
error. The only flaw in the fact-finding exercise is that it may  have  been
possible for the Judge to make more  comprehensive  findings  of  fact.  The
decision however  contains  sufficient  findings  of  fact  to  support  the
conclusion that the Judge comes to. The correct test in law  has  manifestly
been applied.

22.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

23. In this case, there is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact  finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

24.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

25. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

26. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 23
March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
