
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05720/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 7th December 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JCL
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Masih of Counsel, instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of  Judge  Pooler  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 3rd June 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male national of Trinidad and Tobago  born  in  1985.
    He applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of
    his family and private life.

 4.  The  application  was  refused  on  23rd  January  2015,  having  been
    considered under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration
    Rules.

 5. The appeal was heard on 28th May 2015.  The FtT allowed the appeal with
    reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.   The  FtT  noted
    that the Appellant's wife  and  two  children  are  British.   The  FtT
    considered section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (the 2002 Act) and found that section 117B(6)  applied  and  meant
    that because  the  Claimant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with two British children, and it would not be  reasonable
    to expect the children to leave the UK, the appeal should be allowed.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended  that  the  FtT  had  materially
    erred in law by considering section 117B(6) as the determining  feature
    of the case, and the Article 8 analysis had been inadequately reasoned.



 7. It was contended that the FtT had considered that because the  children
    could not reasonably go to Trinidad with the Appellant, then the appeal
    should be allowed, and this misapplied section 117B.

 8. The FtT had failed to consider the wider assessment, including the very
    strong public interest.  The Appellant had entered on a visit visa, and
    knew that he could not switch, and therefore  knew  that  there  was  a
    possibility that he  may  have  to  return  to  Trinidad  to  make  the
    appropriate application.  The public interest was greater, because  the
    Appellant was in the UK unlawfully when he and his partner first met in
    2009.

 9. The FtT had given no consideration to the fact that the  Appellant  was
    expressly precluded from varying an  application  when  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor.  Therefore the FtT had failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the public interest in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control was outweighed.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Pedro, who found the grounds arguable.

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT had  erred  in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

12. Mr Mills stated that he agreed with the response submitted on behalf of
    the Respondent pursuant to rule 24 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 which had  been  lodged  on  the  morning  of  the
    hearing, and which contended that the decision of the FtT disclosed  no
    error of law.

13. Mr Mills confirmed that he disagreed with the application made  by  the
    Secretary of State, and accepted that the decision of the FtT disclosed
    no error of law.  Mr Mills explained  that  he  accepted  that  section
    117B(6) was determinative, and confirmed that the public  interest  did
    not require a person's removal,  if  that  person  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and it  would
    not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

14. Mr Mills invited me to dismiss the Secretary of State's application  on
    the basis that the decision of the FtT should stand.

15. Mrs Masih agreed, and  indicated  that  if  necessary  she  could  make
    submissions relying upon the rule 24 response.  I indicated  that  that
    would not be necessary.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. In my view Mr Mills was correct to concede that the application made by
    the Secretary of State should be dismissed, and that  the  decision  of
    the FtT discloses no error of law.

17. The FtT adopted an appropriate and correct  approach  when  considering
    this appeal, and took into account all relevant matters,  and  did  not
    attach weight to immaterial considerations.

18. The FtT at paragraph 31  acknowledged  the  importance  of  immigration
    control, and recorded that the Claimant did not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

19. At paragraph 33 the FtT recorded  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Claimant and his partner developed at a time when the Claimant  was  in
    the UK unlawfully because he had entered as a visitor in  January  2009
    and overstayed.

20. At  paragraph  38  the  FtT  again  recorded  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control, and concluded;

         "I have kept in mind the Appellant's  relatively  poor  immigration
         history, demonstrated by his period of overstaying, but  I  do  not
         consider  that  this  can  outweigh  the  best  interests  of   the
         children."

21. The FtT has demonstrated that it considered all the factors in  section
    117B, and no error of law is disclosed in the consideration of  section
    117B(6) which is set out below;

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child; and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

22. The FtT found that the Appellant did  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his two British children, and gave  adequate
    reasons for finding that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  those
    children to leave the United  Kingdom.   The  FtT  then  observed  that
    because the Appellant was not liable to deportation,  statute  dictated
    that the public interest did not require his removal.

23. The findings and conclusions made by the FtT were open  to  it  on  the
    evidence, and are supported by adequate and sustainable reasons.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
State is dismissed.

Anonymity

The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction  to  protect   the
interests of the Claimant's  children.   I  continue  that  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.



Signed   Date 9th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands,  so  does  the
decision to make a full fee award.


Signed   Date 9th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
