
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05524/2014
     IA/05530/2014
     IA/05565/2014
     IA/05594/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 September 2014 and 16 January 2015      |On 26 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               1) typan gaijan
                              2) pravita gaijan
                             3) swarg raj gaijan
                            4) soorryadeo gaijan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Specialist Appeals Team on 29 September
2014
     Mr P Duffy, Specialist Appeals Team on 16 January 2015
For the Respondents/   Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by Raja & Co
Solicitors
Claimants:    on 29 September 2014
     Mr J Martin, Counsel instructed by David Benson Solicitors,
     28 Merton Road, London SW19 1DN on 16 January 2015


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimants'  appeals  against  a
    decision by the Secretary of State to  refuse  to  grant  them  further
    discretionary leave to remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds,  and  to  give
    directions for their removal  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make
    an anonymity direction, and I do not consider that such a direction  is
    warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimants are all nationals of Mauritius.   The  first  and  second
    claimants are the parents of the third and fourth claimants.  The third
    claimant was born  in  Mauritius  on  16  November  1991.   The  fourth
    claimant was born in Mauritius on  23  October  1996.   As  the  fourth
    claimant is the principal claimant in this appeal,  for  reasons  which
    will become apparent, I shall hereafter refer  to  him  simply  as  the
    claimant or by the initial S save where the context otherwise requires.
     I shall refer to the first three claimants by the initials T, P and R,
    save where the context otherwise requires.

 3. T arrived in the United Kingdom with valid entry clearance as a visitor
    on 1 September 2005.  He extended his  stay  in  this  country  in  the
    capacity of a student.  The remaining members of  T's  family  came  to
    this country on 23 November 2006 as student dependants.  T successfully
    extended his leave in the capacity of a student until 30 January  2011.
    He then made an application for leave to remain as a student under  the
    points-based system on 29 January 2011, but  this  was  refused  on  21
    October 2011.  T appealed, and the  remaining  members  of  his  family
    appealed in line as his dependants.

 4. The subsequent determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  not  before
    me.  But apparently T's appeal did not succeed under the Rules, but was
    allowed on Article 8 grounds.  In the determination promulgated  on  11
    December 2011 the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  apparently  allowed  T's
    appeal under Article 8 to the extent that T was allowed to complete his
    education  by  November  2013.   The  judge  also  allowed  the  fourth
    claimant's appeal to the extent that he should be allowed  to  continue
    with his GCSE studies, and to take his GCSE exams in July 2013.   As  a
    consequence of the ruling, on 23 February 2012 each  of  the  claimants
    was granted discretionary leave  to  remain  until  22  November  2013.
    Their leave was set to expire some two weeks after  the  scheduled  end
    date of T's course.

 5. The letter granting discretionary leave to remain is not before me. But
    apparently the Secretary of State specifically  stated  in  the  letter
    that none of the claimants could expect to extend their leave beyond 22
    November 2013.

 6. On 14 November 2013 Raja & Co  Solicitors  applied  on  the  claimants'
    behalf for a variation of their leave to remain.   In  the  application
    form, T was the lead applicant and the remaining members of his  family
    were put forward as his dependants.  Under the heading of private life,
    T said he had one brother and one sister in Mauritius, and  he  was  in
    contact with them and with his friends in Mauritius.  At  section  6.18
    he was asked to give details of any  factors  which  would  prevent  or
    seriously limit his ability to form a private life in the country where
    he was born, or any other exception or factors  which  applied  in  his
    case.  T said that his course  was  not  complete;  also  his  children
    together with himself and his wife had established close connections in
    the UK; and his sons were at a crucial stage of their education.

 7. In a letter dated 8 January  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  gave  her
    reasons for refusing the claimants' applications.   Addressing  T,  the
    Secretary of State was not satisfied the grounds  under  which  he  was
    previously granted discretionary leave still  persisted.   He  had  now
    completed the relevant course of  study,  and  therefore  the  specific
    circumstances related to why he was granted limited discretionary leave
    were  no  longer  applicable.    So   his   application   for   further
    discretionary leave was refused.

 8. Consideration had been given to Appendix FM of the Rules   He  and  his
    wife did not qualify for leave to remain under the partner  route,  nor
    did they qualify for leave to remain under  the  parent  route.   Their
    elder son R was over the age of 18, and  therefore  was  not  a  child.
    Their younger son S was aged  17.   He  was  in  the  UK  with  limited
    discretionary leave to remain in line with T valid  until  22  November
    2013.  At the date of application S had only spent six years and eleven
    months in the UK, and therefore he  had  not  been  living  in  the  UK
    continuously for at least seven years immediately preceding the date of
    application. The sole parental responsibility  requirements  were  also
    not met.  So T did not qualify for leave by  virtue  of  E-LTRPT2.3  of
    Appendix FM.

 9. It had been considered whether EX.1 applied to the application, but the
    application fell for refusal under the eligibility requirements of  the
    Rules set out earlier.  These were mandatory requirements which applied
    to all applicants, regardless of whether the EX.1  criteria  were  met.
    As T failed to  meet  these  eligibility  requirements,  he  could  not
    benefit from the criteria set out at EX.1.

10. The Secretary of State went  on  to  make  a  decision  on  Exceptional
    Circumstances.  T said he had enrolled on further study at level 6, but
    no documentary evidence was provided to support this.  His younger  son
    S had been enrolled in the sixth form in September 2013 and  his  elder
    son R had enrolled on his second degree in  September  2013.   But  his
    family had done this with the  knowledge  that  they  all  only  had  a
    limited period of two months left of  their  discretionary  leave,  and
    they had no expectation that they would be granted further leave to  be
    able to remain in the UK to complete any further studies.  If T  wished
    to continue study in the UK, he should make a Tier 4 application  as  a
    student.  Exercising discretion in his favour in this respect would  be
    to treat him in a more favourable manner when compared to other persons
    who are either in a similar position or could meet the requirements for
    leave under the Tier 4 points-based system.

11. In his witness statement dated 25 November 2011 which he  had  used  in
    his appeal, he stated that his intention had always been to  return  to
    Mauritius following  the  completion  of  his  training,  to  start  an
    import/export business.  T  had  said  that  he  wished  to  return  to
    Mauritius with his family on completion of his course in November 2013.
      His  family  was  fit  to  fly  to  Mauritius,  and  there  were   no
    insurmountable obstacles preventing them  from  returning  there  as  a
    family unit.  T could use  his  acquired  business  qualifications  and
    skills to support his family in his home country.

12. S had spent the first ten formative years of his life in Mauritius, and
    therefore he would still have social and  cultural  ties  to  his  home
    country.  His elder son R was over 18, and therefore he could  lead  an
    independent life.  He had been working in the UK, and could continue to
    do so in his home country to support himself.

13. His children may be currently  enrolled  in  education  in  the  United
    Kingdom but it was clear from the objective information available  that
    Mauritius had a functioning education system which his  children  would
    be able to enter.  They had both completed their  compulsory  education
    and could apply for further educational studies either  in  their  home
    country or they could make applications to study in the UK.

14. The family would return to Mauritius as a family unit and  continue  to
    enjoy family life together.  Whilst this  might  involve  a  degree  of
    disruption to their  private  lives,  this  was  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of maintaining effective immigration control and was  in
    accordance with the Secretary of State's duty under Section 55.

The Hearing before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

15. The claimants' appeals came before Judge  Cockrill  sitting  at  Taylor
    House in the First-tier Tribunal on 9 July 2014.  Mr Martin of  Counsel
    appeared on behalf of the claimants, and the  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented by Miss Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer.   The  judge
    received oral evidence from T and his two sons.  The judge  also  heard
    from Mrs Gaijan, who is T's  sister.   She  had  written  a  letter  in
    support which she adopted.  She was a  nurse  by  background,  and  she
    indicated in the letter how the claimants were all living with her  and
    how they were all very close as a family.

16. In his subsequent determination, Judge Cockrill said  at  paragraph  30
    that the important feature was  to  see  whether  or  not  any  of  the
    claimants met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He  continued
    in paragraph 31 as follows:

         The focus needs to be on the fourth [claimant] really because he is
         still the child.  The fourth [claimant] then, at the  time  of  the
         application was made, had been in this country with just a few days
         short of seven years.  If one viewed the matter  strictly  then  he
         does not meet the requirements of the Rules because he falls  short
         of that seven year period.  The only way in which he could get over
         that problem is if Mr Martin is right and that rather than  reading
         the date of application in a strict matter that the application, in
         fact, remains outstanding pending the date of the decision and  so,
         at the time of decision, the fourth claimant would have  been  here
         for seven years.  What is abundantly clear, though, is the mischief
         that is being aimed at which is, in effect, that  a  child  who  is
         settled here for a substantial period like seven years  can  really
         expect to enjoy the benefits of such long stay (my  emphasis).   It
         seems to me that rather than have to answer  that  question  as  to
         whether or  not  the  application  remains  outstanding  until  the
         decision,  perhaps  a  better  way  of  looking   at   the   fourth
         [claimant's] case is to see it in relation to his right to  respect
         for a private life.  It  seems  to  me  that  that  really  perhaps
         reflects the reality rather better.  By the time  of  this  hearing
         the fourth claimant has unquestionably  been  here  for  more  than
         seven years.  He has started on a course now which is due to end in
         July 2015 and the question that I ask myself is whether or  not  it
         is reasonable to expect him now to go  to  Mauritius,  interrupting
         that course by so doing.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  it  is
         reasonable, given the whole background which I have both read about
         and heard.  I can see that there is force in the Chikwamba argument
         presented by Mr Martin but it would be wholly unnecessary to expect
         the fourth  [claimant]  to  go  to  Mauritius  simply  to  make  an
         application which is then going to be successful  so  that  he  can
         return here.  He is still under the care of his parents, the  first
         and second [claimants], and as I see matters the best  way  forward
         for the fourth claimant is to be afforded leave up until July  2015
         so that  he  can  complete  the  present  course.   In  my  overall
         assessment and judgment that would  be  the  reasonable  course  to
         take.

17. The judge went on to find in paragraph 32 that if he was right  in  his
    central analysis with regard to the fourth claimant, then it seemed  to
    him the position of the parents was relatively clear cut.   They  could
    quite reasonably be expected to remain here until July 2015 to  support
    their child.  He accepted therefore that the claimants  should  qualify
    for leave under R-LTRPT of Appendix FM on the  basis  that  the  fourth
    claimant met paragraph 276ADE(1).  He  found  the  restriction  upon  a
    parent applicant having to have sole responsibility hard to grasp.   It
    seemed to him that there could be no logical distinction made between a
    parent having sole responsibility and two parents being responsible for
    their child.

18. As regards the third claimant, it was accepted by Mr Martin  that  this
    claimant did not meet the requirements of  the  Rules.   His  case  was
    therefore entirely on Article 8.  It seemed to the judge that he  could
    present a sensible argument that he should  be  permitted  to  stay  at
    least until July 2015 because of the position of his brother and he was
    also  undertaking  some  further  studies  at  Kingston.   One  of  the
    advantages of that course of action would be to allow the Secretary  of
    State an opportunity to assess the family as a whole in  July  2015  to
    see what leave should then be afforded  to  them.   At  that  point  of
    course the third claimant would still have one year left of his course.

19. At paragraph 36 the judge returned to the question of the impact on the
    fourth claimant of being expected to go  back  to  Mauritius  now.   He
    would have to retake his A levels and that would be a  great  waste  of
    time and resources.  If that was correct, then it seemed  to  him  that
    not only could the fourth claimant now benefit from the  situation  but
    also the other claimants.  This was a very close knit family  and  both
    the parents and the children were all working hard together to  provide
    for one  another  and  to  support  one  another.   It  seemed  to  him
    appropriate in the circumstances for  leave  to  be  granted  for  this
    limited period whilst the fourth claimant  remained  a  minor  and  was
    still in education.

20. At paragraph 37, he observed that  the  third  claimant  was  incurring
    substantial course fees at Kingston University.  For the first year the
    fees were in excess of �10,000.

21. Judge Cockrill went on to allow the appeals of the  first,  second  and
    fourth claimants under the Rules, or in the alternative under Article 8
    ECHR.  He dismissed the appeal of the third claimant under  the  Rules,
    but allowed his appeal under Article 8.

The Application for Permission

22. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In paragraph 1 he asserted
    the judge had erred in finding in  favour  of  the  claimants  in  this
    appeal.  But in paragraphs 2 to 6, he only pleaded a material error  of
    law with respect to the appeals of the parents.

23. He pleaded that the judge was wrong  to  find  that  the  parents  were
    solely  responsible  for  the   fourth   claimant.    The   judge   had
    misinterpreted the provisions of Appendix FM.  His second complaint was
    that the judge  had  undertaken  a  cursory  Article  8  assessment  in
    relation to the parents.  There had  been  no  consideration  of  their
    respective positions against the principles established in the case  of
    Gulshan.   The  judge  had  given  inadequate   reasons   as   to   why
    proportionality should be exercised in favour of the parents.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

24. On 11 August 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes  granted  permission
    to appeal.  His reasoning  was  that  an  arguable  error  of  law  was
    disclosed by the application, not least the absence of consideration of
    Gulshan in respect of appeals allowed or allowed "in  the  alternative"
    on human rights grounds.

25. Insofar as it is material, Judge Heynes granted the Secretary of  State
    permission to  challenge  the  outcome  of  the  appeals  of  all  four
    claimants.  He did not limit the grant of permission to an error of law
    challenge to the outcome of the appeals of the parents.   Judge  Heynes
    treated T as being  the  lead  applicant,  with  the  remaining  family
    members being dependent on his application, and hence dependent on  the
    outcome of his appeal against the refusal of that application.

The Rule 24 Response

26. Mr Martin on behalf of the claimants settled a  Rule  24  response.  He
    submitted there was no material error of law in  the  disposal  of  the
    parents' appeals as child S could not be left in the  UK  to  fend  for
    himself.  There was also no error of law in the disposal of the appeals
    of the third and fourth claimants, and none had  been  alleged  in  the
    SSHD's grounds of appeal.





The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 29 September 2014

27. At the hearing on 29  September  2014,  Mr  Deller  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State sought permission to amend the grounds of appeal  to
    plead errors of law in respect of the disposal of the  appeals  of  the
    sons. He acknowledged that the current grounds of challenge  were  only
    explicitly directed at the parents'  appeals  and  raised  no  specific
    challenge to the rest of the determination, including saying nothing at
    all about the third and fourth claimants.  He could only  rely  on  the
    fact that the challenge named all four claimants  and  cited  all  four
    reference numbers, and that permission had been  granted  in  all  four
    appeals.

28. After hearing submissions from Mr Martin, I granted an adjournment  for
    the following reasons stated in the adjournment report form:

         The FTT decision discloses arguable errors of law not raised in the
         grounds, and to proceed today would be futile.  The SSHD  needs  to
         serve amended and extended grounds, which the claimants should have
         time to consider.

The Application for Permission to vary the Grounds of Appeal

29. Pursuant to the directions which I made at the hearing, by letter dated
    3 November 2014 Mr Deller asked the Upper Tribunal to exercise its case
    management powers under Rule 5(3)(a)  to  accept  a  variation  of  the
    application for permission to appeal such that the  grounds  of  appeal
    should now read as follows:

         Summary grounds

         1.   The FTT erred in its approach to  the  appeal  of  the  fourth
             claimant by:

                . isolating the case from the circumstances of the  rest  of
                  the family and treating it as a discrete matter;

                . failing correctly to apply paragraph 276ADE in respect  of
                  the residential requirement as at the date of  application
                  and/or reasonableness of  expectation  that  the  claimant
                  should leave the UK;

                . failing to analyse any residual  claim  outside  paragraph
                  276ADE with  regard  to  relevant  case  law  and  factors
                  relevant to the case.

         2.   The FTT erred in its approach to the appeals of the first  and
             second claimants by:

                . importing errors in respect of the fourth claimant and  to
                  its consideration of paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM;

                . misapplying the provisions of Appendix FM;

                . failing to  have  regard  to  relevant  case  law  in  its
                  decision but the claimants succeeded under  Article  8  if
                  they failed under paragraph 276ADE/Appendix FM.

         3.   The FTT erred in its approach  to  the  appeal  of  the  third
             claimant by:

                . importing errors in its decisions on the first, second and
                  fourth claimants;

                . failing properly to apply relevant case law as to  whether
                  a case which fell outside the  private  and  family  Rules
                  (276ADE and Appendix FM) could nevertheless succeed  under
                  Article 8.

30. In the same letter, Mr Deller went on to make detailed  submissions  in
    support of each of the three grounds.

The Supplementary Rule 24 Response

31. On 12 January 2015 Mr Martin served by email a further Rule 24 response
    directed at the further grounds submitted by Mr Deller.  He invited the
    Tribunal not to exercise its power under  Rule  5(3)(a)  to  allow  the
    Secretary of State to vary her application for  permission  to  appeal.
    His reasoning was that the Secretary of State should not be allowed  to
    amend her grounds at this late stage.  Despite being served with a Rule
    24 response,  the  Secretary  of  State  had  put  forward  no  further
    arguments until the day  of  the  hearing.   It  was  contrary  to  the
    overriding  objective  that  the   parties   should   be   allowed   to
    fundamentally change their error of law challenge on  the  day  of  the
    hearing.

32. Alternatively, Mr  Martin  submitted  that  the  new  grounds  did  not
    disclose arguable errors of law.  In response to ground 1, it  was  not
    correct that the judge should have considered the family  as  a  whole.
    The question of whether the fourth claimant could meet  the  Rules  was
    not dependent on his parents and brother.  The issue was whether it was
    reasonable for him looking at all of  the  circumstances.   That  might
    include a consideration of other family members, and it was not limited
    to that.  A child's studies would always  be  an  important  factor  in
    looking at what was reasonable.   It  made  up  an  important  part  of
    private life, which was  what  paragraph  276ADE  was  concerned  with.
    There was no requirement that a Tier 4  application  should  have  been
    made.  Mr Martin cited Nasim & Others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  0025  at
    paragraph [41] and paragraph 2 of the head note of CDS (Brazil)  [2010]
    UKUT 305 as follows:

         Article 8 does not give an Immigration Judge a freestanding liberty
         to depart from the Immigration Rules, and it  is  unlikely  that  a
         person would be able to show an Article 8 right by coming to the UK
         for temporary purposes.  But a person who is admitted to  follow  a
         course that has not yet ended may build  up  a  private  life  that
         deserves respect, and the public interest in removal before the end
         of the course may be reduced  where  ample  financial  resource  is
         available.

33. Mr Martin submitted that these  authorities  showed  that  was  nothing
    inappropriate in the way in which the judge had approached the case, or
    in the matters that he had taken  into  account  when  looking  at  the
    position of the fourth claimant.  The judge was fully entitled to  find
    that, if he was wrong under the Rules on the seven year point, then the
    fourth claimant should prevail on Article  8  grounds  on  a  Chikwamba
    basis.

Ruling on Application to vary the Grounds of Appeal

34. At the outset of the hearing  on  16  January  2015,  I  received  oral
    submissions from Mr Duffy and Mr Martin  as  to  whether  the  Tribunal
    should exercise its power under Rule 5(3) to accept a variation of  the
    Secretary of State's application for permission to appeal.  I found  in
    the Secretary  of  State's  favour  on  this  issue,  and  granted  the
    Secretary  of  State  permission  (a)  to  vary  her  application   for
    permission to appeal in accordance with the amended grounds put forward
    by Mr Deller on 3 November 2014 and (b) to rely on the amended grounds.
    My reasons for my ruling are set out below.

35. Although the application to vary the grounds was not mooted  until  the
    previous hearing, the amended grounds could reasonably be characterised
    as Robinson obvious ones, having regard to relevant case  law.   I  was
    satisfied that the amended grounds were not  merely  arguable  but  had
    prime facie merit (notwithstanding the robust Rule 24 response filed by
    Mr Martin in which he asserted that all three grounds were unarguable);
    and I was satisfied that it  was  in  accordance  with  the  overriding
    objective to deal with cases fairly and justly that  the  Secretary  of
    State should not be shut out from raising  them.   There  was  also  no
    prejudice caused thereby to the third and fourth  claimants  for  three
    reasons. Firstly, permission to appeal in respect of the outcome of all
    four appeals had been sought and obtained within time, so the third and
    fourth claimants were already "before" the  Upper  Tribunal.  Secondly,
    their legal representatives were given time  to  consider  the  amended
    grounds. Thirdly, although under the original grounds of  appeal  there
    was not a direct attack on the soundness of the findings in relation to
    the third and fourth claimants, a collateral attack on  these  findings
    was likely to arise in any event either in an  exploration  of  whether
    the asserted errors with regard to the parents were  material  or  when
    remaking the decisions about the parents.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

36. EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 provides  the  most  recent
    guidance from the senior courts on the approach to best  interests  and
    the question of reasonableness.  Clarke LJ said:
   1. More important for present purposes is to know how the tribunal should
      approach the proportionality exercise if it has  determined  that  the
      best interests of the child or children are that they should  continue
      with their education in England. Whether or not it is in the interests
      of a child to continue his or her education in England may  depend  on
      what assumptions one makes as to what happens to  the  parents.  There
      can be cases where it is in the child's best interests  to  remain  in
      education in the UK, even though one or both parents  did  not  remain
      here. In the present case, however, I take the  FTT's  finding  to  be
      that it was in the best interests of the children  to  continue  their
      education in England with both parents living here. That assumes  that
      both parents are here. But the best interests of the child are  to  be
      determined by reference to the child alone without  reference  to  the
      immigration history or status of either parent.
   1. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present, the need
      for immigration control outweighs the best interests of the  children,
      it is necessary to determine the  relative  strength  of  the  factors
      which make it in their best interests to remain here; and also to take
      account of any factors that point the other way.
   1. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will depend
      on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length  of  time
      that they have been here; (c) how long they have  been  in  education;
      (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what  extent  they
      have become distanced from the country to which it  is  proposed  that
      they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to
      what extent they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties
      in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which  the
      course proposed will interfere with their family life or their  rights
      (if they have any) as British citizens.
   1. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer falls
      to be given to the question: is it in the best interests of the  child
      to remain? The longer the child has been here, the more  advanced  (or
      critical) the stage of his education, the looser  his  ties  with  the
      country in question, and the more deleterious the consequences of  his
      return, the greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.
      If it is overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that  he  should
      not return, the need to maintain immigration control may well not  tip
      the balance. By contrast if it is in the  child's  best  interests  to
      remain, but only on balance (with  some  factors  pointing  the  other
      way), the result may be the opposite.
   1. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken into  account
      the strong weight to be given to  the  need  to  maintain  immigration
      control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the country  and  the
      fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no entitlement to remain.
      The immigration history of the parents may also be  relevant  e.g.  if
      they are overstayers, or have acted deceitfully.

37. Lewison LJ said:

         49.  Second, as Christopher Clarke LJ points out, the evaluation of
             the  best  interests  of  children  in  immigration  cases  is
             problematic.  In the  real  world,  the  appellant  is  almost
             always the parent who has no right to remain in the  UK.   The
             parent thus relies  on  the  best  interests  of  his  or  her
             children in order  to  piggyback  on  their  rights.   In  the
             present case, as  there  is  no  doubt  in  many  others,  the
             Immigration Judge made two findings about the children's  best
             interests:

             (a)  the best interests  of  the  children  are  obviously  to
                  remain with their parents; [29] and

             (b)  it is in the best interests of the  children  that  their
                  education in the UK [is] not to be disrupted [53].

         50.  What, if any, assumptions are to be made about the immigration
             status of the parent?  If one takes the facts as they  are  in
             reality, then the first of the  Immigration  Judge's  findings
             about  the  best  interests  of  the  children  point  towards
             removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the  parent
             has the right to remain, then one is assuming  the  answer  to
             the very question the Tribunal has to decide.  Or is there  is
             a middle ground, in which one has to assess the best interests
             of the children without regard to the  immigration  status  of
             the parent?

38. The judge went on to analyse ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 in order to  elicit  an  answer  to  this
    question.  He reached the following conclusion:

         58.   In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world.  One parent has no right to
             remain, but the other parent  does,  that  is  the  background
             against which the assessment is conducted.  If neither  parent
             has the right to remain, then that is the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted.  Thus the ultimate question
             will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to  follow  the
             parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?"

         59.  On the facts of  ZH  it  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family will be separated and the children will be deprived
             of the right to grow up in the  country  of  which  they  were
             citizens.

         60.  That is a long way from the facts of our case.   In  our  case
             none of the family is a British citizen.  None has  the  right
             to remain in this country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the
             father has no independent right to remain.  If the parents are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go with  them.   As  the  Immigration  Judge  found  it  is
             obviously in their best interest to remain with their parents.
              Although it  is,  of  course  a  question  of  fact  for  the
             Tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents.  Just as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world.

39. Jackson LJ agreed with both judgments.

40. The "hypothetical" approach sanctioned by Christopher Clarke LJ  is  in
    line with the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in MK (India)  which
    he cites with approval.  In MK, the Upper Tribunal emphasised the  need
    to conduct the initial best interest assessment without any immigration
    control overtones.  These only came into play when the  decision  maker
    moved on to a wider proportionality assessment.

41.  However,  the  "real  world"  approach  is  not   unprecedented.    In
    particular, it is reflected in the leading  speech  of  Lord  Hodge  in
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State [2013] UKSC 74, where  the  Supreme  Court
    dismissed an appeal against  removal  brought  by  a  Congolese  family
    comprising Mr and Mrs Zoumbas and two daughters, who had been  born  in
    the United Kingdom on 3 February 2007 and 14 April  2011  respectively.
    At paragraph 24 Lord Hodge said:

         There is no irrationality in the conclusion  that  it  was  in  the
         children's best interests to go with their parents to the  Republic
         of Congo.  No doubt it would have  been  possible  to  have  stated
         that, other things being equal, it was in the best interests of the
         children that they and their parents stayed in the  United  Kingdom
         so that they could obtain such benefits as healthcare and education
         which the decision maker recognised might be of a  higher  standard
         than would be available in the Congo. But  other  things  were  not
         equal.  They were not British  citizens.   They  had  no  right  to
         future education and healthcare in this country.  They were part of
         a close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of an age
         when their emotional needs could  only  be  fully  met  within  the
         immediate family unit.   Such  integration  as  had  occurred  into
         United Kingdom society would have been predominantly in the context
         of that  family  unit.   Most  significantly,  the  decision  maker
         concluded that they could be removed to the Republic  of  Congo  in
         the care of  their  parents  without  serious  detriment  to  their
         wellbeing.

42. The significance of this brief survey of the relevant law  is  that  it
    illuminates the question of how the decision maker should go about  the
    task of  deciding  whether  an  applicant  meets  the  requirements  of
    EX.1(a)(ii) or Rule 276ADE(iv). The assessment of reasonableness  is  a
    holistic one, and the immigration status and history of the parents  is
    a relevant consideration, following EV (Philippines).   The  fact  that
    there is a qualifying child, either because the child has accrued seven
    years residence in the UK or because the child is a  British  national,
    is not a trump card, as otherwise there would not be a  requirement  to
    go on to consider whether, nonetheless, it is reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

43. Judge Cockrill erred in law in finding that  the  claimant  S  met  the
    gateway requirement contained in Rule 276ADE(iv).  In order to  qualify
    for consideration under this Rule, the claimant  had  to  have  accrued
    seven years' residence as at the date of application.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that the application was submitted on 15 November  2013,  which
    was eight days short of the required seven year residence  period.   So
    it was a near miss, but it was still a miss.  Mr Martin relied  on  the
    Secretary of State's long residence guidance which  provides  that  the
    Home Office may grant an application if it is received 28 days or  less
    before the applicant meets the required  qualifying  period,  "provided
    they meet all the other Rules for long residence".

44. However, the  guidance  is  permissive  not  mandatory.   Moreover  the
    proviso is crucial.  The caseworker is permitted to treat the applicant
    as completing the required qualifying  period  only  if  the  applicant
    meets all the other Rules for long residence.  The  caseworker  dealing
    with the application reasonably took the view that the claimant did not
    meet the second limb of Rule 276ADE.  So  the  decision  to  treat  the
    claimant as not meeting the seven year qualifying  requirement  was  in
    accordance with the law, and there was not a failure to apply  relevant
    Home Office guidance.

45. The judge's approach to assessing the second limb of  Rule  276ADE  was
    also erroneous in law.  Following the guidance of the Court  of  Appeal
    in EV (Philippines), a copy of which was included in  the  Home  Office
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal, the judge needed  to  conduct  a
    rounded assessment of reasonableness in a real world context.  Although
    he had been here for  a  substantial  period  "like  seven  years"  the
    claimant could not "really expect to enjoy the benefits  of  such  long
    stay". Even if he had accrued seven years residence in accordance  with
    the rules (i.e. by the date of application) this would not have created
    a presumption that it was now unreasonable for the claimant  to  leave.
    It  was  wholly  wrong  to  focus   exclusively   on   the   claimant's
    understandable desire to complete his A level studies,  without  paying
    any regard to a number of counterbalancing factors.  These included the
    fact that the claimant had no right to remain, in common with the  rest
    of his family, and no entitlement to continue to be educated at  public
    expense in the UK.  The judge failed to ask himself the right  question
    which was whether it was reasonable to expect the child with  no  right
    to remain to follow his parents with no right to remain to Mauritius.

46. It is argued in the Rule 24 response that even if the judge  was  wrong
    to find that the claimant qualified  under  the  Rules,  there  was  no
    material error as the judge was entitled  to  find  that  the  claimant
    qualified for leave to remain outside the Rules, applying Chikwamba.

47.  The  Chikwamba  argument  accepted  by  the  judge  was  that  it  was
    unnecessary to expect the claimant to go to Mauritius simply to make an
    application which was then going to be successful,  so  that  he  could
    return here.  His line of reasoning was fatally flawed.   The  claimant
    was not entitled to make an application under the Rules  for  leave  to
    enter or remain in order to complete his  A  level  studies  at  public
    expense.  The claimant had not applied to complete his A level  studies
    at private expense under the points-based system, and so the  Chikwamba
    argument simply did not arise.

48. It is apparent from Mr Martin's skeleton argument  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the judge misunderstood Mr Martin's  case  on  Chikwamba.
    Mr Martin was not postulating a scenario whereby the claimant went back
    to Mauritius in order to make an entry clearance application,  but  was
    relying on the proposition that the claimant should not be required  to
    make another in-country application for  leave  to  remain  under  Rule
    276ADE "just to satisfy a formal requirement  when  the  substance  has
    been met".  But this line of argument was not one which the judge could
    entertain, as the judge was constrained to follow the rules:  he  could
    not re-write them to accommodate the fact that  the  claimant  had  now
    passed the  seven  year  mark.  The  claimant  had  not  made  a  fresh
    application after accruing seven year's residence, and so he could  not
    meet Rule 276ADE.

49. Following the Nagre/Gulshan line of  authority,  the  judge  could  not
    simply embark on a freestanding Article 8 assessment outside the  Rules
    without acknowledging that the claimant's private life  claim  did  not
    succeed under Rule 276ADE,  and  without  addressing  the  question  of
    whether there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
    by the Rules which justified the Article 8 claim succeeding outside the
    Rules.  Following MM (Lebanon), it was arguably not necessary  for  the
    judge to address this by posing an intermediate or threshold  test  for
    the Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, but he  nonetheless  needed
    to engage with this question in the course of a rounded  assessment  of
    the wider proportionality issues.

50. The judge's errors in respect of the  claimant's  appeal  affected  his
    decision on the other appeals, and  so  they  are  all  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law in consequence and must be set aside.  The  judge
    was also wrong to find that the  parents  succeeded  in  their  appeals
    under the Rules.  They were not eligible  under  the  parent  route  as
    neither of them had sole responsibility for the claimant's  upbringing.
    They had shared responsibility for the  claimant  and  they  all  lived
    together.

The Remaking of the Decision

51. Mr Martin and Mr Duffy agreed that it was not necessary for me to  hear
    any further evidence for the purposes of remaking  the  decision.   The
    evidence tendered before the First-tier Tribunal by  the  claimants  is
    not disputed by the Secretary of State.

52. By way of an update, Mr  Martin  reported  that  the  claimant's  older
    brother R had been required to take a year out of his degree studies by
    his college, pending the resolution of his immigration status.  As  for
    the claimant S, he has now just passed his 18th birthday, and he is due
    to take his A levels exams in July 2015.

53. Realistically, neither  the  first,  second  nor  third  claimants  can
    succeed in an Article 8 appeal on his or her own account.  Each of them
    is piggybacking on the fourth claimant's Article 8 appeal.

54. For the reasons given in my error of law ruling, the fourth claimant  S
    cannot succeed in his appeal under Rule 276ADE(iv) because he does  not
    meet the gateway requirement of having accrued seven  years'  residence
    in the United Kingdom by the date of the application.

55. I refer to the five point Razgar test.  While the claimant continues to
    enjoy family life with his parents and older brother, the effect of the
    refusal decision is not  to  interfere  with  family  life,  as  it  is
    proposed that the entire family returns to  Mauritius.   On  the  other
    hand, I answer questions 1 and 2 of the Razgar test in  favour  of  the
    claimant with regard to the establishment of private life in the United
    Kingdom.

56. I answer questions 3 and 4 of the Razgar test in favour of the SSHD, so
    the crucial question is whether the refusal decision is  proportionate.
    From a private life perspective the claimant's case is weaker  than  it
    was, as he is now an  adult.   Under  the  UNCRC  which  underpins  our
    domestic jurisprudence on the topic of giving primary consideration  in
    the proportionality assessment to the best interests of minor children,
    reaching the age of majority is an absolute cut off point.   The  UNCRC
    only  applies  to  children  under  the  age  of  18.   Similarly,  the
    obligation of the Secretary of State under the 2009 Act to have  regard
    to the safety and welfare of children in the UK does not extend  beyond
    a child's 18th birthday.

57. But even if the claimant continues to be treated as if he was  a  child
    under the age of 18, I consider that overall his best interests lie  in
    him returning with his family to Mauritius.  While  this  will  shatter
    the private life that he has established here, he can reconstitute  his
    private life in all its essential elements in Mauritius, the country of
    which he is a national and where he has lived for the majority  of  his
    life.  His A level studies will be disrupted, but the knowledge  gained
    thus far will not be wasted.   Although  there  will  be  delay  and  a
    considerable amount of inconvenience, the claimant can complete  his  A
    levels, or an equivalent set of qualifications, in Mauritius.

58. The claimant's situation is very far from  the  paradigm  case  of  CDS
    (Brazil).  He has completed the course  of  studies  envisaged  by  the
    grant of discretionary leave to remain.  The reason for  his  inability
    to complete his A level studies is not a failure to meet some technical
    requirement of the Rules, but a simple lack of entitlement to follow or
    complete such A level studies in the first place.  The studies are  not
    privately funded, but have been pursued at public expense.  The parents
    who are responsible for his welfare knew full well  when  the  claimant
    embarked on his A level studies that the family's  discretionary  leave
    to remain was about to expire, and that they were expected to return to
    Mauritius, as the claimant's father had told the Tribunal was the plan.
     So it was always on the cards that the claimant might well not be able
    to complete his A level studies. Insofar as it is material, I  consider
    it is likely that the claimant himself was aware of this fact.  As  the
    claimant is part of a close knit family, it is not to be inferred  that
    his father misled the claimant as to the precariousness of his  ability
    to complete the A level studies upon which he had embarked. I find that
    the claimant would have been sufficiently mature to appreciate that  he
    had no legitimate expectation of being able to  complete  his  A  level
    studies, but only a hope that he might be  allowed  to  do  so  if  the
    application for further leave  to  remain  was  successful  and/or  the
    appeal against the refusal of further discretionary leave to remain was
    ultimately successful.

59. On the wider proportionality assessment, the crucial factor  militating
    against the claimant is that he has no right to remain under the  Rules
    in common with the rest of his family.

60.  Part  5A  entitled  "Article  8   of   the   ECHR:   public   interest
    considerations" came into  force  from  28  July  2014.   Section  117A
    provides:

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest  question'  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

61.  Section  117B  lists  the  following  "Article  8:   public   interest
    considerations applicable in all cases (my emphasis)":

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

62. A public interest consideration in the claimant's favour  is  that  he,
    together with the rest of his family, speaks English; and the family as
    a whole are financially  independent  insofar  as  they  have  hitherto
    maintained and accommodated themselves adequately without  recourse  to
    public funds.  But little weight should be given to a private life that
    is formed by a person while his right to remain here is precarious, and
    this consideration applies to the claimant, just as much as it  applies
    to the remaining  members  of  his  family.   The  claimant  is  not  a
    qualifying child, and even if he was, it would be reasonable to  expect
    him to leave the United Kingdom with the rest of his family.

63. In conclusion, I find that the refusal of further  discretionary  leave
    to remain to the fourth claimant, and the prospective  removal  of  the
    fourth claimant together with the rest of his family, is  proportionate
    to the  legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,  namely  the
    maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.  As the  fourth
    claimant's Article 8 claim  fails,  it  necessarily  follows  that  the
    intrinsically weaker Article 8 claims of the remaining  family  members
    must also fail.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  and  the
following decision is substituted: the appeals on Article 8 grounds  of  all
four claimants  against  the  refusal  of  further  discretionary  leave  to
remain,  and  against  removal  under  Section  47  of  the  2006  Act,  are
dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson




