

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05908/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 September 2013                             |On 9 September 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           BAHADUR KRISHNA GURUNG
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Howells, instructed by NC Brothers & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department. For the sake of convenience we refer to Mr  Gurung
    as the claimant.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nepal born 15 August 1979.  His father  is
    a former member of the Brigade of Gurkhas and  served  in  the  British
    Army. In  2006,  after  a  change  of  policy  by  the  United  Kingdom
    government, the claimant's  father  was  granted  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain. Shortly thereafter the claimant's mother and three sisters were
    also allowed to settle in United Kingdom. The claimant came  to  United
    Kingdom as a visitor  on  12  July  2007.  He  subsequently  lodged  an
    application  for  settlement  as  a  dependent  of  his  father.   This
    application was refused by the Secretary of State, a  decision  against
    which the claimant appealed. The hearing of the appeal appears to  have
    been delayed pending a decision on a lead case  in  the  Administrative
    Court relating to the settlement of Gurkhas in United Kingdom. Although
    it is not entirely clear, it appears that the Secretary of  State  then
    withdrew her decision of 11 February 2008 and made a  further  decision
    in June 2010. Immigration Judge Callow dismissed the claimant's  appeal
    against  such  decision  in  a  determination  of  12  November   2010,
    concluding, inter alia, that the claimant  was  not  dependent  on  his
    father, and that his claims not to have been employed prior to visiting
    the United Kingdom were untruthful.

 3. On 19 February 2013 the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  remove
    the claimant from  the  United  Kingdom.  The  claimant  appealed  this
    decision to  the  Tribunal,  such  appeal  being  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Morgan on the 16 May 2013, and allowed on  human  rights
    grounds (article 8) on 24 May 2013.

 4. The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  the
    permission of Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray,  granted  on
    13 June 2013. Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. Having heard submissions from the parties I concluded that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision did not contain an error on  a  point  of  law
    such that it ought to be set aside. I  announced  my  decision  at  the
    hearing, and now give my reasons.

 6. I shall deal with each of the Secretary of  State's  grounds  in  turn.
    Paragraphs 1 to 3 of the pleaded grounds  submit  that  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal judge erred in failing to consider whether  the  claimant  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and further, given  that  it
    is plain that the claimant could not meet  the  requirements  of  those
    Rules, in failing to take such fact into account.  At  the  hearing  Ms
    Holmes observed that the Secretary of State had  carefully  considered,
    in her refusal decision, whether the claimant met the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules, and concluded  that  he  did  not.  She  further
    observed that the judge made no  reference  to  the  Rules  within  his
    determination. She submitted that such failure  was  an  error  on  the
    judge's part, and that this error was material because  had  the  judge
    had regard to the Immigration Rules, his mind  "may  have  been  better
    concentrated" when dealing with the article 8 considerations outside of
    the Rules.

 7. Ms Holmes is entirely correct in her observation  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge refer, in his determination, to the Secretary of State's
    considerations and conclusions made  in  relation  to  the  Immigration
    Rules. However, that he did not do so has to be viewed in  the  context
    of the fact it was  never  part  of  the  claimant's  case  before  the
    Tribunal that he could meet the requirements of the Rules.

 8. When a Tribunal determines an individual  appeal  based  on  article  8
    considerations outside the rules,  it  should  consider  the  issue  of
    proportionality  in  context  of  the  Secretary   of   State's   clear
    expression, as set out in the Immigration Rules, of where  the  balance
    lies [MF (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393(IAC)]. There
    is, however, nothing within the  determination  of  Judge  Morgan  that
    leads me to conclude that he was not aware that this was so, or that he
    did not take such an approach. The fact that the judge made no  mention
    of the requirements of the Immigration Rules in an appeal in which  the
    Rules were not in issue, does not of  itself  lead  me  to  a  contrary
    conclusion. Judge Morgan is a judge of a specialist Tribunal  and  must
    be taken to be aware, unless the terms of his decision clearly  dictate
    otherwise, of the obligations imposed of him in this regard.

 9. Paragraph 4 of the Secretary  of  State's  pleaded  grounds  make,  and
    assert, statements of fact, and does not particularise or identify  any
    error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.  Likewise
    paragraphs 5 to 7 of the pleaded grounds make statements  of  law,  but
    again make no attempt to identify any legal  error  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.

10. In paragraph 8 of the pleaded grounds the Secretary of  State  observes
    that Immigration Judge Callow made an adverse finding in respect of the
    claimant's asserted dependency on his father; identifying in particular
    the rejection of claimant's evidence that  he  had  been  not  been  in
    employment prior to coming to the United Kingdom. Although the terms of
    this ground do not go on and identify claimed error in  Judge  Morgan's
    determination, at the hearing Ms Holmes submitted that Judge Morgan had
    erred in coming to a contrary conclusion of  fact  without  giving  due
    weight to, or sufficient reasons for, departing from the conclusions of
    Judge Callow.

11. It was pointed out to Ms Holmes during the course  of  her  submissions
    that the presenting officer who had appeared before  Judge  Morgan  had
    not sought  to  impugn  the  factual  basis  of  the  claimant's  claim
    [recorded in paragraph 10 of the  determination]  and  was  content  to
    proceed on the basis that the key factual circumstances of  the  appeal
    were not in dispute. In response Ms Holmes indicated that a note on the
    Secretary of State's file, drawn up by the presenting officer  who  had
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, suggested that the credibility
    of the claimant's account had not been conceded  before  the  tribunal.
    She accepted however that the terms of the Judge Morgan's determination
    stated otherwise and that no point had been taken in  this  respect  in
    grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    She was unable  to  explain  why  this  was  so,  or  why  neither  the
    aforementioned note, nor a statement from the presenting  officer,  had
    been provided to the tribunal in compliance with directions.

12. Having acknowledged her difficulties in this regard Ms Holmes  did  not
    seek to amend the Secretary of State's grounds so as to make  challenge
    to the recording of the aforementioned concession. Had she  done  so  I
    was  would  have  refused  to  grant  permission  for  such  amendment,
    ostensibly for the reasons identified in  the  previous  paragraph.  In
    such circumstances this ground falls away. The judge was  not  required
    to give further reasons for departing from  a  finding  made  by  Judge
    Callow; it was sufficient that he proceeded on a basis of fact accepted
    by the parties before him.

13. Paragraph 9 of the pleaded grounds is narrative, and  again,  does  not
    seek to identify or particularise an error in the First-tier Tribunal's
    determination.

14. In paragraphs 10 and 11 of the grounds it is submitted that  the  judge
    erred in (i) giving undue weight to his finding that the  claimant  was
    financially and emotionally dependent on his parents and  (ii)  failing
    to  give  sustainable  reasons  for   finding   that   the   claimant's
    relationship with his parents went beyond "normal emotional ties".

15. I reject both of these submissions. As to the former, matters of weight
    are for the judge determining the appeal. It cannot be  said  that  the
    weight attached to the claimant's dependency on his parents was, on the
    facts of this case,  perverse,  and  neither  did  Ms  Holmes  seek  to
    persuade me that this was so.

16. As to the second of the aforementioned submissions, Ms Holmes  accepted
    that it had been conceded before the First-tier Tribunal  that  article
    8(1) of the Human Rights convention was engaged. It is in this  context
    that the conclusions and the findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge,
    made in relation to article 8 (1), must be taken. The  judge  proceeded
    on the basis of the accepted  facts.  He  set  out  a  summary  of  the
    relevant facts in paragraphs 12 to 14 of the determination. He accepted
    that the claimant was, and had always been, a member  of  his  father's
    household; save for a short  period  of  time  between  the  claimant's
    family members' arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  claimant's
    arrival here. The judge concluded that the claimant had not established
    an independent life and that he was still financially  and  emotionally
    dependent on his parents. These were findings open to the judge on  the
    available evidence.

17. The claimant's circumstances were such that it was open to the judge to
    conclude that the he had a family  life  with  his  parents  in  United
    Kingdom. In any event, even if it could be  said  that  the  claimant's
    circumstances do not establish he had a family  life  here,  the  close
    bond he shares with his family members in the  United  Kingdom  clearly
    demonstrate he has a substantial private life here,  interference  with
    which would patently lead to the engagement of article 8. Consequently,
    as the judge identifies in  paragraph  10  of  his  determination,  the
    appeal turned on whether  it  would  be  proportionate  to  remove  the
    claimant.

18. Paragraph 12 of the pleaded grounds appears to relate to different case
    altogether. It is prefaced on the claimant being outside of the  United
    Kingdom; asserting, inter alia, that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    provide adequate reasons as to why family life could  not  continue  as
    presently constituted. The ground further asserts that  separation  and
    interference with claimant's family life was one of choice and personal
    preference, not necessity. It  is  to  be  recalled  that  it  was  the
    claimant's case, and the  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that
    family life should continue as it is at present; the claimant  and  his
    parents living together as a family unit in the United Kingdom.

19. Finally, as to the submission in paragraph 13 of the grounds  that  the
    judge erred in failing to give adequate reasons for his proportionality
    assessment, I find this to be unarguable. As I  have  identified  above
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  set  out  the  circumstances  of  the
    claimant's relationship  with  his  family  members,  both  prior,  and
    subsequent, to his arrival in the United Kingdom. He made  findings  of
    fact that were open to  him  regarding  the  issue  of  the  claimant's
    dependency on his parents and took into account, as he was entitled to,
    the historic injustice caused to the  claimant  and  his  father  as  a
    consequence of the delay in the UK authorities recognising that Gurkhas
    should have had their service to this country rewarded by being allowed
    to settle here. Whilst the judge makes no reference  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's  decision  in  Sharmilla  Gurung  [2013]   EWCA  Civ  8,   his
    conclusions are entirely  consistent  with  it.  The  court  in  Gurung
    observed, when  considering  appeals  relating  to  refusals  of  entry
    clearance of 'over-age dependents' of former members of the Brigade  of
    Gurkhas, that "If a Gurkha he can  show  that,  but  for  the  historic
    injustice, he would have settled in the UK at a time when his dependent
    (now) adult child would have been able to accompany him as a  dependent
    child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding that  it
    is proportionate to permit the adult child to join his family now." The
    claimant's father stated, and his evidence was accepted, that he  would
    have settled in the UK upon his retirement from the Brigade of  Gurkhas
    had the opportunity to do so been available to him. At  such  time  the
    claimant would have been under the age of 18.

20. Looking at the determination as a whole  I  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge took into account all materially relevant  matters,  and
    did not take into account any irrelevancies. The determination read  as
    a whole makes sense, and the  tribunal's  conclusions  were  reasonably
    open to it having regard to the accepted evidence.

21. For all these reasons I conclude that the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on a point of  law
    and must remain standing.

Decision

For the reasons given above, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
not contain an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal
and it therefore remains standing.  The  claimant's  appeal  is  allowed  on
Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 4 September 2013

