
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05833/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 16 January 2015                            |On 20 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                        VERA BANFOGHA NKAMANYANG AWA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Westmaas, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon born on 10  June  1985.  She
         has appealed with the permission of the First-tier Tribunal against
         a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scobbie, promulgated
         on 1 October 2014, dismissing her appeal against a decision of  the
         respondent, served on 13 January 2014, to  refuse  her  application
         for leave to remain outside the rules  by  reference  to  paragraph
         322(1) of the Immigration Rules, HC395.


      2. The background is that the appellant was granted leave to remain in
         the UK as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant from 6 September  2011
         until 6 September 2013. Towards the end of that  period  she  began
         making enquiries about joining the British  Army.  On  5  September
         2014 the appellant applied for further  leave  under  a  concession
         outside the rules for leave to remain  to  enlist  in  the  British
         Army. In the solicitors' covering letter reliance was placed on the
         IDIs Ch 2, s1, annex A, para 2 or Ch 2.1.7. The letter  stated  the
         appellant was booked to have an assessment for her  suitability  to
         enlist on 12 September 2013.


      3. The appellant's application was refused by the  respondent  because
         the British Army could not find  her  application  to  enlist.  The
         decision was made by reference to paragraph 322(1)  of  the  rules,
         which states that leave must be refused if leave  is  being  sought
         for a purpose not covered by the rules.


      4. The appellant's husband, Mr Fitzgerald Fonane Mbekwa, whom she  had
         met and married in the UK on 28 May 2013, was also refused  further
         leave as the appellant's dependant. He  does  not  appear  to  have
         lodged an appeal.


      5. The grounds of appeal argued the application  had  not  been  fully
         considered and discretion should have been exercised differently in
         the appellant's favour. Correspondence  was  attached  showing  the
         appellant had applied to join the Army. Alternatively, the decision
         was a breach of the appellant's human rights.


      6. The appellant was represented  by  counsel  at  her  appeal.  Judge
         Scobbie heard the appeal on 15 September 2014.  He  heard  detailed
         evidence from the appellant about the progress of  her  application
         to enlist. He noted the appellant was seeking leave for  a  purpose
         not covered by the rules and therefore the  mandatory  refusal  was
         correctly made.  He  accepted  the  respondent  had  discretion  to
         exercise whether to grant leave outside the rules. However, he  had
         no power to exercise discretion himself. He upheld the decision. In
         paragraph 21 he gave brief reasons why there had been no breach  of
         the appellant's right to enjoy her private life under article 8.


      7. The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  by  Judge  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Levin because he found it was arguable that the
         judge's apparent acceptance that the Army  had  no  record  of  the
         appellant's application to enlist was perverse.


      8. The respondent filed a response opposing the  appeal,  arguing  the
         refusal letter did not state  that  there  was  no  record  of  the
         appellant's application but it appeared the date of assessment  had
         passed. Furthermore, according to the presenting  officer's  notes,
         the appellant did not rely on article 8.


      9. I heard submissions from the  representatives  as  to  whether  the
         judge made a material error of law. I have recorded  them  in  full
         and merely attempt to summarise them here.


     10. Mr Westmaas accepted the appeal was outside the rules and that  the
         Tribunal had no jurisdiction to exercise discretion to depart  from
         the rules. He could not show me the source of the concession relied
         on by the appellant but Mr Avery accepted that there was  a  policy
         to grant a period of leave to enable certain Commonwealth  citizens
         to enlist in the Army.


     11. Mr Westmaas based his arguments on breach of the common law duty to
         act fairly in line  with  the  decision  in  Patel  (revocation  of
         sponsor licence - fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT  00211  (IAC).  He
         produced a letter from the Ministry of Defence,  addressed  to  the
         appellant, as "Vera Awa", dated 28 October 2014, which confirms she
         did apply to join the Army on 9 January 2013  and  her  application
         was active  during  the  time  of  her  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. The respondent had asked for sight of her application  in
         January 2014 but had used the name "Banfogha Nkamanwang  (sic)  Awa
         Vera" which was not the name the appellant had  used  to  apply  to
         join the Army, which was "Vera Awa". As a  result  her  application
         had not been located. Mr Westmaas argued the respondent's  decision
         was unfair in light of the known facts.


     12. Mr Avery argued there was no error in  the  decision.  The  judge's
         decision had been inevitable.


     13. The circumstances of this appellant's appeal are very  unfortunate.
         It is clear the appellant's application was  considered  under  the
         concession and that checks were made with the Army. The results are
         shown at Appendix E of the respondent's bundle. There was no record
         of any application in the name of  Banfogha  Nkamanyang  Awa  Vera,
         which was the name used on the  application  form  FLR(O)  and  the
         covering letter  from  the  appellant's  solicitors.  Her  passport
         records her surname as "Awa Vera" and her given names  as  Banfogha
         Nkamanyang. The appellant accepted this was incorrect and her first
         name was Vera. As a consequence of the  difference  in  names,  the
         wrong information had been provided to the respondent by the  Army,
         which resulted in the application being refused.


     14. However, none of this means there was a material error  of  law  in
         the Tribunal's assessment. The letter of 28 October  2014  was  not
         before the judge. He had been shown the response from the MoD which
         led to the decision. He had also been shown emails produced by  the
         appellant suggesting her she had made an application.  He  was  not
         bound to prefer the appellant's evidence and he was  certainly  not
         "perverse" in failing to do so.


     15. In any event, the point now being pursued was  never  made  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal, which cannot  therefore  be  faulted  for  not
         considering it. I can  find  no  reference  at  all  to  any  Patel
         unfairness argument being put forward and  there  is  no  reference
         either to arguments that the respondent had  failed  to  apply  her
         policy.


     16. It was open to the appellant to have argued the decision was not in
         accordance with the law because  the  respondent  had  applied  her
         policy wrongly owing to a misapprehension of fact, in line with  DS
         Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148. However, the appellant did not pursue  that
         argument before the First-tier Tribunal and, in any event, she  did
         not establish the error of fact.


     17. As far as any argument based on Patel was concerned, in my view  it
         would  have  been  doomed  to  failure.  There  was  no  procedural
         unfairness in the way  the  respondent  approached  her  task.  She
         considered  the  application  under  the  policy  and  checked  the
         appellant's claim with the MoD. It was not due to  any  failure  on
         the part of the respondent that the result came back  negative.  It
         was caused by the appellant using a  different  name  in  her  Army
         application to the one she used for her immigration application.


     18. In Marghia (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC) the  Upper
         Tribunal provided the following guidance:

              "9. ...  The "common law duty to act  with  fairness",  which
             the judge refers to in paragraph 15 of the  Determination  and
             Reasons, is the common law  duty  of  a  decision-maker  or  a
             public body to make decisions in a manner which is fair,  i.e.
             the common law duty of fairness is about  procedural  fairness
             in this context. There is, however, no absolute duty at common
             law to make decisions  which  are  substantively  "fair".  The
             Court will only interfere with administrative decisions  which
             are unfair in this second, i.e., substantive, sense where they
             can be shown to  be  Wednesbury  unreasonable,  i.e.  that  no
             reasonable decision-maker or public body could have arrived at
             such a decision.


             10. Ms  Malhotra  and  the  Judge  erroneously  use  the  term
             "fairness"  in  the  second,  substantive  sense.  It  is  not
             suggested, however (nor could it  be)  that  the  decision  in
             question was Wednesbury unreasonable. It was a matter for  the
             Secretary of State as to whether  or  not  she  exercised  any
             residual discretion to permit the Claimant to have  a  further
             Tier 4 visa notwithstanding her clear inability  to  meet  the
             criteria set out in the Rules. That exercise of such  residual
             discretion, which does not appear in the Rules, is  absolutely
             a matter for the Secretary of State and nobody else, including
             the court (see Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148). The Court  should  not
             have sought to impose its own view. This trespassed  upon  the
             proper functions of the executive.  Nor  could  there  be  any
             suggestion of any procedural unfairness in this case. The mere
             fact that the judge in question may have had sympathy for  the
             claimant or regarded the substantive decision of the Secretary
             of State as "unfair" is not to point.


     19. It will be remembered that, in Patel, the issue was the  respondent
         had refused an application by a would-be Tier 4  (General)  Student
         Migrant for further  leave  because  the  sponsor  licence  of  the
         proposed college had been revoked without the applicant being aware
         of or responsible for it. It was procedurally unfair to refuse  the
         application without giving the appellant the  chance  to  vary  his
         application. In contrast, in the present case, the  respondent  did
         not act unfairly in refusing the application which was based on the
         result of the  verification  check  she  conducted.  In  effect  Mr
         Westmaas was arguing there had been substantive unfairness.


     20. Mr Westmaas did not pursue  any  arguments  regarding  the  judge's
         dismissal of the article 8 claim which, I note, was included in the
         grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


     21. For these reasons, I find there is no error of law  in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal's assessment and its decision dismissing  the  appeal
         shall stand.


NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of
    law and his decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.


    Anonymity direction made.






                               Signed   Date 19 January 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
