
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05428/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 24 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               KWABENA YAMOAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None (and the Appellant did not attend)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, applied for a residence card as  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in  the  UK.   The
    application was refused on 13 January 2014, but the appellant's  appeal
    was then allowed, on the papers, by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    James (determination promulgated 23 July 2014).

2.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that the judge had not considered and applied the law as  described  in
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  24  (IAC)  (16
    January 2014).    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Brunnen on 7 August 2014.

3.   There was no appearance on the day of the hearing, and  no  message  of
    any sort was received. We noted that notices of hearing had been served
    to the appellant at his  home  address,  and  to  his  representatives,
    Michael & Co  Legal  Services.   These  were  accompanied  by  standard
    directions about the hearing.  There was therefore nothing  to  suggest
    that the appellant was not aware of the hearing, and neither was  there
    any application for an adjournment. Having considered these matters  we
    decided to proceed with the hearing in the absence  of  the  appellant.
    We were satisfied that he had been notified  of  the  hearing,  and  we
    considered that it was in the interests of justice to proceed (Rule  38
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

 4.  The  determination  of  this  appeal  on  the  papers,  in  July  2014,
    postdated the promulgation of the Kareem case.  TA and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316  (IAC)  clarified  Kareem,  removing
    room for misunderstandings that had arisen from certain  statements  in
    the headnote.

5.   We have decided that there was an error of law material to the  outcome
    of the appeal, namely the failure to consider the law as stated in  the
    Kareem case.  We accept that  the  Kareem  case  was  promulgated  some
    months before the determination on the papers, and that it  did  amount
    to a statement of the law.  As such the decision  allowing  the  appeal
    without considering the Kareem point must be said to involve  an  error
    on a point of law that was material to the outcome.

6.   We therefore set aside the decision allowing the appeal.   Since  there
    is no evidence before us about the legal position  in  the  country  of
    nationality of  the  EEA  partner  (the  Netherlands)  we  re-make  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal.  Following Kareem there  is  a  need
    for such evidence, even if all other matters  were  to  be  decided  in
    favour of the  marriage  having  complied  with  the  requirements  for
    validity in Ghana. The appeal of the Secretary of  State  is  therefore
    allowed.

7.   It was not suggested that there was any  need  for  anonymity  in  this
    appeal, and we make no such order.  The judge who allowed the appeal at
    the First-tier made a whole fee award, but since we  are  remaking  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal there can be no fee award.

Decision

8.   The decision allowing the appeal is set aside.   The  decision  in  the
    appeal is remade as follows.

9.   The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb             22 October 2014
