
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05262/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 December 2016                  |On 16 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                SAFEER AHMAD
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr  P  Haywood,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors
For the  Respondent:     Mr  P  Armstrong,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 10  January  1983.  He
      entered the UK as a Tier 4 migrant in October 2006 with leave for  two
      years and in October 2011 was granted discretionary leave on the basis
      of his marriage to a British national until October 2014. The marriage
      appears to have broken down  before  the  expiry  of  the  appellant's
      period of leave but he did not  disclose  this  to  the  Secretary  of
      State; nor did he initially do so when he sought further leave.  After
      seeking  further  information  of  the  ongoing  marriage   from   the
      appellant, it transpired that he had divorced his first wife  in  June
      2014 after commencing another relationship in 2011-12.  He  sought  to
      remain on the basis of his private and family life.


   2. The application was refused on  26  January  2015  and  the  appellant
      appealed the decision. He did not attend the hearing of his appeal and
      the matter was decided on the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Plumptre who dismissed the appeal.


   3. The appellant's challenge to the determination is that the  respondent
      failed to consider the exercise of her  discretion  under  the  active
      review of her policy and the judge  erred  in  her  finding  that  the
      policy did not apply to the  appellant  because  he  had  not  claimed
      asylum.


   4. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Haywood  repeated  that  argument.  He
      submitted that the policy did not just  apply  to  those  who  claimed
      asylum and that even if the  basis  on  which  the  initial  grant  of
      discretionary leave had changed, the respondent had  a  discretion  to
      consider any other grounds put  forward.  He  argued  that  the  judge
      should have remitted the appeal to the Secretary of State to  consider
      the other matters raised.


   5. Mr Armstrong resisted that submission. He maintained that the issue of
      discretion was a matter for the respondent. The appellant  had  failed
      to attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and the judge had
      to base her  decision  on  the  papers.  The  determination  was  well
      reasoned and nothing exceptional was apparent.


   6. Mr Haywood  responded.  He  maintained  that  having  noted  that  the
      circumstances had changed, the  respondent  should  have  gone  on  to
      consider the other factors put forward.


   7. Those were the  submissions.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  I
      reserved my determination which I now give.


   8. Findings and conclusions


   9. I have considered the submissions with care. I  accept  entirely  that
      the discretionary leave policy applied to the appellant even though he
      did not claim asylum. When undertaking an active  review,  the  policy
      states the purpose to be to determine whether a  person  continues  to
      qualify for leave to remain or for leave on some other  basis  at  the
      date of the review.


  10. It is the appellant's case that the respondent only considered whether
      he qualified for leave on the basis of the original  grant  of  leave.
      However, the decision letter makes it plain that all the other matters
      put  forward  were  considered  by  the  respondent.  The   respondent
      considered the rules, she considered whether the  appellant  qualified
      as a partner or on  private  life  grounds  and  she  also  considered
      whether his circumstances warranted leave outside the rules (i.e. on a
      discretionary basis) as is plain from page 3 of the  decision  letter.
      Mr Haywood did not point  to  any  specific  matters  which  had  been
      overlooked.


  11. The application made by the appellant was in rather general terms  and
      the respondent considered the matters put to her. I am satisfied  that
      the policy, the rules and discretion were taken into account before  a
      decision was reached. As such, the judge's mistaken  belief  that  the
      policy (which was not included in the bundle before the Tribunal) only
      applied to asylum seekers is immaterial. On the available evidence, no
      other  outcome  would  have  been   possible   and,   therefore,   the
      determination shall stand. It is, of course, open to the appellant  to
      make an application to the respondent based on his new relationship.


  12. Decision


  13. The judge  made  no  errors  of  law  and  the  decision  stands.  The
      appellant's appeal is dismissed.




    Signed





         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

         Date: 20 December 2016







