
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05574/2015
                                                               IA/05329/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th June 2016                             |On 14th July 2016             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                   M.K.A.
                                    S.B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Khan of Anwar Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against the decision of Judge S J  Pacey  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 1st October 2015.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born [ ] 1997 and  [  ]  2002
    respectively.   They  are  brother  and  sister.   Because  the  second
    Appellant is a minor I have made an anonymity direction.

 3. On 30th September 2014 the Appellants applied for indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  The Appellants had arrived in the United
    Kingdom with their mother on 17th June 2012 with visas valid until 17th
    August 2014.

 4. The Appellants applied for indefinite leave on  the  basis  that  their
    father is settled in the United Kingdom.

 5. The applications were refused on 20th January 2015  with  reference  to
    paragraph 298(1) on the basis that both of the Appellants' parents were
    not present and settled in the United Kingdom.  Although  their  mother
    was present in the United Kingdom, she did not have settled status  and
    was not a British citizen.

 6. The Respondent went on to consider the family and private lives of  the
    Appellants but concluded that  their  applications  could  not  succeed
    either within or outside the Immigration Rules.

 7. The Appellants appealed to the FTT.  It was accepted that their  mother
    did not have settled status but it was contended that their father, who
    did  have  settled  status,  had  had  sole  responsibility   for   the
    Appellants' upbringing.  Reliance was also placed upon Article 8 of the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 8. The FTT found that the Appellants' mother was not settled in the United
    Kingdom.  It was also found that the Appellants had  lived  with  their
    mother in Bangladesh and travelled with her to the United Kingdom,  and
    it was not accepted that their father had had sole  responsibility  for
    their upbringing.  The FTT found that there was no evidence  whatsoever
    that the Appellants' mother had abandoned or  abdicated  responsibility
    for them.

 9. The FTT also found that there were no serious and compelling family  or
    other considerations which made exclusion of the  Appellants  from  the
    United Kingdom undesirable.  The FTT considered the best  interests  of
    the children, and also found that the appeals could  not  succeed  with
    reference to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

10. Following  dismissal  of  their  appeals  the  Appellants  applied  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It was contended that  the
    FTT had been wrong to dismiss the appeal of their mother, the  FTT  had
    heard the appeals together, but issued a separate decision and  reasons
    for the Appellants'  mother  under  reference  IA/20566/2015.   It  was
    contended  that  because  their  mother's  appeal  had   been   wrongly
    dismissed, this meant that she should be given  leave  to  remain,  and
    therefore so should the Appellants as her children.

11. It was further contended that  the  FTT  had  failed  to  consider  all
    relevant evidence when finding that the Appellants' father did not have
    sole responsibility for them.  It was also contended that the  FTT  had
    erred in failing to allow the appeals  under  Article  8  of  the  1950
    Convention, as an alternative to allowing them  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Davidge of  the  FTT  on  the
    basis that the FTT may have erred  in  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellants' mother.  Judge Davidge  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

13. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

14. Mr Khan relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  The  main  argument  was  that  the  Appellants'
    mother's  appeal  should  not  have  been  dismissed,   therefore   the
    Appellants' appeal  should  also  be  allowed.   In  relation  to  sole
    responsibility Mr Khan contended  that  the  FTT  had  not  taken  into
    account relevant evidence, and had not properly taken into account  the
    guidance given in TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049.

15. Mr McVeety contended that there was no error of law  disclosed  in  the
    FTT decision, and relied upon the written  response  dated  13th  April
    2006, which had been made pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

16. It was submitted that there was no merit in  the  suggestion  that  the
    Appellants' mother's appeal should  have  been  allowed.   As  to  sole
    responsibility,  the  grounds  simply  disclosed  a  disagreement  with
    findings made by the FTT and disclosed no error of law.

17. It was evident from the Appellants'  evidence  that  their  mother  was
    actively involved with the children, and it was open to the FTT to find
    that she had not abdicated responsibility.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I will deal, as a preliminary point, with the comment made in the grant
    of permission that the application for permission to  appeal  was  made
    late.  Both representatives  indicated  that  they  believed  that  the
    application had been made in time.  I have considered rule 33(2) of the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014, and conclude that  the  application  was  made  in
    time, and therefore there is no necessity for an application to  extend
    time.

20. Permission to appeal was refused on Article 8 grounds.  Permission  was
    granted on the ground that the FTT may have  erred  in  dismissing  the
    appeal of the Appellants' mother.  I have issued a separate decision in
    relation to the Appellants' mother, and found that the FTT did not  err
    in dismissing her appeal.

21. I do not find that the FTT erred  in  dismissing  the  appeals  of  the
    Appellants.  It is clear that  the  FTT  considered  all  the  evidence
    placed before it, and correctly applied  the  guidance  in  TD  (Yemen)
    [2006] UKAIT 00049.

22. The conclusion of the FTT that the Appellants' mother was  not  settled
    in the United Kingdom cannot be faulted.  The FTT was entitled to  find
    that the Appellants' father did not have sole responsibility for  them.
    The FTT, in my view, examined the evidence with care, and was  entitled
    to reject the assertion that the mother was no more than a  housekeeper
    for the children.  The FTT was entitled  to  find  that  there  was  no
    evidence  that  the  Appellants'  mother  had  abandoned  or  abdicated
    responsibility for the children.

23. The FTT was also entitled to find no serious and compelling  family  or
    other  considerations  which   made   exclusion   of   the   Appellants
    undesirable.

24. The grounds contained within the application for permission to  appeal,
    amount to no more than a disagreement with findings made  by  the  FTT,
    and do not disclose any error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT did not involve the making of an error  on  a  point
of law  such  that  the  decision  must  be  set  aside.   The  appeals  are
dismissed.

Anonymity

I have made an anonymity direction pursuant to rule 14 of the 2008  Tribunal
Procedure Rules because the second Appellant is a minor.  Unless  and  until
a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellants   are   granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them.  This direction applies both to the  Appellants  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 5th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the decision of the FTT stands, so does the decision not to  make  a
fee award.






Signed                              Date 5th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
