
IAC-AH-co-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/05644/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination  Promulgated   |
|On 25 November 2014                           |On 26 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FS
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                    Claimant


                         DECISION AND REASONS REMADE

    1. This is the remaking of a decision that was set aside as a result  of
       an error of law.   The Upper  Tribunal  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
       Secretary of State's against a decision by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       (FTT)  allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  a  refusal  of   a
       derivative residence card under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
       Area) Regulations 2006.   The  Upper  Tribunal  remade  the  decision
       previously but owing to a procedural irregularity that  Tribunal  did
       not have the requested written submissions before it.  That  decision
       was then set aside under Rule 43 (Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
       Rules 2008 on 1st April 2015 by Upper Tribunal Judge Latter.

    2.  The  Upper  Tribunal  has  had  regard  to  the  Claimant's  written
       submissions and evidence attached to the solicitors letter dated 14th
       February 2014.  No submissions were received from  the  Secretary  of
       State.  The  issue  related  to  Regulation  15A(4A)  of   the   2006
       Regulations, specifically  the  second  limb  whether  "the  relevant
       British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or in another EEA
       State if P were required to leave. " The Upper  Tribunal  takes  into
       account the preserved findings of fact  made  by  the  FTT  that  the
       Claimant was the primary carer of a British national child, and  that
       the child's father had a role in caring for his daughter but this was
       restricted by his working hours. The child has  emotional  ties  with
       her mother and also with her father although she became fretful  when
       with her father. There was no evidence to show that the child's  life
       would be seriously impaired such that she would be compelled to leave
       the UK with the Claimant (her non EU citizen mother) to live  outside
       the UK. The Upper Tribunal takes  into  account  the  second  witness
       statement from the Claimant's partner (although this was not evidence
       that was before the FTT). He indicates that  he  is  unable  to  look
       after his child full time because of work, he is unwilling to  do  so
       because of lack  of  experience  and  the  strong  bond  between  the
       Claimant and the child.

    3. In Sanneh R (on the application of) v  SSWP  &  HMRC  2013  EWHC  793
       (Admin) Hickbottom J held that "... even where  a  non  EU  ascendant
       relative is compelled to leave EU territory, the Article 20 rights of
       an EU child will not be  infringed  if  there  is  another  ascendant
       relative who has the right of residence in the EU, and  who  can  and
       will in practice care for the child".  This view was emphasised in MA
       & SM (Zambrano:EU children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT  00380  (IAC)
       and in which it was confirmed that: " The mere fact that the  sponsor
       cannot be as economically active as he would wish because of his care
       responsibilities to JM  and  FM,  is  not  sufficient  to  support  a
       conclusion that JM and FM would be denied the  genuine  enjoyment  of
       their EU citizenship rights, nor would this be the case even  if  the
       sponsor were required to stop working altogether."

    4. The Upper Tribunal has  also  considered  the  applicable  principles
       where, as here, there is another relative who may be able to care for
       the child, in Hines v Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ 660 at [21]  and  [24],
       and the significance of the welfare  of  the  child.  The  Court  was
       unwilling to lay down guidelines as to the kind of  alternative  care
       that might be required in order to  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the
       child would be forced to leave. The correct approach, as approved  by
       the Court of Appeal at [10]:

           "The decision maker is not required to consider whether it would
           be best for the child to remain with his  primary  carer  -  the
           welfare  of  the  child  is  not  the  paramount  consideration.
           Although less than desirable, the child  might  be  able  to  be
           looked  after  -  to  the  extent  that  his   age   and   other
           circumstances made him dependent on the care of another person -
           by someone other than the current primary carer.  It would  only
           be if no adequate arrangements could be  made,  that  the  child
           would effectively have to leave."

    5. The Claimant's written submissions cite two unreported  decisions  of
       the First-tier for which permission has neither been applied for  nor
       granted in accordance with the Practice Direction No 11.   The  Upper
       Tribunal has not taken those decisions into consideration. There  was
       no evidence before  the  FTT  to  indicate  that  the  child  had  no
       relationship with her father or that the bond  between  her  and  the
       Claimant prevented the father from looking after his  daughter.   The
       evidence was that he did have a role, albeit he was not  the  primary
       carer, and that involved taking her to school on occasion.  He  could
       be expected to make adaptations to his working life to look after his
       child.  As  to  the  practical  arrangement  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
       satisfied that the father would be able to make  adjustments  to  his
       working arrangements to enable him to look after  the  child.   There
       was no evidence that the child would be traumatised if separated from
       the Claimant and or her quality of life seriously impaired. The Upper
       Tribunal is not satisfied  that  the  Claimant's  partner  could  not
       reasonably care for his child full time. The  child  is  now  over  5
       years old.  The partner's working pattern is a matter of choice.  The
       requirements of paragraph 15A (EEA Regs) are met.

    6. The Claimant did not raise Article 8 ECHR in her grounds of appeal.

  Decision

    7. The decision of the FTT did involve an error of law  and  it  is  set
       aside.  The Appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

    8. The Tribunal re make the decision by dismissing the appeal under  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 with reference to Regulation 15A.



Signed   Date 18.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Anonymity order made because there is a child involved.



Signed   Date 18.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

