
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05304/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated              |
|On 26 January 2015                     |On 26 January 2015                     |
|                                       |                                       |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                           Ms CHARLEEN VHIRINIZHU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, Counsel
      (instructed by Genesis Law Associates)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth on 27  November  2014  against  the
         determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rowlands  who   had
         dismissed the Appellant's appeal against removal  on  human  rights
         (Article 8 ECHR private and family life) grounds in a determination
         promulgated on 8 October 2014.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 21 August 1986.
          It is not necessary to  repeat  her  immigration  history  in  any
         detail which is  set  out  at  [3]  and  [4]  of  Judge  Rowlands's
         determination.  In essence the Appellant  had  entered  the  United
         Kingdom as a visitor on 28  March  2012,  had  tried  to  join  the
         British Army but her application was withdrawn by the  army  on  21
         October 2013.    The judge found that there was no relevant private
         life in the United Kingdom.  He also  found  that  the  Appellant's
         family bonds with her United Kingdom relatives were as an adult and
         there  was  no   dependency   and   there   were   no   exceptional
         circumstances.  The judge referred at [15] of his determination  to
         his consideration of section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  in
         extremely brief terms,  suggesting  that  Judge  Rowlands  had  not
         addressed the full extent of the grounds of appeal.   This may have
         been prompted by  the  inadvertent  erroneous  reference  by  judge
         Rowlands at [9] of his determination  to  the  Refugee  Convention.
         The appeal was  only  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  as  the  judge
         correctly stated at [12] of  the  determination.   That  could  and
         should have been confirmed from the original Notice of Appeal.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
         the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material error of  law
         were found.  A rule 24 notice dated 17 December 2014  opposing  the
         appeal had been filed on the Respondent's behalf.

    Submissions - error of law

    5.     Mr Chohan for the Appellant relied on the grounds of onwards  of
         appeal and the grant of permission to appeal.   There  was  nothing
         which he could usefully add.

    6.     Ms Everett for the Respondent relied on the rule 24 notice.  The
         judge had reached a properly reasoned decision  and  there  was  no
         basis for interfering with it.

    7.     The tribunal indicated at the conclusion of submissions that  it
         found no material error of law and reserved its determination which
         now follows.

    No material error of law finding

    8.     It is not easy to see why permission to appeal was ever  granted
         in this appeal.  The onwards grounds of appeal failed completely to
         identify any arguable error of law. The original grounds of  appeal
         lodged by the Appellant made no reference at all to Articles 2 or 3
         ECHR, let alone asylum grounds.  Nor did the  Appellant  raise  any
         such issue in her evidence before Judge  Rowlands.    It  is  plain
         that [9] of the determination to which reference has  already  been
         made was an oversight by a hard pressed judge,  and  was  an  error
         which was not material.  [12] of  the  determination  set  out  the
         basis of the appeal accurately.

    9.     The judge's treatment of the evidence was sufficient and he  set
         out his essential findings with clarity.  The judge applied section
         117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
         plainly paid close attention to it.  The judge was entitled to find
         on  the  evidence  before  him  that  there  were  no   compelling,
         compassionate  or  exceptional  circumstances  which   might   have
         required the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the  exercise  of
         discretion outside the Immigration Rules in the Appellant's favour.
          It was manifest that the Appellant's removal was proportionate  to
         the legitimate objective of immigration  control.    The  Appellant
         had entered the United Kingdom for a temporary purpose only and the
         possibility of employment as a soldier had not  come  to  fruition.
         The Appellant's home was in Zimbabwe.  The judge's conclusions were
         manifestly open to him.

    10.    The tribunal accordingly finds that there was no material  error
         of law in the determination and there is no basis  for  interfering
         with the judge's decision.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law and stands unchanged






    Signed       Dated 26 January 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
