
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05218/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |On  1st July 2014            |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          mr Olusola James Adeniyi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chibowu, Counsel instructed by M.J. Solomon &
                    Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Tully promulgated on  8
    April 2014 in which the Immigration Judge found that the appellant,  Mr
    Adeniyi, had discharged the burden of proof that he was the  spouse  of
    an EEA national who was exercising treaty rights as a worker  and  thus
    met the criteria to be granted an EEA residence card. The thrust of the
    decision was that Mr Adeniyi had proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
    judge that a marriage which he had entered into by proxy  on  22  March
    2012 was legally  recognised  in  Nigeria  and  validly  registered  in
    Nigeria on 28 March 2012.

The decision in Kareem [2014] overlooked

 2. Permission to appeal that decision was granted to the respondent on the
    ground that the judge had arguably made an error of law in  failing  to
    consider the decision of Kareem (Proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 24 which held that  evidence  had  to  be  provided  by  an
    appellant to show that the law of the EU partner's nationality (in this
    case French law) recognised proxy marriages.  Had  such  evidence  been
    brought forward, it would have shown that the French law, the  relevant
    EU law in question, did not recognise such proxy marriages.

 3. Like the First-tier Tribunal Judge who gave permission  in  this  case,
    Judge Gibb, we have sympathy for the judge in  this  case  because  the
    Kareem case was not brought to her attention by either party.   Equally
    we have some sympathy with Counsel for Mr  Adeniyi,  in  this  case  Mr
    Chibowu, who like others, we suspect, read the head note to the  Kareem
    case and concluded that  "the  production  of  a  marriage  certificate
    issued by a competent authority  (that  is,  issued  according  to  the
    registration laws of the country where the marriage  took  place)  will
    usually be sufficient" in order to demonstrate that  the  applicant  is
    the spouse of an EEA national qualifying for free movement.

IJ O'Connor in TA, KA and ANAG (14 June 2014)

 4. We have the benefit, however, of a very clear and helpful  decision  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor  in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v TA, KA and ANAG dated 14 June 2014 in which Judge O'Connor
    examined the decision in  Kareem  with  great  care,  in  circumstances
    similar to the present the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider
    the decision in Kareem.

 5. Judge O'Connor after setting out and analysing in particular paragraphs
    68, 11, 13, 16 and 18 of the decision in Kareem concluded as follows:

         "Given that which I set out above it is difficult to  see  how  the
         Upper Tribunal in  Kareem  could  have  been  any  clearer  in  its
         conclusion that when consideration has been  given  to  whether  an
         applicant has undertaken a valid marriage for the purposes  of  the
         2006  Regulations,  such  consideration  has  to  be  assessed   by
         reference to the laws of the legal system of the nationality of the
         relevant Union citizen.  Mr Akohene's submissions to  the  contrary
         are entirely misconceived and are borne out of a  failure  to  read
         the determination in Kareem as a whole."

 6. We would, rather like Judge O'Connor, draw particular attention to  the
    following passages in Kareem:

         "11. We conclude that in EU law the question of whether a person is
             in a marital relationship is governed by the national laws  of
             the member states.   In  other  words,  whether  a  person  is
             married is a matter that falls within the  competence  of  the
             individual member states.

         17.  ... The question of whether there is a marital relationship is
             to be examined in accordance with the laws of the member state
             from which the Union  citizen  obtains  nationality  and  from
             which therefore that citizen derives free movement rights.

         18.  ... Given the intrinsic link between nationality of  a  member
             state and free movement rights, we  conclude  that  the  legal
             system of the nationality of the  Union  citizen  must  itself
             govern whether a marriage has been contracted."

 7. Like Judge O'Connor, we are of the  firm  view  that  the  decision  in
    Kareem was an orthodox decision on Conflicts  of  Law  grounds,  namely
    that the question of the validity of a marriage pertaining to the right
    to free movement within the EU was one to be governed by  the  relevant
    nationality of the Union citizen from  which  such  free  movement  was
    derived.

 8. Mr Saunders for the Secretary of State submits in his appeal that  this
    is an open and shut matter because it is quite clear  that  French  law
    does not recognise proxy marriages. He relies on Article 146-1  of  the
    French civil code  which  in  translation  provides  as  follows:  "The
    marriage of a French person even where contracted in a foreign  country
    requires his being present."

 9. Mr Saunders submits that Mr Adeniyi does not  meet  Regulation  7(1)(a)
    and the judge materially erred in his finding that Mr Adeniyi satisfied
    the EEA Regulations 2006.  We  agree  and  accordingly  hold  that  the
    Secretary of State's challenge by way of  appeal  to  the  decision  of
    learned First-tier Tribunal Judge Tully should be allowed.

Headnote in Kareem is misleading

10. We note  the  general  observations  at  the  end  of  Kareem.   It  is
    unfortunate that those general observations seemed to have found  their
    way into the head note in the reported decision. This appears to be the
    reason why undue reliance has been placed upon them by Mr  Chibowu  and
    Counsel in other cases.  Such general  observations  do  not  form  the
    ratio of the decision itself.  As elucidated  by  Judge  O'Conner,  the
    headnote  does  not  reflect  the  gravamen  of  the  decision  and  is
    misleading.  It should be corrected.  This case is a  reminder  of  the
    special care which is necessary when preparing headnotes.

The issue of Durability

11. The only remaining question relates to the question of durability.   In
    paragraph 23 of the Determination and Reasons Tribunal Judge Tully said
    as follows:

         "The respondent goes on to address whether the appellant  is  in  a
         durable relationship  with  an  EEA  national  can  be  treated  as
         extended family members (sic).  I  see  no  need  to  address  this
         further in light of the findings above."

12. As is normal practice parties are expected to appear at  these  appeals
    ready to argue all points. Mr Chibowu submits that whether or  not  the
    marriage was valid the  said  appeal  should  nevertheless  be  allowed
    because the appellant should be treated as an extended family member in
    a durable relationship with an EEA national.

13. He relies on a schedule of documents in the bundle in support  of  that
    submission. It is apparent, however, from  the  schedule  of  documents
    which lists 24 documents that few, if any, touch upon the  question  of
    durability. Documents 9 and 13  relate  to  some  sort  of  joint  life
    insurance proposal from Aviva.

14. It is  apparent  from  the  decision  letter  under  challenge  in  the
    substantive appeal dated 4 January 2014 that careful consideration  was
    given by the Home Office to the question of durability.  In that letter
    the Home Office said as follows:

         "To assess whether your relationship is durable we would expect you
         to demonstrate that you have been living  with  your  EEA  national
         spouse for at least two years.  Equally, it is reasonable to expect
         that you  both  intend  to  live  together  permanently,  that  any
         previous relationship/marriage each of you may have had has  broken
         down  and  that  the  parties  are  not  related  by  birth.   This
         department will  not  normally  accept  that  there  is  a  durable
         relationship where these criteria are not met, although  each  case
         is considered on its own merits.  ..."

15. The letter  explains  that  given  the  failure  of  the  applicant  to
    demonstrate that the marriage was legally contracted  the  Home  Office
    had given careful consideration to the application of  Regulation  8(5)
    and referred to the  Aviva  life  insurance  documents.   The  decision
    letter then continued as follows:

         "You have provided no evidence  that  you  resided  together  as  a
         couple at the same address prior to  the  date  of  your  customary
         marriage certificate. Moreover  you  have  failed  to  provide  any
         evidence of joint financial commitment. You have also  provided  no
         evidence that you even knew each other or had met prior to the date
         of your customary marriage certificate being issued abroad.

         As a result it is considered that you  have  provided  insufficient
         evidence to suggest you are in a durable relationship. Due  to  the
         lack of evidence submitted this department cannot accept  that  you
         are  in  a  durable  relationship  for  the  purpose  of  the   EEA
         Regulations. Consequently you have failed to demonstrate  that  you
         are an extended family member as defined in  Regulation  8  of  the
         Regulations 2006.  Your  application  is  therefore  refused  under
         Regulation 8(5) of those Regulations."

16. Doing his best for his client Mr Chibowu was unable  to  point  to  any
    further evidence or matters to gainsay the conclusion in  the  decision
    letter set out above or otherwise in support of the proposition that Mr
    Adeniyi was able to demonstrate a durable relationship.  It is  plainly
    apparent that he has no such evidence and is and was  quite  unable  to
    discharge the burden of proof upon him on that Regulation 8(5) basis.



Conclusion

17. In those circumstances, we have concluded that it  is  appropriate  not
    only to allow the Secretary of State's challenge  to  the  decision  in
    question but also to dismiss the substantive appeal by  Mr  Adeniyi  to
    the original decision letter of 4 January 2014.  So the order is:

      1) Appeal of the Secretary of State allowed.

      2) Mr  Adeniyi's  substantive  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
         Secretary of State dated 4 January 2014 is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Haddon-Cave



