
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA050902015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15 June 2016                            |On 17 June 2016                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                             ANIL RAJARAM CHAVAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chohan of Counsel
For  the  Respondent:     Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  a  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent cancelled the Appellant's grant of leave to remain  on
       3 February 2015. His appeal against this was dismissed by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Woolley  ("the  Judge")  following  a  hearing  on  25
       November 2015.

    2. The brevity of this decision is due  to  the  concession  may  by  Ms
       Brocklesby-Weller following consideration of a document  produced  by
       the Appellant that at all times he had a  relevant  English  language
       certificate issued through ESOL and  that  accordingly  the  concerns
       expressed in relation to a different certificate were (in her  words)
       "a red herring". She conceded that there was a material error of  law
       and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal could not stand  and  she
       had no submissions to make in relation  to  whether  the  substantive
       appeal itself should be allowed once it was reheard.

The grant of permission

    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted permission to appeal (17 May
       2016) on the grounds that it is arguable that there was  indeed  this
       second language certificate which had been  wrongly  overlooked,  and
       also as the wrong approach had been  applied  by  the  Respondent  in
       light of SM & Qadir (ETS) [2016] UKUT 229.

Discussion

    4. It is  unnecessary  for  me  to  deal  with  SM  &  Qadir  given  the
       Respondent's concession that there was a material error of  law  with
       regards to their failure to consider the second language certificate.



    5. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made a material error of law.
       I set aside the decision.

    6. Having heard from both representatives I agreed with them  both  that
       it was appropriate to rehear the matter as I  had  all  the  relevant
       evidence available to me, and delay was in no one's interest.

    7. For the reasons I have already given above, it is plain the Appellant
       had an English language certificate that was  valid  and  accordingly
       there was no basis for the Respondent to cancel his leave.

Decision:

   The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

   I allow the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Judge
   following the hearing on 23 November 2015 and set aside the decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal.

   I allow the Appellant's  substantive  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision of 3 February 2015.

Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
16 June 2016
