
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05780/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 April 2015                      |On 22 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Zishanur Rehman Adnan
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer, Counsel, instructed by Immigration &
                    Work Permit Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the  parties  as  they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    The
    appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, came to the UK as  a  visitor,  and
    subsequently applied for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds  to  live
    with his older brother, who is settled in the UK.   The  appellant  has
    been dependent on his older brother since their father's death in 1996.
     The appellant suffers from  beta  thalassaemia  major,  for  which  he
    requires care including regular blood transfusions.

2.   The Article 8 application was refused on 10 January 2014.   The  appeal
    was subsequently allowed on Article 8 grounds, outside the  Immigration
    Rules, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 11 December 2014.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  29
    January 2015, by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coates.  The grounds seeking
    permission to appeal had been concerned with a failure to apply binding
    decisions of the higher courts, with reference to Akhalu (health claim:
    ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT  400  (IAC);  failing  to  correctly  apply
    primary legislation, in the form of section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; failing to give adequate weight to the
    public interest; and failing to give adequate  reasons  for  a  finding
    that there was family life between the appellant and his older brother.



4.   Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  all  grounds  were
    arguable.

5.   Mr Walker, for the Secretary of State, made submissions in  support  of
    the grounds of appeal.  The first three grounds related  to  inadequate
    findings on the public interest question.  The medical letters referred
    to the standard of treatment in Bangladesh, not to unavailability.  The
    judge's mind should have been focused to a greater extent on the weight
    to be given to the public interest.  There was a lack of  consideration
    of the appellant not being  financially  independent,  and  a  lack  of
    reasoning and detail  in  support  of  the  family  life  finding.   No
    attention had been paid to the ability of the appellant to  return  and
    live independently.  The combination of all of these  factors  amounted
    to a material error of law.

6.   Mr Singer, for the appellant, produced a skeleton argument,  responding
    to the four grounds, and then raising other points as to the nature  of
    an error of law.  Although it was  accepted  that  the  judge  had  not
    mentioned case law, to which it appeared, from Mr  Walker's  minute  in
    the file, that she had been referred, nevertheless she had  taken  into
    account the key points raised by relevant cases.  At  paragraph  20  it
    was clear that the judge had  considered  the  issue  of  the  cost  of
    healthcare, and the economic burden.  The point  related  to  substance
    rather than form.  The real complaint by the  Secretary  of  State  was
    concerned with weight, but matters of weight were for  the  judge.   It
    was clear from paragraph 18 of the decision that the medical aspect did
    not stand alone.  Instead it was linked to the  family  life  with  his
    brother, and his brother's family.  This had also been an unusual  case
    in that the medical evidence was from a doctor who had expertise in the
    treatment of the condition in Bangladesh,  and  the  exact  differences
    between the two countries, in respect of treatment of  this  particular
    condition.

Error of Law

7.   As I indicated at the hearing I have  decided,  having  considered  the
    grounds, and the submissions by both sides, that it has not been  shown
    that there was any material error of law in the judge's decision.

8.   Particular reference was made, in the grounds, to the Akhalu  decision.
     It is significant to note that  the  outcome  of  that  case  was  the
    rejection of an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State,
    where an appeal had been allowed on Article 8 grounds,  with  reference
    to health matters.  It appears to me that the comments made at the  end
    of the Akhalu case are directly applicable to this appeal.

9.   Mr Walker, for the Secretary of State, did not seek to argue  that  the
    legal position had shifted from that  discussed  in  the  Akhalu  case,
    including the observations by the Court of Appeal in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279; and in GS and EO  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40.   In
    brief terms the position remains that the door is legally  open  to  an
    appellant being able to succeed in an Article 8 case,  where  a  health
    issue is one of the factors (but not  where  the  health  issue  stands
    alone), although it is the case that such success will be "very rare".

10.  Looking at the four grounds in turn it does not  appear  to  me  to  be
    correct to say that the judge has failed to follow relevant  authority.
    Although the judge has chosen not to cite particular cases it is  clear
    from her decision, both in terms of structure and reasoning,  that  she
    had in mind the key legal principles summarised in the Akhalu case.  If
    it  could  be  argued  that  the  relevant  legal  principles  made  it
    impossible for an appeal of this sort to be allowed, then an  error  of
    law might flow from the very fact of the outcome itself,  but  that  is
    not being argued.  It is quite clear, even from the particular  outcome
    of the Akhalu case itself, that certain cases can succeed.

11.  The second ground does not appear to me to  be  made  out.   It  cannot
    possibly be said that the judge has failed to have regard to Part 5A of
    the 2002 Act.  On the contrary, she has set out section 117B in full in
    her own decision, and has then gone through the various factors.

12.  As for the third ground it cannot be  said,  in  view  of  the  judge's
    comments at paragraph 20, that she failed to give weight to the  public
    interest and the economic burden.  The wording in paragraph 20 makes it
    clear that this was a central and important issue for  the  judge.   It
    may be  that  the  judge  did  not  accept  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submissions as to the amount of  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest, but that cannot be said to involve an  error  of  law,  since
    matters of weight were for the judge.

13.  As for the fourth ground the facts and findings are  reasonably  clear.
    The appellant has been entirely dependent on his older brother for some
    years.  His health problems place him in an unusual  situation.   Since
    arrival in the UK in 2012 he has lived as part of his  older  brother's
    household, and has remained  entirely  dependent  on  him.   Given  the
    medical and other evidence summarised  in  the  decision  it  does  not
    appear to me to be arguable that the judge erred in  law  in  providing
    inadequate reasons for the finding that there was, on these  particular
    facts, family life between the appellant and his older brother, despite
    the fact that the appellant is now an adult.

14.  In the Akhalu case there is a citation, at paragraph 52, from  Mukarkar
    v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045.  This deals with  factual  judgments,  and
    the way in which decisions on the facts in particular cases  should  be
    respected.  There is nothing in the grounds or submissions that I  have
    heard that appears to me to take the  various  challenges  outside  the
    factual arena.

15.  In my view it has not been shown that the judge  made  a  legal  error.
    There were unusual and particular circumstances in  this  appeal.   The
    judge came to the view, which was clearly one that was open to  her  on
    the particular facts, that this was a case that was different from  the
    majority of cases  where  disadvantage  flowing  from  less  favourable
    healthcare is a key issue.  Once it  is  accepted  that  there  remains
    room, legally, for certain cases to succeed on their particular  facts,
    then it becomes difficult to  establish  an  error  of  law  where  the
    correct legal framework has been applied, and due regard has  been  had
    to the principles of the relevant case law and the new statutory public
    interest factors.  In short, no error of law having  been  found,  this
    decision has to be regarded as one that was open to the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her.

16.  Neither side suggested any need for anonymity  in  this  appeal  and  I
    make no such direction.  The judge made no fee  award.   This  has  not
    been challenged, and neither was  any  application  made  for  any  fee
    award.

17.  For all these reasons the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed,
    and the determination of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal on human rights grounds stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 22 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

