
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05638/2014
     IA/08531/2014
     IA/06556/2014
     IA/05637/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2015                            |On 27th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         (1) ms Kafilat Yetunde Osho
                      (2) mr Sinmiloluwa Samuel Omotayo
                     (3) master Jordan Oladipupo Omotayo
                       (4) miss Wonuola Angel Omotayo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dineen, promulgated on 18th December 2014, following a hearing at
    Hatton Cross  on  1st  May  2014  and  11th  September  2014.   In  the
    determination, the judge dismissed the appeals of the  Appellants,  who
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are Nigerian nationals and comprise  a  mother  and  her
    three children.  Their respective dates of birth  are  4th  July  1977,
    31st December 2003, 3rd October 2005, and 20th July  2009.   The  first
    Appellant, the mother, entered the UK in 2005 on a visitor's visa,  and
    was on that occasion accompanied by her son, the second Appellant.   At
    the time of her entry, the first Appellant was pregnant with her second
    son, the third Appellant, who was subsequently born  in  the  UK.   The
    fourth Appellant, who is the first Appellant's daughter, was then  also
    born in the UK.  The father  of  all  three  children  is  Mr  Emmanuel
    Omotayo.  The first Appellant  maintains  that  she  last  saw  him  in
    January 2011 and that he has had no contact with him or  the  children.
    The judge did not accept that this was the case.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The first Appellant's claim is that she would like her claim  and  that
    of her children to be  considered  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention of Human Rights.  Two of her dependent children were born in
    the UK and they have spent their lives continuously  in  this  country.
    She and her children have no social, cultural, or family  ties  outside
    the UK.  The claims were considered under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE.   The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State   accepted   that   the
    Appellants' family met the requirements of "suitability".  However, the
    first Appellant had not shown that she was currently  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with a British citizen  or  someone  settled  in  the  UK.
    Nevertheless, with regard to the children, Section EX1  under  Appendix
    FM was applied and the Respondent held that, in the  circumstances,  it
    would not be unreasonable to expect the children to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom because they are Nigerian and  citizens  of  that  country  and
    would be able to enjoy full rights there.  The Appellants fail to  meet
    the eligibility requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iii) and (vi).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard evidence that  the  first  Appellant  was  educated  in
    Nigeria, and held a LLB degree from that country, and had qualified  at
    the Nigerian Bar.  She had extended family  members  in  that  country,
    including  her  father's  sisters.   The  judge  held  that  the  first
    Appellant cannot succeed in a claim for indefinite leave to remain as a
    parent under Appendix FM, because she cannot meet the requirements of E-
    ILRPT.1.2  as she had not been granted  valid  leave  to  remain  as  a
    parent, and had not completed the required continuous period of limited
    leave to remain as a parent (see paragraph 37).

 5. The first Appellant's claim under paragraph 276ADE depended on  whether
    she had lost ties with Nigeria and the judge was not satisfied that she
    was a witness of truth  (paragraph  39).   She  claimed  to  have  lost
    contact with her partner Emmanuel Omotayo, but this could not  be  true
    because she had access to his bank account (see paragraph  40).   There
    was evidence that the children had established a private life in the UK
    and were doing very well at school, and the judge accepted  that,  "the
    children undoubtedly  have  established  a  private  life  in  the  UK"
    (paragraph 53).  The judge also applied the established case  law  that
    children cannot be penalised for the ill deeds of their parents.

 6. Nevertheless, the judge was not satisfied that there  were  exceptional
    or compelling circumstances which would  make  removal  of  the  entire
    family to Nigeria as a unit disproportionate to the Respondent's lawful
    aims (paragraph 56).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to the fact that he  found  the  two  older  children
    would have been able to have established a right to remain  in  the  UK
    under paragraph 276ADE.  He gave insufficient weight to this fact.

 9. On 13th February 2015, permission to appeal was granted,  including  on
    the ground  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    provisions of Section 117 of the 2014 Act in reaching his decision.

10. On 18th February 2015, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect
    that although the  eldest  children  can  in  principle  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE, it was open to the  Immigration  Judge  to  make  the
    findings that he did, given what he set out at paragraph  43,  and  his
    further findings at paragraphs 50 and 55.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 17th April 2015, the Appellants were not in
    attendance,  and  nor  was  there  anyone  in   attendance   as   their
    representatives.  I put the matter back to the end of  the  list.   The
    appeal had been set down as an "oral hearing" and it  was  unclear  why
    there was no one in attendance.  During the course  of  the  afternoon,
    the court clerk made inquiries of those representing the Appellants and
    spoke on the telephone with one, Mr Ike Okere, of Legal Assistance, and
    it was then that it became clear  that  he  wanted  the  appeal  to  be
    determined "on the papers".  This I accordingly then proceeded to do.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.  First, whereas it is plainly correct that regard  must  be
    had to  the  "best  interests  of  the  child"  in  any  administrative
    decision, this was a case where the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    relationship with the  children's  father,  who  was  in  Nigeria,  had
    terminated.  He had referred to the fact that the first Appellant,  the
    children's mother, had since January 2011, access to the  bank  account
    of Mr Emmanuel Omotayo (see paragraph 40).  The judge did give specific
    consideration to the children's best interests and stated that,

         "I find that their best interests, with  regard  in  particular  to
         their ages, are to continue living in their existing  family  unit.
         This means that they should continue to live with their mother, and
         her partner if, as well as her maintaining contact with him, ......
          There is no evidence to suggest that there is any barrier  to  his
         removal if he is in fact a member of the  family  unit"  (paragraph
         45).

13. Accordingly, this was a well balanced determination.

14. Second, with respect to the age of the children, it is well stated  now
    in the case of Azimi-Moayed that, "seven years from age 4 is likely  to
    be more significant to a child than the first  seven  years  of  life",
    because "very young children are focused on their parents  rather  than
    their peers and are adaptable".  That case also affirmed that, "as  the
    starting point, it is in the best interests of children to be with both
    their parents".

15. It is these considerations that have effectively informed  the  judge's
    decision with respect to  the  material  facts  of  this  case.   Those
    material facts have been elaborately set out by the judge in  the  body
    of the determination.  It is quite  clear  that  the  judge  was  fully
    cognisant of them.  With respect to the application of Section  117  of
    the 2014 Act, the case of  Dube  establishes  that  provided  that  the
    "public interest considerations" are in the judge's  mind,  which  they
    plainly were, it is unnecessary to make a  specific  reference  to  the
    statutory provisions as such.

16. It was plain in this case that the judge was fully aware  of  the  fact
    that little weight had to be granted to private life  rights  that  had
    been developed during a time when the  status  of  the  Appellants  was
    "precarious" in the UK.  All in all, therefore, there is  no  error  of
    law in the determination.

Notice of Decision

17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2015

