
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05163/2015
                                                               IA/05170/2015
                                                               IA/05172/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 June 2016                               |On 25 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                  SUNIL [B]
                                 SNEHAL [B]
                                    [M B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan of Counsel, instructed by Louis Kennedy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) The appellants are a family of Indian nationality.  They appeal against
    a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hunter  dismissing  an
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 2) The background is set out in the decision by the Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The first appellant entered the  UK  as  a  student  in
    2010.  He was granted further leave to remain on three  occasions,  the
    last of which was on 20 June 2013.  His leave was due to expire  on  12
    April 2015.

 3) On 25 November 2013, however, the first appellant's leave was curtailed
    so as to end on 24 January 2014.  The first appellant applied for leave
    to remain in the UK as a student.  This was ultimately  refused  on  23
    January 2015.  The second and third appellants were  refused  leave  as
    his dependants.

 4) The reason for refusal, according to  the  respondent's  decision,  was
    that the first appellant's Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS)
    had been withdrawn by the sponsoring college.

 5) In his grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the first appellant
    stated that he had no knowledge of  the  withdrawal  of  the  CAS.   He
    submitted a  letter  from  the  college,  the  Finance  and  Technology
    Institute of London, confirming  that  his  sponsorship  had  not  been
    withdrawn.  The college had faced technical issues with the Home Office
    SMS computerised system, as a result of  which  it  appeared  that  the
    appellant's CAS number had been withdrawn but this was an error.   When
    the error was discovered the Home Office was notified.

 6) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal observed that a number  of  emails
    were produced as evidence.  These were between the director of  studies
    at the college and the Home Office referring to unauthorised access  to
    the computer system of the Finance and Technology Institute of  London.
    This was said to have led to certain students having been shown to have
    had their CAS numbers withdrawn when this was not the case.  The  judge
    observed that none of these emails referred specifically to  the  first
    appellant.  The first appellant produced a letter from the director  of
    studies of 26 January 2015 but there was no evidence to show that  this
    letter was ever copied to the Home Office.  The  judge  concluded  that
    there was no valid CAS  at  the  time  the  respondent  considered  the
    application.   Accordingly,  the  first  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 7) An argument was presented to the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal based
    on the common law principle of fairness.  The judge observed that there
    was a line of authorities from the  Upper  Tribunal  referring  to  the
    situation where through no fault of the student concerned the college's
    licence was withdrawn by the respondent.  In those  circumstances,  the
    common law  duty  of  fairness  was  recognised  as  meaning  that  the
    respondent should give the student 60 days in which to attempt to  find
    another college.  In this particular case the first appellant was given
    60 days to look for a new  college  following  the  revocation  of  the
    licence of the college  he  had  previously  proposed  to  attend.   In
    relation to the decision under appeal,  however,  the  application  was
    refused because the first appellant did not have a valid CAS  and  this
    was not because of the revocation of the sponsor's  licence.   In  this
    situation the judge was not satisfied that  the  respondent  had  acted
    unfairly.

 8) The judge went on to say that it was possible to envisage  a  situation
    where the respondent was informed by  the  sponsor  before  making  the
    decision that an error had been made.  The judge  reiterated,  however,
    that none of the emails from the director of studies at the Finance and
    Technology Institute of London predating the refusal decision  referred
    to the first appellant by  name,  although  some  other  students  were
    named.  In an email dated 16 December  2014  the  director  of  studies
    referred to a security breach of "my home office SMS system  log".   It
    is stated that 176 CAS numbers had been  withdrawn  and  the  list  was
    attached of those which the director had actually  withdrawn.   In  the
    same email it is said that a second list was being attached  for  those
    students whose CAS numbers had not been withdrawn.   Neither  of  these
    lists was placed before the Tribunal.

 9) The judge concluded  that  at  the  time  the  respondent  refused  the
    applications, the respondent had  received  no  notification  that  any
    further inquiries were required in relation to  the  first  appellant's
    CAS and there was no resulting unfairness.

10) No reliance was placed upon Article 8.

11) The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    submitted that the  judge  did  not  properly  assess  the  documentary
    evidence and did not properly consider the issue of  fairness.   It  is
    submitted that the judge confused an application  made  on  24  January
    2014 with a subsequent application made on or around 18 November  2014.
    This confusion made the judge's findings unclear.

12) It was further contended  that  the  documentary  evidence  itself  was
    clear.  The college  had  provided  a  letter  dated  26  January  2015
    confirming that the sponsorship had not been withdrawn but there was  a
    technical error involving the respondent's SMS system.  This letter and
    its contents were not in dispute.  The  judge  disregarded  the  emails
    exchanged between the college and the respondent because there  was  no
    mention of the appellant's name.  This was a  material  error  of  law.
    The assessment  of  the  evidence  should  have  been  undertaken  more
    carefully.  The emails did not need to  mention  the  appellant's  name
    specifically.  This information was already in the letter.  The  emails
    confirmed that the sponsoring college had brought to  the  respondent's
    attention  that  technical  errors  had  occurred  which  led  to   CAS
    withdrawals when this was not the case.

13) It was contended that the judge further erred in finding that there was
    no evidence that the letter from the college of  26  January  2015  was
    ever copied to the respondent.  What was relevant was that this  letter
    was produced as evidence.  It clarified the  sole  ground  of  refusal.
    The evidence was admissible and appropriate  weight  should  have  been
    attached to it.

14) It was further contended that the issue of fairness was central to  the
    appeal.  The authorities cited were relevant because the  CAS  had  not
    actually been withdrawn.  There was a technical error and  the  college
    had raised this with the respondent in advance.  The appellant was  not
    at fault.

15) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    (a) the judge misdirected himself over whether the refusal letter of 23
    January 2015 referred to the application made on 24 January 2014 or the
    later application of 18 November 2014: (b) the  sponsoring  college  in
    the letter dated 26 January 2015 confirmed that the sponsorship was not
    being  withdrawn  but  there  had  been  a  technical  error   in   the
    respondent's SMS system and the judge erred in relation  to  this;  and
    (c) the judge erred in assessing the emails between the college and the
    respondent which could make a material difference to the outcome.

16) There was a rule 24 notice dated 8 June 2016 from the respondent.  This
    states that the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  himself
    appropriately.  While in the refusal letter the incorrect date  of  the
    application was referred to, the  letter  had  considered  the  college
    specified in the 18 November 2014 application.   The  judge  considered
    the November 2014 application and made reference to this throughout the
    decision.  The judge had  the  correct  application  and  the  relevant
    issues in mind.

17) It was further submitted that the judge  adequately  engaged  with  the
    letters and emails submitted by the appellant and gave adequate reasons
    for not accepting that the evidence demonstrated unfairness.  As  noted
    by the judge, there was no evidence to indicate that the CAS  had  been
    erroneously withdrawn as opposed to intentionally withdrawn.  There was
    no evidence before the judge that the application was  refused  on  the
    basis that the new sponsoring college had had its licence revoked.

Submissions

18) At the hearing before me, Mr Mannan, for the  appellants,  relied  upon
    the grounds of the application for permission to appeal and referred in
    detail to the relevant documents.   He  submitted  that  the  college's
    position was clear.  The college had provided an explanation  by  email
    to the respondent.  The respondent should have given the benefit of the
    doubt to the first appellant.  Even though the judge found that neither
    list of CAS numbers was attached to the email,  this  did  not  make  a
    difference as the email itself was clear.

19) The question was raised as to the power of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    grant a remedy, on the basis that it had been found that the respondent
    had made a mistake over the withdrawal of the CAS.  Mr Mannan submitted
    that the Home Office should not have made a decision in  the  terms  in
    which it was made.

20) For the respondent, Mr Bramble relied on the rule 24 notice.  The judge
    was clearly aware that it was the application of  November  2014  which
    was under consideration.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion which he did.  The judge found there was  no  evidence  that
    the letter of 26 January 2015 was ever copied to the Home  Office.   In
    any event this letter post-dated the date of  decision.   There  was  a
    chain of emails but the judge examined  these  in  the  decision.   The
    first appellant could not  satisfy  the  relevant  requirement  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  At the date of  the  decision  the  CAS  showed  as
    withdrawn.  There was no CAS in existence.  The judge  could  not  have
    made any other finding.  The circumstances were unfortunate  but  there
    was no unfairness on the part of the Home Office.  The appellant  could
    not be identified from the emails.

21) Mr Mannan submitted that the CAS was  withdrawn  owing  to  a  computer
    malfunction and was not in reality withdrawn.  The  college  had  asked
    for all withdrawn CAS letters to be placed on hold and could  not  have
    been clearer.  The judge did not take this into  account.   The  emails
    from the college referred to a "screen shot" being attached in relation
    to identifying the CAS numbers affected.  There  should  be  a  further
    hearing for the evidential issues to be resolved.

Discussion

22) In his submission on behalf of the respondent, Mr Bramble  referred  to
    paragraph 33 of the decision of the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    at which the judge said that a valid CAS was not in  existence  at  the
    time the application was considered by the respondent.  This  statement
    is, however, qualified  by  the  preceding  sub-clause,  which  states:
    "Whether or not confusion has arisen in the case of the first appellant
    regarding  the  withdrawal  of  his  CAS  ...".   In   my   view   this
    qualification is of some importance.  It raises the question of whether
    the CAS was  intentionally  withdrawn  by  the  sponsoring  college  or
    whether it was mistakenly  shown  as  withdrawn  owing  to  a  computer
    malfunction,  perhaps  caused  by  some  malicious   interference,   as
    suggested by the evidence from the  director  of  studies.   I  do  not
    consider that it is sufficient simply to find that there was  no  valid
    CAS in existence at the date of decision.  It is necessary to  consider
    whether the record of whether a valid CAS existed was accurate or  not.
     If the record was not accurate, then it was possible that there was  a
    valid CAS although the record did not show this.

23) It follows from this that if there was a valid CAS but the  record  did
    not show this, the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse  the
    application may have been  made  subject  to  a  misapprehension  of  a
    material fact.  This material fact  was  that  the  CAS  had  not  been
    intentionally withdrawn but was, so far as the sponsoring  college  was
    concerned, still in existence.  It was shown as withdrawn only  because
    of an error in the college's computer system.

24) Of course it may be argued that the Secretary of State had  no  way  of
    knowing this at the time the decision was made.  Certainly  the  letter
    from the college of 26  January  2015  post-dates  by  three  days  the
    Secretary of State's decision.  Nevertheless there were earlier  emails
    from the college to the Home Office.  Although  the  judge  found  that
    these emails did not list the sponsor's CAS number  specifically,  this
    appeared to be because certain attachments to the emails had  not  been
    lodged as evidence.  It is worth observing that attachments seem  quite
    readily to become separated  from  emails  when  these  are  forwarded,
    copied or printed and it may be that attachments were sent to the  Home
    Office although they were not  produced  in  the  evidence  before  the
    judge.

25) At the hearing before me the question of jurisdiction  was  raised  but
    was not considered in  detail.   Nevertheless,  I  consider  it  to  be
    important to the outcome of this  appeal.   Under  section  84  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as it stood up  until  20
    October 2014, it was possible to argue as a ground  of  appeal  that  a
    decision taken by the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the
    law.  Under this  provision  it  might  have  been  argued  before  the
    Tribunal that, if the Secretary of State had made a misapprehension  of
    a material fact, namely as to the existence of a valid  CAS,  then  the
    refusal decision was not in accordance with the law.  If this  argument
    was accepted, the application would then have been pending  before  the
    Secretary of State for a further decision to be made, having regard  to
    the crucial issue of whether the CAS had been withdrawn by the  college
    or not.  This was a question of fact which the Secretary of  State  and
    the college together ought to have been in a position to resolve.

26) Nevertheless no reference was made to this issue before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In this context it  is  important  to  have  regard  to  the
    amendment of section 84 with effect from 20 October 2014, which removed
    the possibility of arguing as a ground of appeal that the Secretary  of
    State had made  a  decision  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    amendment was made by section 15 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   The
    amendment came into force on 20 October 2014 with savings  set  out  in
    the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No  3  Transitional  and  Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014, SI 2014/2771,  articles  9-11).   In  terms  of
    article 9, the previous provisions continued to have effect  except  in
    respect of certain persons.  These persons include, at article 11(1), a
    person who makes an application on or after 20 October 2014  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant or as the partner  or  a  child  of  such
    person.  Thus  it  appears  from  article  11(1)  that,  as  the  first
    appellant applied as a Tier 4 Migrant he would  not  benefit  from  the
    saving provision in article 9 if his application was made on  or  after
    20 October 2014.  There are  certain  further  provisions  in  articles
    11(2) and (3) but these do not appear to  have  any  relevance  to  the
    current appeals.

27) Now there is some uncertainty in this appeal over when the  application
    giving rise to the decision  under  appeal  was  made.   There  was  an
    application made on 24 January 2014.  It is this application  which  is
    referred to in the Secretary of State's refusal letter  of  23  January
    2015.  Before me, however, all parties appeared to be of the view  that
    this was a mistake.  The application of 24 January  2014  was  in  fact
    refused by the respondent in a letter dated 19 September  2014  because
    the licence of the sponsoring college  in  that  application  had  been
    revoked.  The first appellant was given  60  days  to  make  a  further
    application, which he did, in November 2014 in respect of  the  Finance
    and Technology Institute of London.  It was in fact the application  of
    November 2014 which was refused on 23 January 2015.  This  question  of
    dates is important.  If the application  giving  rise  to  the  present
    appeal was made on 18 November 2014, this was after  the  amendment  to
    section 84 of the 2002 Act came into force.  It would appear  that  the
    appellant would be caught by the restriction on the grounds  of  appeal
    made by the amendment and could no longer argue that  the  respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  If on the other hand  the
    application was the application of 24 January 2014, this would pre-date
    the coming into force of the amendment to the 2002 Act  and  the  first
    appellant would be able to argue that the respondent's decision was not
    in accordance with the law.

28) It appears from the foregoing that there are a number of  issues  which
    were not adequately considered by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.
     The first of these  was  whether  the  sponsoring  college's  CAS  was
    withdrawn at the date of the decision on 23 January 2015 or whether  it
    merely appeared to have been withdrawn because of a computer error when
    it was not in fact withdrawn.  The judge should  have  considered  this
    point but did not do so.  For the reasons set out above the  point  may
    be material and by not considering it the judge erred in law.

29) The second issue which the judge did not properly clarify  was  whether
    the decision under appeal was made in respect of the application of  24
    January  2014  or  the  application  of  18  November  2014.   If   the
    application was dated 24 January 2014, then the appellant had  all  the
    grounds of appeal available  under  section  84  of  the  2002  Act  as
    originally enacted, including that the respondent's decision was not in
    accordance with the law.  This might have been argued on the basis that
    the respondent misapprehended a material fact, namely whether  the  CAS
    had been withdrawn or not.

30) If, however, the application was made on 18 November  2014,  after  the
    coming into force in respect of an application by a Tier 4  Migrant  of
    the amendment to section 84 made by the Immigration Act 2014, then this
    ground of appeal would not have been available to the  first  appellant
    and there would therefore  seem  to  have  been  no  remedy  which  the
    Tribunal might grant.  This is  on  the  basis,  of  course,  that  the
    application in November 2014 was a fresh application, which it  appears
    to have been, rather than a variation of one previously made.

31) If the Tribunal did have jurisdiction to decide that the  Secretary  of
    State's decision was not in accordance with the law, then the Secretary
    of State's knowledge would become crucial.  I am inclined to agree that
    the judge further erred by not fully considering the emails sent by the
    sponsoring college to the Secretary of State indicating that there were
    difficulties with CAS numbers which had been withdrawn in error.  It is
    possible that the respondent was provided with a list of those numbers.

32) By not adequately considering this evidence, the judge further erred in
    law.  This is a matter which it ought to be possible for the  appellant
    and the respondent to resolve before any further hearing.

33) At the hearing before me Mr Mannan said that if there was an  error  of
    law there should be a further hearing.  At that point it was  undecided
    whether the further hearing should be  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  In view of the inadequacies in the way
    the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  approached  the  evidence,  I
    consider that the appropriate course is for the appeal to  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for findings to be made on the  matters  set
    out above.  It does appear to me, however, that many of  these  matters
    might be resolved  by  discussion  between  the  first  appellant,  the
    sponsoring college and the respondent  without  the  need  for  further
    proceedings.

Conclusions

34) The making of a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
    making of an error of law.

35) I set aside the decision.

36) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing
    before a different judge with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

37) The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  for
    anonymity.  I have not been asked to make such an order and  I  see  no
    reason of substance for doing so.


Signed      Date 24th August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
