

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05949/2013
      IA/12464/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th March 2014                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                           VIJAY NATARVARLAL PATEL
                           BHUMIKABEN VIJAY PATEL
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Westmoreland of YDVisas
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants appeal a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
      dismissed an appeal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
      refusing to vary the appellants leave to remain in the UK.






      Background

   2. The first appellant had sought indefinite leave to remain in the UK by
      application dated 5th October 2012  having  previously  had  leave  to
      remain in the UK initially as a student since  May  2005,  then  as  a
      Highly Skilled Migrant and then as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant  valid
      until October 2012. The second  appellant  had  likewise  applied  for
      indefinite leave to remain as a dependant of the first appellant.


   3. The first appellant's application was refused under paragraph  322(1A)
      of  the  Immigration  rules  on  the  grounds  that  in  his  previous
      application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant  he  had
      submitted counterfeit documents and the Secretary of  State  was  thus
      not  satisfied  that  he  had  not  used  deception  in  his  previous
      application. The second appellant was refused as the first appellant's
      dependant. We have referred in this  determination  hereafter  to  the
      appellant given that the appeal is predominantly  concerned  with  the
      first appellant's appeal; the second appellant  being  dependant  upon
      him.

   4. The appellant denied all knowledge of the deception  although  it  was
      acknowledged by him that those who  had  prepared  the  application  -
      Migration Gurus Ltd - had "submitted  dishonest  applications  to  the
      Home Office on an extensive scale". The appellant sought permission to
      appeal on the grounds, in essence, that:

   a. The respondent had failed to  produce  crucial  evidence  against  the
      appellant namely payslips that he had submitted with his application;
   b. That the prosecution of a person (Mr Modi) for  his  involvement  with
      Migration Gurus Ltd and the lack of prosecution against the  appellant
      was in favour of the appellant rather than adverse to the appellant as
      found by the First-tier Tribunal;
   c. The appellant was not named in any of the police prosecution papers
   d. Lack of reasoning by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  discounting  these
      matters
   e. Lack of adequate reasoning for the findings by the First-tier Tribunal
      that the appellant had "provided  wholly  unconvincing  and  contrived
      oral evidence" and that the appellant was  not  credible  because  his
      evidence  was  inconsistent  with  him  being  "educated   to   degree
      level...".


   5. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge had erred in law in failing to  find  on  the  evidence
      before him that "the respondent had discharged the burden of proof  as
      opposed to just relying on his findings about working for the  company
      at the relevant time lacked credibility."


   6. Before us it was accepted  by  the  appellant  that  the  payslips  in
      question had been returned to him  by  the  respondent  prior  to  the
      appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and he had  lost/mislaid
      them; he had not produced them to the First-tier Tribunal judge.

   7. Paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules is as follows:

             Refusal of leave to remain, variation of leave to enter or
             remain or curtailment of leave
             322. In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension of
             stay set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following
             provisions apply in relation to the refusal of an application
             for leave to remain, variation of leave to enter or remain or,
             where appropriate, the curtailment of leave:
             Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to
             enter or remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused
                   (1).....
                   (1A) where false representations have been made or  false
                   documents or information have been submitted (whether  or
                   not material to the application, and whether  or  not  to
                   the applicant's knowledge), or material  facts  have  not
                   been disclosed, in relation  to  the  application  or  in
                   order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State  or
                   a third party required in support of the application.

   8. Although in  submissions  before  us  the  appellant's  representative
      stated that the decision to refuse to vary leave had been  incorrectly
      taken under 322(1A), this was not a  ground  of  appeal,  nor  was  it
      expanded before us and nor had it been  taken  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge. In any event the First-tier  Tribunal  adequately  and
      correctly considered this in paragraphs 50 to 53 of the determination,
      finding that the decision the subject of  the  appeal  was  predicated
      upon the appellant's previous deception.


   9. In a carefully considered and detailed  determination  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge addressed the burden and standard of proof in  reaching
      his conclusions. He describes this as  being  the  "high  end  of  the
      balance  of  probabilities"  which  is  a  mis-description   but   the
      appellant's representative confirmed that in any event  that  approach
      was in the appellant's favour; he did not take  issue  with  this  (JC
      (China)[2007]00027). The First-tier Tribunal  judge  found  (in  [67])
      that the respondent had discharged the onus of proof at the  high  end
      of balance of probabilities for the reasons that followed and were set
      out in paragraphs 68 to 80. The First-tier Tribunal judge sets out the
      evidence before him with regards to inter alia  Migration  Gurus  Ltd;
      the fraudulent circulation of money; the lack of expenses incurred  by
      Pat Technology Ltd and that there was nothing in the  police  evidence
      that indicated that Pat Technology Ltd (for whom the appellant claimed
      to work) demonstrated that it was a genuine trading company or that  a
      genuine salary was paid to any one by the company.

  10. The First-tier Tribunal judge then goes on (in [81]) to  evaluate  the
      appellant's evidence, such evaluation  including  sustainable  reasons
      why he did not find credible the appellant's evidence that  he  worked
      for Pat Technology including the appellant's  unclear  evidence  about
      his role; his lack of knowledge of the address where he worked despite
      claiming to have worked there for 15 hours a week for 7 months and his
      inability to remember details of the work undertaken. The judge  makes
      reference to the appellant being educated and having no  communication
      difficulties. This reference is challenged by the  appellant  although
      there is no apparent basis for such a challenge - it is  self  evident
      that an educated person with good command of English would  inevitably
      be able to provide an address of where he worked for  such  a  lengthy
      period and would recall details of the job he  undertook  particularly
      given that he had claimed it involved the supply of  IT  software  and
      documents to other clients.

  11. It is plain that the First-tier Tribunal correctly considered  whether
      the respondent had discharged the burden of proof (albeit to a  higher
      standard than was required) and had then  considered  the  appellant's
      oral and documentary evidence in context.

  12. The conclusions and findings reached by the First-tier  Tribunal  were
      predicated upon careful evaluation of  the  evidence  before  him  and
      correctly determining initially whether the respondent had  discharged
      the burden of proof  in  establishing  deception  and  thereafter  the
      evaluation of the appellant's evidence.

  13. There was no challenge to the dismissal of the  appeal  on  Article  8
      grounds. Although the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  on
      those grounds it had been acknowledge in any event by  the  appellants
      that if the appeal was unsuccessful under the  Rules,  the  appellants
      would not be relying upon Article 8 (or  the  respondent's  evidential
      flexibility policy).



          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  We  do  not  set  aside  the
    decision.


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge stands.





                                    Date
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
