
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05755/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 July 2016                               |On 02 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR HARJEET SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Awan, Legal Representative of Mayfair
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Mr Singh.  However for the purposes of this decision and reasons,  I
    shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,
    where Mr Singh was the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India.  He was born on 28  January  1991.
    The respondent in  a  decision  dated  17  November  2014  refused  the
    appellant's application for leave to remain on private life grounds (in
    order to allow the appellant to enrol on a new academic  course).   The
    application was refused by the respondent as  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules and that there were no  grounds  for  allowing
    his appeal under Article 8 outside of the Rules.

 3. The appellant's application was refused by the respondent on 28 January
    2015 with no right of appeal as the appellant did  not  have  leave  to
    remain at the time of his application.

 4. The appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal A Kelly on 14 January 2016.  In a decision promulgated on
    21 January 2016 Judge A Kelly at paragraph 7 of the decision, dismissed
    the appeal for want of jurisdiction.  However at paragraph 8 under  the
    "notice of  decision"  Judge  A  Kelly  stated  that:  "The  appeal  is
    allowed".

 5. The Secretary of State appeals with permission.  Although the Secretary
    of State asked that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  be
    amended  pursuant  to  the  Slip  Rule,  Rule  31  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, it was conceded before me,
    and agreed by both parties, that the "Slip  Rule"  cannot  be  used  to
    reverse the effect of a decision (Katsonga ("Slip Rule;" FTT's  General
    Powers) [2016] UKUT 00228 (IAC) applied).

 6. It was also not disputed before me that  the  judge  clearly  erred  in
    making a decision at paragraph 8 to allow the appeal when  all  of  the
    preceding paragraphs indicated that the appeal was dismissed  for  want
    of jurisdiction.

 7. As I indicated at the hearing, I am satisfied that this is the case and
    that such an error is material given  that  it  purports  to  allow  an
    appeal where the judge clearly found that there was no right of  appeal
    and that the appeal would not succeed in the alternative.

 8. I heard submissions from both parties  in  relation  to  re-making  the
    decision.  Mr Awan essentially re-made the submissions which  had  been
    made before Judge A Kelly.  In particular  it  was  Mr  Awan's  renewed
    submission that the respondent had failed to properly serve the  notice
    of curtailment upon the appellant and therefore the decision to curtail
    his leave was unfair and otherwise not in accordance with the law.   It
    was his submission that it is the Secretary of State's policy to  serve
    decisions on a residential address but if this  is  not  possible  then
    decisions will be served by email.

 9. It is clear in this case that the appellant did not  have  a  right  of
    appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant  made   his
    application on 17 November 2014.  His leave was curtailed  on  24  July
    2014 by the respondent,  following  the  revocation  of  his  college's
    licence.  His leave was curtailed to 22 September 2014.   As  a  result
    the decision that the appellant sought to  appeal  is  not  covered  by
    Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   I  am
    satisfied that this is the case.

10. Although Mr Awan sought to argue that the respondent failed to properly
    serve the notice of curtailment I rely on the findings of fact of Judge
    A Kelly at paragraph 4 of his decision that the curtailment notice  was
    served on the appellant by email on 24 July 2014 and Judge Kelly  noted
    that the service of a notice of curtailment by  email  is  one  of  the
    methods of service detailed in the  Immigration  (Leave  to  Enter  and
    Remain) (Amendment) Order 2013.

11. Judge A Kelly did not accept Mr Awan's argument that the notice  should
    have  been  served  on  the  appellant's  postal  address   under   the
    respondent's own policy and that  given  that  the  respondent  was  in
    possession of the appellant's postal address the respondent  failed  to
    follow her  own  policy  and  the  curtailment  was  therefore  not  in
    accordance with the law.  Again, Judge A Kelly rejected  this  argument
    and Judge A Kelly found as a matter of  fact  that  the  appellant  did
    receive the curtailment notice and therefore  no  unfairness  resulted.
    It is of note that the judge had before him evidence of an  email  sent
    by the appellant to the respondent in which he gave his email  address:
    [ - ]@yahoo.com.  This was sent on 2 June  2014  and  it  was  to  this
    address that the curtailment notice was sent.

12. Judge Kelly did not find the appellant credible in his evidence that he
    did not send the email of 2 June 2014 to the  respondent  and  did  not
    provide the email address in question; this email was recorded  on  the
    respondent's database.  Judge Kelly simply did not find the appellant's
    evidence credible and gave  adequate  reasons  for  not  doing  so.   I
    preserve those findings of fact.

13. In the alternative the judge found that if he did have jurisdiction the
    appeal would have failed.  The judge found  that  the  appellant  would
    have been aware that his college's licence had been revoked as  he  was
    aware of this fact when he wrote to the respondent on 13 November  2014
    and the judge found that it was not unreasonable of the  respondent  to
    serve the curtailment by email in circumstances where the appellant was
    no longer studying and it could therefore not be assumed  that  he  was
    definitely living at the address he had given previously.

14. As I indicated at the hearing I preserve Judge Kelly's findings of fact
    in relation to Mr Singh's  case.   There  was  no  challenge  to  those
    reasons in the grounds of appeal and nor was  there  any  cross-appeal.
    Even if there were, for  the  reasons  set  out  above  those  findings
    disclose no material error of law.  On the basis of  those  findings  I
    dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is  allowed.   The  decision  of  Judge
Kelly is set aside, although all findings of fact are preserved.  I  re-make
the  decision,  dismissing  Mr  Harjeet   Singh's   appeal   for   want   of
jurisdiction.

No anonymity direction was sought or made.


Signed                                  Date: 29 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal of Mr Singh is dismissed and therefore no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date: 29 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
