
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/05465/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|                                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|                                           |On 24th November 2014          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


                                   Between

                               Daniel Kwarteng
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant has been granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal which dismissed
      his appeal against the decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain.

2.    The Upper Tribunal has received a letter from  the  appellant's  legal
      representatives dated 23 November 2014 in which they  state  that  the
      appellant wishes to withdraw his appeal which is currently pending  in
      the Upper Tribunal as he is intending to submit a fresh application to
      the respondent.

3.    Rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provides that a party may give notice of the withdrawal of its case or
      part of it, subject to the consent of the Upper Tribunal. There is  no
      provision for  a  party  to  withdraw  the  appeal  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal, which is the effect of the  recent  letter.  Therefore,  the
      letter from the appellant's legal representatives can serve only as  a
      notice  of  withdrawal  of  the  appellant's  case  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal, to which the Upper Tribunal now consents.


4.    The Upper Tribunal will  therefore  treat  the  determination  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal as unchallenged so  that  the  appeal  before  the
      Upper Tribunal will be dismissed without a hearing.

5.    Accordingly, the appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed  with
      the effect that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand in
      all respects.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede


                                                            24 November 2014


