
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05343/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, at the Upper Tribunal  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2016                          |On 3 December 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          MR GAGANDEEP SINGH DHAMI
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Iengar, Counsel instructed by direct access


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision of the SSHD to refuse to grant him leave to remain  on  family
    or private life grounds, and to make directions for  his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom as an overstayer.  The First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    make an anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not  consider  that  such  a
    direction is more indeed for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant for Permission to Appeal

 2. On 23 November 2016 Firs-tier Tribunal Judge Page gave his reasons  for
    granting the SSHD permission to appeal:

       The [SSHD] has identified arguable  areas  of  law  in  the  Judge's
       approach to the conclusion that the [claimant] could not  return  to
       India.  The [SSHD] has argued  that  the  [claimant's]  family  life
       would be maintained upon return to India  as  the  family  would  be
       returning as a unit, and very limited weight should have been  given
       to the  [claimant's]  child's  education  in  the  UK.   The  [SSHD]
       complains  that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  law  in  allowing   the
       [claimant's] appeal on the basis of the claim that  it  was  in  the
       children's best interest to continue their education in the  UK  and
       the Judge has failed to give regard to the case law on the point and
       to consider the [claimant] and his family  under  Section  1176B(iv)
       and (v) and considered the evidence in the light of  the  fact  that
       they had only ever  been  in  the  UK  with  precarious  Immigration
       status.  It is complained that  the  Judge  only  took  into  regard
       matters which were in the [claimant's] favour, and  failed  to  give
       consideration to matters which were  against  the  [claimant].   The
       [SSHD] has identified arguable areas of law in the approach  to  the
       issues that were before the Judge.  Permission to appeal is granted.

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant is a national of  India,  whose  date  of  birth  being  3
    October 1980.  He entered the UK on 8 October  2005  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a student.  He  remained  here  with  lawful  leave  as  a
    student or student nurse until 28 February 2011.

 4. On 29 August 2008 the claimant's wife, Mrs Dhami, gave birth  to  their
    first daughter, Harasees, in India.  On 10 October 2009 the  claimant's
    wife and daughter entered the UK as  his  student  dependants.   On  29
    December 2012 Mrs Dhami gave birth to their second daughter,  Raspreet,
    in the UK.

 5. In the meantime, on 14 May 2012, the claimant and his  dependants  were
    served with IS15A notices informing them of their liability to  removal
    as overstayers.  On 16  June  2012  the  claimant  and  his  dependants
    applied for leave to remain on the ground of family  and  private  life
    established in the UK.  This application was refused on 17  July  2013.
    On 21 January 2015 the SSHD made the decision to remove the claimant as
    an illegal entrant or as a person subject to  immediate  removal  under
    section 10 of the Immigration Asylum Act 1999.

 6. Mr Paramjorthy of Counsel settled lengthy  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Despite their length, the claimant's  case  could
    be put very succinctly.  It was that he  and  his  family  members  had
    resided in the UK for a long time, and his youngest daughter  had  been
    born here; the children knew no other way of life; the  family  had  no
    subsisting ties with India; and they had developed a private and family
    life in the UK.  On that basis, it was submitted by Mr Paramjorthy that
    the decision to remove the claimant was disproportionate.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Keane, sitting  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House on 12 February 2016.  The  appellant  was
    represented by Mr Paramjorthy, and there was no appearance on behalf of
    the SSHD.

 8. The Judge received evidence that the claimant had sought to  regularise
    his status before his student leave expired on 28  February  2011.   He
    had instructed an immigration law  case  worker  called  Mr  Shah.   He
    provided Mr Shah with the family's passports, and he completed a number
    of EEA application forms; and over a period of time  he  had  given  Mr
    Shah �4,000 in cash.  However, Mr  Shah  was  a  fraudster  and  not  a
    lawyer.  He took the money, but did not submit any application  to  the
    SSHD, and he stole the family's passports.  Upon  discovering  that  Mr
    Shah was a fraudster, the claimant had instructed  solicitors  and  had
    made a formal complaint against Mr Shah to his  Member  of  Parliament.
    His solicitors had made an application  on  his  behalf  for  leave  to
    remain in 2014, and they had corresponded with the Home Office in order
    to procure information about Mr Shah.

 9. The older child had been attending school since 6 September 2012,  when
    she joined  the  school's  Reception  class.   She  had  an  excellence
    attendance record and she was a  well-respected  and  dedicated  pupil.
    The younger child had started nursery school in January  2016  and  had
    already made friends.  The claimant  did  not  have  family  in  India.
    Although Mrs Dhami's parents and brother lived in Punjab province,  her
    brother was married with a wife and  child,  and  they  lived  in  very
    modest circumstances.  So, they  would  not  be  able  to  support  the
    claimant and his family if  they  returned  to  Punjab  province.   The
    family had strong  local  connections,  particularly  with  a  Gurdwara
    situated in Slough.  The family had never been  a  burden  on  the  tax
    payer, and the  claimant  believed  that  the  best  interests  of  his
    children would be in their continuing to reside in the UK.

10. His older daughter suffered from asthma, so pollution and hot  climates
    affected her detrimentally.  The claimant expressed a  belief  that  it
    would be difficult for his children to adjust to life in India.

11. In his subsequent decision,  the  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  [7]  the
    concession by Mr Paramjorthy that there was no claim under  the  Rules,
    and that the appeal could only  succeed  on  exceptional  circumstances
    outside the Rules.

12. At paragraph [8] he set out his findings  of  fact.   He  accepted  the
    evidence of the claimant and Mrs Dhami, who he  found  to  be  credible
    witnesses. He found  that  the  claimant  had  been  the  victim  of  a
    grotesque fraud.  Mrs Dhami said that she  had  family  in  India,  but
    their means and circumstances were such that it  was  not  a  realistic
    proposition to expect help or support  from  them,  and  also  she  was
    unwilling to impose upon her brother and his family.

13. In paragraph [9], he held that he should simply  decide  whether  there
    was a good claim outside the Rules or not.  If  it  was  necessary,  he
    found that the appeal disclosed exceptional  circumstances  to  warrant
    the consideration of a grant of leave outside the Rules.

14. At paragraph  [10],  he  explained  why  he  reached  this  conclusion.
    Firstly, the appellant had an unblemished immigration history.  He only
    came to reside without leave as the result of a fraud perpetrated by Mr
    Shah, who led him to believe that an application for  leave  to  remain
    had been submitted to the respondent when it had not  been.   Secondly,
    he gave some weight to the  likely  circumstances  which  the  claimant
    would face upon his return to India. The claimant did not  have  family
    there or a  means  of  support.   Mrs  Dhami  was  effectively  without
    support, preferring not to impose upon a relatively impoverished, close
    family  member.  Thirdly,  he   placed   decisive   weight   upon   the
    circumstances of the children.  He found that  the  best  interests  of
    both children lay in their continued residence in  the  UK.   He  found
    that it would be "harsh and cruel" to uproot both the older  child  and
    the younger child.  Both children  did  not  know  life  in  any  other
    country.  The younger child had never lived in India.  He bore in  mind
    section 117B of the 2002 Act, but he  preferred  to  accord  more,  and
    indeed, decisive weight to the above-mentioned considerations,  and  in
    particular to the best interests of the children.

15. At paragraph [11], the Judge looked at the matter through the prism  of
    the 5-point Razgar test. He said that he accorded great weight  to  the
    SSHD's  determination  to  achieve  the  legitimate  aim  of  effective
    immigration control by means of an immigration  policy,  but  he  found
    that such considerations were outweighed by  the  considerations  which
    had led him to find that the  claimant  had  a  good  Article  8  claim
    outside  the  Rules,  and   that   he   had   established   exceptional
    circumstances on the balance of probabilities.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of Law was  made
    out,  Mr  Tufan  developed  the  detailed  arguments  advanced  in  the
    application for permission to  appeal  which  had  been  settled  by  a
    colleague in the  Specialist  Appeals  Team.   He  submitted  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was perverse. He submitted that  it
    had not been open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  reach  any  other
    conclusion than that the appeal should be dismissed, having  regard  to
    the bare facts of the case and the relevant jurisprudence.

17. I raised the question of whether the asserted error  was  material,  as
    the older child had now accrued over 7 years' residence in the UK.   Mr
    Tufan pointed out that the child had not accrued 7 years' residence  at
    the date of the hearing before Judge  Keane.   Moreover,  he  submitted
    that on a careful reading of MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  the
    Court of Appeal was not indicating that there was now, in effect, a  de
    facto amnesty for families with a child who has  accrued  more  than  7
    years'  continuous  residence.   Elias  L.J.  had  made  it  clear   at
    paragraphs [45]-[49] that the outcome of the best interests  assessment
    was not determinative of the question  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the child to return to the country of origin  with  his  or  her
    parents.

18. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Iengar submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    reached a decision that was reasonably open to him on the evidence, and
    that his approach was not legally flawed.  Alternatively, she submitted
    that any error made was not  material,  as  the  older  child  had  now
    accrued 7 years' continuous residence in the UK, and so she was  now  a
    qualifying child under the Statute.

19. Having heard submissions from both representatives,  I  ruled  that  an
    error of law was made out, such that the decision should be  set  aside
    and re-made.  The representatives were in  agreement  that  the  proper
    course was for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a de novo hearing, as the factual matrix had changed since the  hearing
    before Judge Keane.

Reasons for finding an error or Law

20. As was highlighted by Mr Tufan in his submissions, at the date  of  the
    hearing before Judge Keane, the older child was still some way short of
    reaching the crucial 7-year milestone.  In any event, in order to  come
    within the  ambit  of  Rule  276ADE(1)(iv),  the  period  of  7  years'
    continuous residence  needs  to  have  been  accrued  by  the  date  of
    application.

21. In the refusal letter, the SSHD asserted that  the  claimant  would  be
    accustomed to society and culture in India, having spent  25  years  of
    his life living there.  In addition, he had  been  living  amongst  the
    Indian community whilst in the UK, and he attended a  local  temple  of
    worship regularly, which reinforced the fact that he would continue  to
    be familiar with the society and culture of India if he was to return.

22. On the topic of exceptional  circumstances,  the  SSHD  stated  in  the
    refusal letter that the circumstances were not  exceptional  enough  to
    warrant a grant outside the Rules as the children had not  been  living
    in the UK for the minimum of 7 years as required.  They are still  very
    young and able to relocate and adjust to the lifestyle  of  India  with
    the support of their parents, as they had  not  spent  their  formative
    years in the UK.   The  children  had  been  living  among  the  Indian
    community, which would mean  that  they  would  be  familiar  with  the
    language to some extent, which would aid their return to India.

23. Furthermore, the eldest child visited India in June 2010, resulting  in
    her being exposed to life in India and the culture at that time.  Also,
    the claimant had obtained numerous qualifications and skills in the  UK
    which he could use in India to help to secure employment so as to  able
    to support his family in India.  Finally, the claimant and  his  family
    would be able to take full advantage of the benefits  of  their  Indian
    citizenship on their return.

24. In Azimi-Moayed & Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) the Tribunal held:

         30.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary (my emphasis).

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong (my emphasis).

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period (my emphasis).

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable (my emphasis).

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

25. AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 is also highly pertinent. The  facts
    of AM Malawi were that AM had entered the UK in  September  2006  as  a
    student.  His last grant of leave to remain had expired on  2  December
    2012.  In the meantime, his wife and eldest daughter were granted entry
    clearance to join as dependants in January 2007, when the second  child
    was then born to the couple in the UK on 3 April 2011.  All the  family
    were citizens of  Malawi.   As  was  held  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  at
    paragraph [35], the eldest child was a qualifying child as  defined  by
    section 117D(i) by virtue of entry to the UK in January 2007.   It  was
    not in dispute before the First-tier Tribunal that she had lived in the
    UK for a continuous period of 7 years or more at the date of the appeal
    hearing, and as a  result  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  required  to
    consider her position by reference to section 117B(vi).  There was also
    no dispute  that  the  appellant,  as  a  father,  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his eldest daughter, and thus the
    only issue was whether or not it would be reasonable to expect  her  to
    leave the UK.  At paragraph [29] the Tribunal said:

       There is no reason to infer that any interruption to  the  education
       of the  elder  child  upon  return  to  Malawi  would  be  any  more
       significant than that faced by any child forced  to  move  from  one
       country to another by virtue of the careers of their  parents.   Nor
       should the difficulties of moving from one school to another  become
       unduly exaggerated.  It would be highly unusual for a child  in  the
       UK to complete the entirety of the education within one school.  The
       trauma, or excitement, of a  new  school,  new  classmates  and  new
       teachers is an integral part of growing up.  In too many appeals the
       FtT is presented with arguments  whose  basic  premise  is  that  to
       change a school is to submit a child to a  cruel  and  unduly  harsh
       experience.

26. It is not suggested by  the  Judge  that  the  children  cannot  access
    education in India, so prima facie his finding that the fate  faced  by
    the children is "harsh and cruel" is not sustainable in so  far  as  it
    relates to the apprehended disruption of the children's education.

27. Although the Judge accepted that the claimant could not access  funding
    from his wife's family members in India, it  did  not  follow  that  he
    would be unable to support himself and his children in India. The Judge
    (rightly) did not find that the family faced destitution in India.

28. The Judge did not find that the older child's asthmatic condition could
    not be adequately treated and controlled in India, and he did not refer
    to her asthma as being a reason why relocating  to  India  would  be  a
    cruel and harsh fate for her.

29. The Judge did not engage  with  any  of  the  matters  referred  to  in
    paragraphs 21 to 23 above in his  assessment  of  the  children's  best
    interests, or in his overall proportionality  assessment.  He  did  not
    engage with the fact that prima facie the older child had  not  resided
    in the  UK  for  long  enough,  or  during  a  crucial  period  of  her
    development (years accrued from the age of four being more  significant
    than years accrued from birth or the age  of  one),  to  tip  the  best
    interests scales in her favour.  As a result, he did not give  adequate
    reasons for concluding that, overall, the children's best interests lay
    in them remaining in the UK, rather than in them returning  with  their
    parents to the country of which they are all nationals, and where  they
    can enjoy to the full all the  rights  and  benefits  of  their  Indian
    citizenship.  In addition, the Judge did not give adequate reasons  for
    reaching the stark conclusion that the fate faced by  the  children  in
    going back with their parents to India is a harsh and cruel one.

30. On the Article 8(2) side of the equation, the  Judge  acknowledged  the
    weight to be  given  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  firm  and  effective
    immigration controls.  But the Judge did not remind  himself  that  the
    claimant and his wife had entered the UK for a temporary  purpose,  and
    that they had no legitimate expectation of being to carry on family and
    private life here on an  indefinite  basis,  unless  they  could  bring
    themselves  within  an  applicable  immigration  rule.   Although   the
    claimant had in good faith, as the judge found, sought  to  extend  his
    stay and that of his dependents through the use of Mr Shah's  services,
    the judge made no finding on Mr Paramjorthy's submission that Mr Shah's
    fraud had deprived the claimant of the opportunity of regularising  his
    status. It is difficult to see how the claimant could have successfully
    extended his stay and that of his family through  an  EEA  application.
    The Judge also did not address the question of whether the claimant was
    financially independent, and whether he could speak English.

31. For the above reasons, the decision is vitiated by a material error  of
    law, such that it must be set aside and re-made.

32. The claimant's case is now stronger, because his older daughter has now
    accrued over 7 years' continuous residence in the UK. But the fact that
    she is now a qualifying child is by no means decisive, as is made clear
    by Elias L.J at paragraphs [45]-[49] of MA (Pakistan).  It is for  that
    reason that it is appropriate to remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Conclusion

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that the decision must be set aside and re-made.

Directions

34. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Traylor House for
    a de novo hearing, before any Judge apart from Judge Keane.

35. None of the findings of fact made by the  previous  Tribunal  shall  be
    preserved.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 21 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

