
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05516/2014
                                                               IA/05517/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2014                           |On 31 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                           MS JOANNA CHOMA-LUCENA
                      MR RICARDO JOSE WAVRICK DE LUCENA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Criggie, Hamilton Burns WS
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal McGavin dismissing the appeals under the  Immigration
   (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations").

2) The first appellant is of Polish nationality and was born on  29  October
   1982.  The second appellant is of Brazilian nationality and was born on 9
   May 1979.  The appellants are a  married  couple.   In  August  2013  the
   appellants each applied for a permanent residence card.   The application
   of the first appellant was made on the basis that she had resided in  the
   UK in accordance with the EEA Regulations for a continuous  period  of  5
   years from 24th March 2008.  As her spouse the second appellant  was  her
   family  member  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and  the  outcome  of   his
   application depended on that of the first appellant.   The  Secretary  of
   State refused the application by the first appellant on  several  grounds
   and the appellants appealed.  Before the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
   there was only one issue in respect of which the first  appellant  failed
   to show that she was exercising Treaty rights for a continuous period  of
   5 years.  During the final few months of the 5 year period,  from  August
   2012 until March 2013, when the first appellant  was  a  student  and  no
   longer in employment, the first appellant was unable to show that she was
   in possession of comprehensive sickness insurance, as  required  by  reg.
   4(1)(d)(ii) of the EEA Regulations.

3) Before the First-tier Tribunal the first appellant sought  to  rely  upon
   her European Health Insurance Card, otherwise  known  as  an  EHIC.   The
   judge recorded that this allowed anyone who was insured by or covered  by
   a statutory social security scheme of an EEA country to received  medical
   treatment in another member state for  free  or  at  a  reduced  cost  if
   treatment became necessary during their visit.  In the  decision  of  the
   Court of Appeal in W (China) [2006] EWCA Civ 1494 the equivalent card  at
   that time was found not to amount to comprehensive sickness cover because
   social security contributions as an employee did not  count  as  sickness
   insurance in terms of the relative  Directive.   The  judge  found  that,
   although  the  first  appellant   had   been   making   social   security
   contributions in the UK or another member state, this did not  amount  to
   comprehensive sickness insurance.  The  first  appellant  was  unable  to
   produce any health insurance policies for the period in question.

4) In  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  the  appellants  cited
   Commission guidelines on the implementation of Directive 2004/38 stating:

    "Any insurance cover, private or public, contracted in the host  Member
    State or elsewhere, is acceptable in principle as long as  it  provides
    comprehensive coverage and does not  create  a  burden  on  the  public
    finances of the host Member State.  In protecting their public finances
    while assessing  the  comprehensiveness  of  sickness  insurance  cover
    Member States must  act  in  compliance  with  the  limits  imposed  by
    community law and in accordance with the principle of proportionality."


   It was further argued that under the  relevant  NHS  regulations  it  was
   unlawful to charge anyone for health services in the UK  if  that  person
   was ordinarily  resident  here.   This  provision  did  not  exclude  EEA
   nationals.  In addition, NHS care was a social security  benefit  falling
   within the scope of Regulation 883/04, which  meant  that  it  should  be
   enjoyed by an EEA national on the same basis as a national of the  Member
   State.  Accordingly if a British citizen  would  not  be  charged  for  a
   particular service by the NHS then an EEA national should not be charged.
    In support of this view reference was made to a decision  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in Secretary of State for Work and Pensions v SW [2011] UKUT 508
   (AAC).  It was further submitted that the European Health Insurance  Card
   was obtained in February 2012 and covered the appellant  for  the  period
   between August 2012 and March 2013 when she  was  studying  without  also
   being in employment, whereas previously she had been  both  studying  and
   working.  This card had  been  obtained  in  order  to  comply  with  the
   guidance issued by the Home Office on EEA applications which stated  that
   such cards were sufficient evidence of comprehensive sickness insurance.


5) Permission to appeal was granted in May 2014 on the basis that  the  case
   of W (China) was  concerned  with  self-sufficient  persons  rather  than
   workers or students.  In granting permission the judge observed  that  it
   was not clear whether the points made about access  to  the  NHS  in  the
   application for permission to  appeal  were  put  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

6) A rule 24 notice on  behalf  of  the  respondent  pointed  out  that  the
   Tribunal was bound to follow the decision of the Court of Appeal and this
   would not amount to an error of law.  No Home Office  guidance  had  been
   produced to show that a European Health Insurance Card  was  regarded  as
   meeting the requirements of the Regulations.

7) At the hearing before us Mr Criggie,  for  the  appellants,  acknowledged
   that in July 2014 the Court  of  Appeal  issued  a  further  decision  on
   comprehensive sickness insurance in Ahmad [2014] EWCA Civ 988.  This  was
   on "all fours" with the  current  case.   Mr  Criggie  acknowledged  that
   between August 2012 and March 2013 the first appellant was a student only
   and was not in employment.  In order to rely on her EHIC issued  in  2012
   in Poland she would have to have been in the UK  only  temporarily.   The
   evidence did not suggest the first appellant was here  only  temporarily.
   Mr Criggie explained that the first appellant was in the UK  on  a  valid
   basis under the EEA Regulations.  The appeal was against only the refusal
   of permanent residence cards.  Mr Criggie further pointed  out  that  the
   couple have a son, aged 5, who was born in the UK.

8) Ms Patterson put before us the current Home Office guidance  on  reliance
   on an EHIC, which confirmed that this was accepted only  in  relation  to
   temporary residence.

9) As Mr Criggie acknowledged, it is clear from the recent decision  of  the
   Court of Appeal in Ahmad that a student in  the  position  of  the  first
   appellant would require comprehensive sickness insurance, as found by the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, and that her European Health  Insurance
   Card would not suffice.  On  this  basis  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal was right to find that the first appellant could not  show  that
   she had been residing in the UK in accordance with the Regulations for  a
   continuous period of 5 years because for the final part  of  that  period
   from August 2012 until March  2013  the  first  appellant  did  not  have
   comprehensive sickness insurance.  Accordingly the Judge  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal did not err in law and her decision shall stand.

Conclusions

10) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

11) We do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

12) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   We  were
   not asked to make an order and see no reason of substance for so doing.

          Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
