

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/05420/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 October 2017                        |On 17 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                              Nhu Chuan Nguyen
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sayadyan of Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grant promulgated on 5 January 2017.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on  6  May  1992.   He  last
    entered the United Kingdom on 31 December 2013 pursuant  to  a  Tier  4
    Student visa with valid leave until 30 October  2014.   On  27  October
    2014, prior to the expiry of his leave, he made an in-time  application
    for leave to remain as a spouse.


3.   His application was based on his marriage on 26 July 2013  to  Ms  Oanh
    Lan Nguyen, (d.o.b. 16 March 1984), a British citizen.  In  support  of
    the application the Appellant relied upon the  income  of  his  partner
    through  self-employment  running  a  beauty  salon  in  the  Stratford
    Shopping Centre.  Her claimed income was a little in excess of  �19,000
    per annum.


4.   On 2 February 2015 the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application
    for leave to remain for reasons set out  in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'
    letter ('RFRL') of that date, and also made a removal decision pursuant
    to section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   In
    essence the Respondent considered that the Appellant had failed to show
    that he met the financial requirements  of  the  Rules.   It  was  also
    considered that  the  Appellant  and  his  partner  could  relocate  to
    Vietnam, and that the Appellant did not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE in respect of private life.


5.   The decision, being made in  February  2015,  was  made  prior  to  the
    recent changes to the appeal regimen introduced by the Immigration  Act
    2014: accordingly it was open to the Appellant to appeal on  the  basis
    that the decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules,  as
    well as on other grounds as specified in the legislation  in  force  at
    that time.  The Appellant did indeed lodge an appeal with the IAC.


6.   The Appellant's appeal was first heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Adio on 13 October 2015.  The Appellant did not appear on that occasion
    and neither did his wife.  At paragraph 3 of Judge Adio's  decision  it
    is recorded that a communication  was  received  from  the  Appellant's
    representatives dated 13 October "which stated that the  Appellant  had
    been involved in a serious motoring accident and as a result is  unable
    to  attend  the  hearing".   The  letter  further  indicated  that  the
    representatives' instructions were to ask the Tribunal to  proceed  'on
    the papers'. (See decision of Judge Adio at paragraph 3.)


7.   There is nothing apparent in that communication by way  of  explanation
    as to why the Appellant's claimed accident should  have  prevented  his
    wife from attending the  hearing  either  to  seek  an  adjournment  or
    otherwise to assist the  Tribunal  by  supporting  the  case  with  her
    evidence - bearing in mind that a  significant  aspect  of  the  appeal
    focused upon the failure, according  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  to
    satisfy the financial requirements  of  the  Rules  (such  requirements
    being focused upon the earnings of the Appellant's partner).   Be  that
    as it may, Judge Adio proceeded with the appeal and allowed the  appeal
    for reasons set out in his decision promulgated on 13 November 2015.


8.   The Respondent, dissatisfied with the decision of  Judge  Adio,  sought
    permission to appeal, which was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lambert on 27 April 2016.


9.   The error of law hearing came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  on
    15 June 2016.  She concluded  for  reasons  set  out  in  her  decision
    promulgated on 17 June 2016 that Judge  Adio  had  indeed  fallen  into
    error of law and accordingly his decision was set aside.


10.  Judge Canavan observed, contrary to submissions that had  been  pursued
    on behalf of the Appellant before her, that there was  no  evidence  to
    show that any concession had been made before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    by the Respondent's Presenting Officer in relation to  Appendix  FM-SE.
    Whilst Judge Canavan did not thereafter make any findings in respect of
    the requirements to provide specified  evidence,  she  did  observe  at
    paragraph 16 of her decision that  "even  brief  consideration  of  the
    evidence provided with the application and in  support  of  the  appeal
    appears to  disclose  a  number  of  possible  gaps  in  the  specified
    evidence."  Nonetheless Judge  Canavan  considered  it  appropriate  to
    remit the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal and did  so,  stating:
    "No findings were made in relation  to  paragraph  EX.1  or  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  All issues must be reheard."


11.  It is in such circumstances that  the  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant  on  13  December  2016.   On  that  occasion  the
    Appellant  again  did  not  appear,  and  neither  did   his   partner.
    Communication  had   again   been   received   from   the   Appellant's
    representatives, by way of letter dated  1  December  2016,  which,  in
    part, stated as follows:

         "Regrettably despite our repeated attempts  we  were  not  able  to
         obtain clear instructions from our client as to the appeal  hearing
         of 13 December 2016.  Regrettably we equally do not  have  specific
         instructions to appear at  the  hearing  on  13  December  2016  to
         present date neither do we have instructions  from  our  client  to
         withdraw the appeal."




12.  The letter  of  1  December  2016  also  contained  a  request  for  an
    adjournment. As is noted by Judge Grant, the application was refused by
    a Designated Judge (paragraph 3).  Judge Grant reached the view that in
    all of the circumstances it was appropriate to proceed with the  appeal
    in the absence of the Appellant (paragraphs 2-4).


13.  Judge Grant also referred at a  later  part  of  her  Decision  to  the
    Appellant's non-appearance before Judge Adio and the  communication  in
    respect of the claimed serious motoring accident  that  had  supposedly
    prevented his attendance (paragraph 11). As regards the assertion of  a
    motoring accident preventing attendance Judge Grant said this:

         "There has never been any credible medical evidence supplied to the
         Tribunal to confirm that statement but  nevertheless  even  if  the
         Appellant was unable to attend his hearing as claimed  in  2015  he
         had no excuse for failing  to  attend  his  second  appeal  hearing
         before the Tribunal on 13 December 2016.  These are not the actions
         of a credible witness." (paragraph 12).
14.  I pause to note that no express complaint is made in respect of  either
    the Judge's decision to proceed in the absence of the Appellant, or her
    observation in respect of the damage to the Appellant's credibility.  I
    do so because, contrary to the contents of  the  grounds  submitted  in
    support of the  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  in  granting
    permission to appeal on 26 July 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Boyes
    stated in his decision:  "The  grounds  assert  that  the  Judge  erred
    principally by proceeding in the absence of the Appellant and remarking
    that it was not something [not attending] that a credible witness would
    do."


15.   Mr  Sayadyan  very  properly  acknowledges  that  there  was  no  such
    assertion made explicitly in the grounds  of  challenge.   Nor,  in  my
    judgment, was such an aspect of  challenge  implicit  in  the  grounds,
    which are quite specific in the matters upon which they focus, and  are
    particular in their articulation of those matters. To  that  extent  Mr
    Sayadyan in effect acknowledges that permission to appeal  was  granted
    in part on the basis of a challenge not  raised  -  and  even  now  not
    pursued. It is unclear to me how it is that Judge Boyes formed the view
    that proceeding in the absence  of  the  Appellant,  and/or  making  an
    adverse inference from  his  failure  to  attend  two  appeal  hearings
    without evidenced explanation, formed any part of the  challenge.   Nor
    have the grounds since been amended to incorporate any such  challenge.
    Indeed, it seems to me that it is impossible to see that there would be
    any merit in a criticism of Judge Grant for proceeding in  the  absence
    of the Appellant -  particularly  where  his  own  representatives  had
    written to the Tribunal indicating that they were struggling to get any
    meaningful instructions from  him,  and  moreover  where  there  was  a
    history of non-attendance with no explanation supported by evidence.


16.  Judge Grant proceed in the absence of the Appellant, and dismissed  his
    appeal for reasons set out in her Decision.


17.  The Appellant's representatives sought permission to appeal, which  was
    granted by Judge Boyes on 26 July 2017, as already indicated.


18.  In addition to the erroneous characterisation of the grounds  discussed
    above, Judge Boyes also identified that the grounds  "assert  that  the
    Judge erred... by refusing to consider the matter pertaining to Article
    8 ECHR outside the Rules". Judge Boyes then stated that  he  found  the
    grounds "arguable", (but stated  no  reason  for  such  a  conclusion).
    Regrettably, it seems to  me  the  treatment  of  the  application  for
    permission  to  appeal   was   in   part   erroneous,   and   otherwise
    unsatisfactory - leaving the parties and the Tribunal uninformed as  to
    the basis of the decision.


19.  Be that as it may, the  matter  comes  before  the  Tribunal  today  to
    consider the issue of error of law.


20.  Although Mr Sayadyan has attended the hearing, the Appellant is not  in
    attendance.  Mr Sayadyan explained that his firm had continued to  have
    difficulties in communicating with the Appellant - and  indeed  he  had
    not been in touch with his representatives since the communication sent
    to the First-tier Tribunal on 1 December 2016.  Mr  Sayadyan  indicated
    that he was essentially acting on the implied authority of the retainer
    held by the firm: beyond that, as indicated, nothing specific had  been
    communicated to his firm from the Appellant by way of  instructions  in
    respect of any pertinent  matters,  or  indeed  anything  otherwise  in
    regard to the Appellant's circumstances.  In the course of  submissions
    Mr Avery pointed out that one consequence of this was  that  there  was
    nothing by way of evidential  material  before  the  Tribunal  since  a
    bundle filed in August 2015 ahead of the appeal  hearing  before  Judge
    Adio.


21.  Nonetheless, permission to appeal has been granted and Mr Sayadyan  has
    appeared before the Tribunal to prosecute  the  grounds  of  appeal.  I
    consider the challenge accordingly.


23.  Judge Grant's Decision, after rehearsing the  procedural  matters  with
    regard to the Appellant's non-attendance and identifying the bundles of
    evidence before her, then sets out the summary of the Appellant's  case
    by way of quoting extensively from his witness statement.  The  witness
    statement of the Appellant's partner is also referenced, albeit  it  is
    also noted  that  the  witness  statement  appeared  to  be  incomplete
    (paragraph 9).


24.  Judge Grant then goes on to rehearse the substance of the  Respondent's
    case by extensive quotation from the RFRL before proceeding to her  own
    evaluation of the evidence under the heading 'My  Findings'  (paragraph
    11 et seq.).  I have already made reference to  paragraphs  11  and  12
    above, and in particular the Judge's observation that  the  Appellant's
    non-attendances without any explanation on one occasion and without any
    evidence-supported  explanation   on   another,   were   in   all   the
    circumstances of this particular case considered by her to be "not  the
    actions of  a  credible  witness".  The  Judge  also  stated  that  she
    concluded that notwithstanding the size of the bundle before  her,  the
    Appellant had not demonstrated that the  necessary  specified  evidence
    pursuant to Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules had  been  provided
    with his application (paragraph 12).  She  concluded,  therefore,  "The
    Appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  for
    leave to remain as a partner under Appendix FM." (paragraph 13).


25.  I note that the Judge's conclusions are  not  expressly  challenged  in
    the grounds upon which permission to appeal was  sought.   Mr  Sayadyan
    has invited me to consider  that  they  are  implicitly  challenged  by
    reason of criticisms of other aspects of the Judge's findings, which  I
    come on to in  due  course.   However,  in  my  judgement  those  other
    criticisms (see below), are discreet in nature: accordingly, even in so
    far as they are meritorious, I do not  consider  them  material  to  an
    extent that they could be said to have 'infected' the Judge's  analysis
    of the requirements of Appendix  FM-SE.   In  the  absence  of  express
    challenge to the Judge's conclusion on the core  element  of  the  case
    under the Rules, and given  that  I  do  not  consider  that  any  such
    challenge is implied, it is unnecessary to consider further the finding
    at paragraph 13 (quoted above): it stands unchallenged.


26.  The Judge  having  concluded  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements with regard to the financial requirements  of  the  Rules,
    went on to consider the exception under paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM
    (paragraph 14).  She reached the conclusion that it had not been  shown
    that there were any insurmountable obstacles preventing the couple from
    continuing their relationship in Vietnam.


27.  In this regard the Judge observed that "there is no  credible  evidence
    from either the appellant or his wife in  front  of  me  save  for  the
    incomplete witness statement of his wife and the witness  statement  of
    the appellant", before stating: "Even if I accept the appellant is in a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a British partner there is  no
    credible evidence before this Tribunal that she is unable to live  with
    him in Vietnam."


28.  Again, there is no express challenge to that aspect  of  the  Decision;
    and,  again,  I  do  not  accept  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  now   has
    jurisdiction impliedly to consider a challenge  to  those  findings  by
    reference to those matters that are pleaded in the grounds - which,  as
    I have said, are quite discrete matters.


29.  Judge Grant then stated her conclusion in respect of  paragraph  276ADE
    (paragraph 15).  In the circumstances it seems to me that that  was  an
    entirely sustainable conclusion - which, yet again, is not the  subject
    of express challenge.


30.  Thereafter, having concluded that the Appellant  did  not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules, the Judge turned  her  attention  to  the  issue  of
    Article 8: it is this aspect of the Decision  that  is  the  particular
    focus of the grounds.


31.  The Judge refers to the case of SS (Congo) and states:

         "In the absence of any credible evidence from the Appellant and his
         wife before the Tribunal I find the Appellant  has  not  shown  ...
         there are any compelling circumstances which require me to consider
         Article 8 on a freestanding basis outside the Immigration Rules and
         I decline to do so." (paragraph 16).


32.  Notwithstanding this observation, the Judge went  on  to  specify  that
    she had borne "in mind the public interest  considerations  in  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act" (paragraph 17), and then indeed made reference to
    such public interest considerations (paragraph 18).


33.  It seems clear, and indeed  Mr  Avery  very  properly  acknowledges  as
    much, that the Judge fell into two factual errors at paragraph 18.

    (i) The Judge stated that she had no evidence before the Tribunal  that
    the Appellant "can speak and understand English".  However, as  pointed
    out in the second of the Appellant's three pleaded grounds  of  appeal,
    there was included in the Appellant's appeal bundle a certificate  from
    the Trinity College London in respect of English language skills.

     (ii) The Judge stated that "the Appellant has remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom illegally", before adding that "little weight should  be  given
    to private and family  life  established  when  immigration  status  is
    precarious".  However,  as  is  apparent  from  the  rehearsal  of  the
    chronology in the opening paragraphs  above,  the  Appellant  made  his
    application for variation of leave to remain at  a  time  when  he  had
    current leave.  There is nothing in any of the materials  that  suggest
    that the Appellant was at  any  point  an  overstayer.  The  Judge  has
    clearly fallen into  factual  error  in  this  regard.   (This  is  the
    substance of the third ground of appeal.)


34.  Mr Avery,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  invites  the  Tribunal  to
    consider that notwithstanding these errors there could rationally  have
    been no different outcome in the appeal, and the errors of fact  should
    be treated as immaterial.  In particular, he  says  that  at  best  the
    Appellant's ability to speak English would be a neutral factor  in  any
    overall evaluation.  As regards the Appellant's immigration  status  he
    essentially identifies that so far as private  life  is  concerned  the
    Judge's point is essentially sound in that the Appellants' private life
    has been  established  at  a  time  when  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious: section 117B(5) was applicable even if section 117B(4)  was
    not. Further, even if section 117B(4)(b) - in respect of a relationship
    with a qualifying partner - did not apply, the reality was that neither
    the Appellant or his supposed  partner  had  provided  supporting  oral
    testimony as to fact and/or quality of their  mutual  family  life.   I
    return to these matters in a moment  in  the  overall  context  of  the
    remaining ground of challenge.


35.  The remaining ground of challenge - which was the first ground  pleaded
    - is headed "Refusal to consider Article 8 ECHR on a freestanding basis
    outside the Immigration Rules".  The ground articulates that the  Judge
    fell into error by in effect applying an intermediary test at paragraph
    16, rather than simply proceeding to a consideration of Article 8.


36.  With all due respect to the drafter of the grounds,  whilst  there  may
    be a technical argument to be raised in this regard it seems to me that
    this fundamentally ignores the facts and circumstances  in  the  appeal
    and the merits of the case.  The Appellant and his  partner  had  twice
    failed to attend appeal hearings to support  their  statements.   Judge
    Grant considered this matter expressly at paragraph 12  and  considered
    this damaging to  the  Appellant's  credibility.   She  reiterated  her
    doubts as to credibility  at  paragraph  14.  And  again,  when  giving
    consideration to the issue of Article 8, expressly observed that  there
    was no credible evidence from the Appellant  and  his  wife  (paragraph
    16).


37.  Bluntly: the grounds of appeal ignore these significant findings  which
    are properly made on the premise of the Appellant's failure  to  attend
    to support his case.  Indeed, it seems to me, that whilst I  understand
    the nature of Mr Sayadyan's perceived duty to a  client  for  whom  his
    firm holds a retainer, nonetheless there is an unfortunate  element  of
    impertinence in pursuing an appeal against a decision which is informed
    in substantial part by the Appellant's absence  from  the  hearing,  in
    circumstances where the representatives acknowledge that the  Appellant
    himself has essentially entirely failed to engage in the  process  with
    the Tribunal - and indeed has not engaged with his representatives  for
    a  substantial  period  of  time,  including  not   giving   up-to-date
    instructions as to his wishes in respect of the appeal given  his  non-
    attendance before Judge Grant.


38.  In my judgement the reality is - whether Article 8 is considered  on  a
    basis inappropriately restricted to  an  intermediary  step,  or  on  a
    substantive 'freestanding' basis - in  circumstances  where  the  Judge
    concluded that there was no credible evidence before  her  from  either
    the Appellant or his partner, the  Appelant  could  not  possibly  have
    succeeded under Article 8.  In short, as Mr Avery identifies, there was
    nothing before the Tribunal to demonstrate that the Appellant was still
    in a relationship with his partner after the materials  that  had  been
    filed in August 2015; and moreover,  as  Judge  Grant  identified,  the
    partner's witness statement itself was incomplete.


39.  The other two grounds of challenge - which I have observed above to  be
    well made - could not  possibly  have  altered  the  outcome  in  those
    circumstances.


40.  In short, with all due  respect  to  the  Appellant's  representatives,
    this is an empty challenge and I reject it.


41.  Finally I note that Mr Sayadyan voiced the difficult position  that  he
    found  himself  in  in  consequence  of  the  absence   of   up-to-date
    instructions. For this  reason,  and  this  reason  only,  I  make  the
    following closing observation. For my own part, I cannot  see  how  any
    criticism could be made of the Appellant's representatives if they were
    now in effect to recognise  that  in  the  absence  of  any  up-to-date
    instructions they do not feel sufficiently competent to  prosecute  the
    Appellant's  case   any   further.   However,   how   the   Appellant's
    representatives  conduct  themselves  henceforth  in  this  matter   is
    essentially a matter for them to decide according to their professional
    obligations - I  offer  no  specific  advice  and  only  the  tentative
    expression of opinion given above.


Notice of Decision

42.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
law and stands.


43.  The appeal remains dismissed.


44.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing



Signed:                                 Date: 16 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
