
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/05057/2013
                                                               ia/05070/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27 November 2014                             |On 2 December 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                        Ashma gupta (first appellant)
                       Bharat gupta (second appellant)
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Kandola of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman of Counsel instructed by Krish Ratna &
                    Co, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Respondents

 1. The Respondents to whom I shall refer as "the  Applicants"  are  mother
    and son born respectively in 1976 and 1998.  They are both citizens  of
    India.  They first arrived on  3  May  2004  with  leave  to  enter  as
    visitors.  The first Appellant (the mother) returned to India  and  re-
    entered on 16 August 2004 with leave as a student.  The mother's  leave
    was extended and subsequently varied to leave as a work  permit  holder
    and then as a Highly Skilled Migrant Person and  lastly  as  a  Tier  1
    (Highly Skilled) Migrant until 7 November 2012.  The second  Appellant,
    her son, was granted leave in line.

 2. On 17 November 2010 the mother and  her  husband,  the  father  of  the
    second Applicant, were arrested on  suspicion  of  committing  offences
    relating to immigration.  On 16 May 2011 the husband  as  convicted  on
    fourteen counts of assisting illegal entry into the United Kingdom  and
    on 18 August 2011 was sentenced to four and a half years'  imprisonment
    and made the subject of a Confiscation  Order  under  the  Proceeds  of
    Crime Act 2002 of which  only  part  was  satisfied.  The  husband  was
    sentenced in default to a term of an additional two and a  half  years:
    see paragraph 12 of the judgment in R v Mahmud and  Gupta  [2013]  EWCA
    Crim 2543.

 3. The husband had dealings with a large number of people who  claimed  to
    have post-graduate diplomas  in  Information  Technology  and  Business
    Management awarded by the Cambridge  College  of  Learning:  see  NA  &
    Others (Cambridge College of Learning) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00031  and
    the police report to the Crown Prosecutor of 4 October 2010 pages 27  -
    40 in the Respondent's bundle.  The  mother  had  been  employed  by  a
    differently named college and a company in which her husband was at the
    time involved or had an interest.

 4. On 28 June 2012 the husband was served with a liability to  deportation
    letter and subsequently before  23  April  2014  voluntarily  left  the
    United Kingdom: see paragraph 12 of the determination of Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Adio promulgated  on  16  May  2014  (the  original
    determination) which is the subject of this  appeal.   At  the  hearing
    before me the mother confirmed she had obtained a decree nisi from  the
    courts in England and Wales in relation to her marriage to  the  second
    Applicant's father.

 5. On 11 July 2011 (between the husband's conviction and  sentencing)  the
    applications  of  the  Applicants  for  further   leave   outside   the
    Immigration Rules (the IRs) were refused with no right of appeal.

 6. On 21 September 2012 the Applicants applied again for leave  to  remain
    outside  the  IRs  and  on  25  January  2013  the  SSHD  refused   the
    applications with an in-country right of appeal.  Additionally,  on  13
    March 2013 the SSHD made decisions to deport the Applicants  as  family
    members of the husband.  These deportation decisions  are  referred  in
    paragraph 10 of the original determination.

 7. The Applicants' appeals against the deportation decisions were heard on
    15 July 2014, some time after the hearing  on  23  April  2014  of  the
    appeals against refusal  of  leave  outside  the  IRs  leading  to  the
    original determination.  The Applicants'  appeals  against  deportation
    were allowed and on 4 August 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  refused  the
    SSHD permission to appeal.  A renewed application was made by the  SSHD
    and refused on 21 October 2014.  There was no  evidence  the  SSHD  had
    taken any further action as a result of the Upper Tribunal's refusal of
    the renewed application for permission to appeal.  The  upshot  is  the
    Applicants have won their appeals against the  deportation  orders  and
    their appeals against refusal of discretionary leave  outside  the  IRs
    were dealt with in the original determination.

The Original Determination

 8. By a determination promulgated on 16 May 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Adio allowed the appeal of the second Applicant  by  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules and the appeal of  the
    first Appellant by way of reference to Appendix FM of the IRs paragraph
    R-LTRP.1.1(d)(iii).

 9. On 30 July 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lever refused the SSHD
    permission to appeal.  The SSHD renewed her  application  on  the  same
    grounds and on 10 October 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge  Goldstein  granted
    permission to appeal.

10. The grounds for appeal are that Judge Adio erred  by  not  taking  into
    account the deportation action being  pursued  against  the  Appellants
    which  took  precedence.  The  other  grounds  challenge  Judge  Adio's
    treatment of the Applicants' claims under Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Kandola sought an adjournment in order to link the  present  appeals
    to the deportation appeals of the Applicants.  Mr Coleman was concerned
    that such an application had been made with no prior indication  given.
    I obtained the  print-outs  showing  the  history  of  the  Applicants'
    appeals against the deportation orders  from  the  Tribunal's  computer
    records (ARIA) and they disclosed that the Applicants' appeals  against
    deportation had been successful as already mentioned.

12. Mr Kandola took instructions and confirmed that the SSHD  had  received
    notice  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  to  refuse  her   renewed
    application for permission  to  appeal  the  deportation  case  already
    referred to  in paragraph 7 and  had  no  record  that  there  was  any
    proposal that it should be challenged.  In the circumstances he  relied
    on the SSHD's grounds for appeal.

Findings and Consideration

13. The first ground for appeal asserting the priority of  the  deportation
    proceedings has no weight at all and is irrelevant because in the event
    the Applicants were successful.  The other grounds relate  entirely  to
    the treatment of the Applicants' claim under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention.  They have  no  relevance  to  the  original  determination
    because  the  original  determination  allowed  the  appeals   of   the
    Applicants by way of reference to the IRs.  The original  determination
    did not address in any way the claim under Article 8  of  the  European
    Convention. It addressed only the claim under the IRs and  allowed  the
    appeals under the IRs. The grounds for  appeal  do  not  challenge  the
    Judge's treatment of the appeals under the IRs  and  therefore  do  not
    disclose any error of law in the  original  determination  which  shall
    stand.

Anonymity

14. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    papers in the Tribunal file and heard the appeal I do not find that one
    is required.

DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error
    of law and shall stand.

    The effect is that the appeals of the Applicants are successful and the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  02.
XII. 2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


