

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05932/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 4 July 2016                                |On 8th July 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                             HASSAN MAHAMED ELMI
                        (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms L Irvine, Advocate; Drummond Miller, Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers  to
    them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals on three grounds against a determination by FtT  Judge
    J C Grant-Hutchison, allowing the appellant's appeal under article 3 of
    the ECHR, based on the circumstances he would  be  likely  to  face  in
    Somalia.

 3. The first ground of appeal arises from paragraph 27  of  the  decision,
    where the judge said that there was "...  nothing  in  the  appellant's
    evidence to show that he is a member of a majority  clan".  The  ground
    states that it was for the appellant to show that he was a member of  a
    minority clan, and that it was  reasonable  to  doubt  his  assertions,
    given his use of multiple entities and other deceit.  The  finding  was
    significant in terms of country guidance and the question of access  to
    majority  clan  support.  The  judge  declined  to  speculate  on   the
    appellant's precise clan identity, but that was not the point.

 4. Further to  this  ground,  Mr  Matthews  accepted  that  the  issue  of
    membership of a minority clan was now of lesser  significance  than  it
    was previously seen to be, in terms of country guidance, but he said it
    remained relevant to whether the appellant would face conditions  which
    reach the level of article 3,  in  his  particular  circumstances.  The
    judge put the matter oddly, because it  was  not  necessary  to  decide
    which majority clan membership appellant might have. It was  sufficient
    that he was more likely to be a member  of  any  one  of  the  majority
    clans. The judge failed to make a clear finding on a relevant issue, of
    particular  significance  given  her  findings  on   lack   of   family
    remittances

 5. The second ground of appeal is that the judge erred in finding that the
    appellant's residence in a camp for displaced persons would result in a
    breach of article 3, because the background evidence and case law is to
    the effect that while certain conditions  in  camps  might  fall  below
    humanitarian standards, an article  3  breach  does  not  automatically
    follow. The judge failed to carry out a "qualitative assessment".

 6. Mr Matthews submitted that the judge failed to direct herself as to the
    necessary threshold to be reached to establish an article 3 breach. The
    evidence about the  appellant's  medical  conditions  and  benefits  he
    received did not amount to evidence that he would be unable to work  in
    Somalia. In assessing the  appellant's  prospects  in  respect  of  the
    article 3 threshold the appellant's clan membership was also  relevant,
    so there was an overlap with ground one.

 7. Ground three  is  based  on  the  judge  referring  to  the  presenting
    officer's "inability to suggest what  employment  the  appellant  could
    undertake upon return to Mogadishu". The ground argues that  the  judge
    again failed to appreciate that  the  burden  of  proof  was  upon  the
    appellant, and that there was no evidence for the contention  that  his
    physical condition preclude him from employment. The judge's assessment
    was therefore "wholly misguided".

 8. Mr Matthews said that the judge had again gone wrong by resolving  case
    on the basis that the burden was on  the  SSHD,  when  it  was  on  the
    appellant.

 9. On the whole grounds, Mr Matthews submitted that error was  shown  such
    as to require the determination to be set aside.  Further  findings  of
    fact were required,  through  rehearing  in  the  first-tier  tribunal.
    Alternatively, the case should be listed for further submissions on the
    substantive remaking of the decision in the upper tribunal.

10. Miss Irvine submitted on ground one that when the  judge  "declined  to
    speculate" that was in response to a submission  by  the  Secretary  of
    State, not a statement of the general burden. Reading her decision as a
    whole,  the  judge  found  the  appellant  a   credible   witness.   By
    implication, a positive finding had been made on his claim of  minority
    clan membership. In any event, this point was no longer  critical.  The
    essential issue was the level of support the  appellant  might  expect.
    The findings that he lacked familial, clan or any  other  support  were
    crucial. He left Somalia at the age of 17 and had no  known  connection
    to any family or clan in Somalia, and no  links  to  support  him  from
    outside Somalia. He suffers from both physical  disability  and  mental
    ill-health. If there were any error on the clan identity point, it  was
    immaterial. The judge found that use of  multiple  identities  had  not
    undermined his evidence overall, a finding which was open  to  her  and
    not affected by any error of law

11. On ground two, Ms Irvin noted that the respondent did not  dispute  the
    important finding that the appellant was likely to have to reside in  a
    camp for displaced persons. She did not allow the appeal  on  the  view
    that having to reside in such a camp automatically meant  a  breach  of
    article  3.  That  conclusion  was  reached  on  the   combination   of
    circumstances mentioned above.  The judge was entitled to find that the
    breach of article 3 was made out.

12. On ground three, Ms Irvine said that the decision was not  based  on  a
    misunderstanding of where the burden of proof lay. This  was  simply  a
    point put to the presenting officer as part of the discussion.

13. On the grounds as a whole, Ms Irvine submitted that  the  tribunal  had
    been entitled to decide as it did, had given adequate reasons, and  the
    decision should stand.

14. I reserved my decision.

15. Reading the determination fairly and as a  whole,  in  my  opinion  the
    grounds do not amount to  more  than  a  minute  search  for  error  on
    particular points which do not materially affect the overall outcome.

16. On each of the particular points, broadly, I prefer the submissions for
    the appellant, as summarised above.

17. The judge was  correct  to  observe  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    appellant's evidence to show that he was a member of a  majority  clan.
    She might reasonably have made a further finding, in line with what she
    made of the appellant's evidence generally, but the  point  is  (a)  of
    small importance and (b) more likely to have gone  in  the  appellant's
    favour than against, if the judge had been any more specific.

18. The judge did not fall into the error of concluding that residence in a
    camp for displaced persons alone would make the appellant's  case.  The
    ground overlooks the other findings of difficulties the appellant would
    face.

19. Ground three takes the judge's observation out  of  context.  It  is  a
    record of an exchange with a representative in the ordinary  course  of
    discussion about the findings which might reasonably be drawn from  the
    evidence.

20. It is highly unlikely that such an experienced  judge  would  base  her
    decision on a mistaken concept of which party had the burden of  proof.
    I do not find the decision to bear out the suggestion that she did fall
    into that error.

21. Underlying the grounds I do not find any more  than  disagreement  with
    findings of fact which were open to the judge and for which  a  legally
    adequate explanation is given.

22. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




            [pic]


            6 July 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




