
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/05733/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th May 2016                           | On 20th May 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                        mr nguessan ben ismael ngatta
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Simo
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robson hereinafter  "the  judge")  to
    dismiss his appeal against the Respondent's decision  of  29th  January
    2015 refusing to grant him a permanent residence card  as  confirmation
    of a right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

 2. After a hearing which took place before me on 3rd February 2016  I  set
    aside the decision of the judge.  The precise reasons for my  doing  so
    are contained in a determination which was signed on 12th February 2016
    and communicated to the parties on 18th  February  2016.   Essentially,
    and in summary, I set the decision aside because I  thought  the  judge
    had materially erred  in  wrongly  thinking  that  certain  documentary
    evidence offered to him and  which  was  said  to  evidence  the  self-
    employment of the Appellant's former wife  had  consisted  of  entirely
    blank copy receipts whereas, in fact, although the  entries  were  very
    faint they were not blank.  That error had caused the judge to  wrongly
    think there was  some  element  of  malpractice  on  the  part  of  the
    Appellant when he had subsequently presented more legible copies.

The Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of the Ivory  Coast  and  was  born  on  20
    December 1981.  He was previously married to one  Sinon  Barbara  Toure
    and that marriage took place on 25th October 2008.  It is not a  matter
    of dispute that Ms Toure is an EEA national and that she came to the UK
    in March of 2008 exercising treaty rights.  The marriage,  though,  has
    now ended.  There was some previous dispute  as  to  the  date  of  the
    divorce but it is now accepted that the two  became  divorced  on  19th
    December 2011.

 4. The Appellant had applied for an EEA residence card in July of 2009  on
    the basis of his marriage and such was issued to him  on  22nd  October
    2009.  It is not clear, and has not  been  clarified  by  the  evidence
    before me, whether the Appellant  had  entered  the  UK  prior  to  his
    obtaining his initial residence card and, if so, when, how and on  what
    basis.  Be that as it may, on 21st October 2014, and  despite  his  now
    being divorced from Ms Toure, the Appellant  applied  for  a  permanent
    residence card under the 2006 Regulations referred  to  above,  relying
    upon preserved rights  and  the  content  of  Regulations  10  and  15.
    However, the Respondent refused the application on 5th  February  2015,
    because she was not satisfied that the Appellant's spouse  had  been  a
    "qualified person" on the date of the termination of the  marriage  and
    was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  resided  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous  period  of  five
    years. The Appellant appealed against that decision and, as noted,  his
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was unsuccessful  but  that  decision
    has now been set aside.  My having done that at an earlier hearing,  an
    attempt was made to go on to remake the decision at  the  same  hearing
    but because of difficulties with interpretation that proved not  to  be
    possible.  Accordingly, there was a separate hearing of  5th  May  2016
    concerned with remaking.  It is worth noting  that,  in  this  context,
    neither party had asked the Upper Tribunal to simply remit to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The hearing before the Upper Tribunal,  concerned  with
    remaking, was a complete rehearing.

The Law

 5. All parties are agreed that the relevant legal provisions with  respect
    to remaking are Regulation 10(5)  and  Regulation  15(1)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

 6. It is for the  Appellant  to  show  that  the  above  requirements  are
    satisfied.  He must do so to a balance of probabilities.



The Documentary Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

 7. I had, before me, at the hearing of 5th May 2016, the various documents
    which had been before the First-tier Tribunal. I was also supplied with
    some further documentation.  Mr  Simo  provided  an  additional  bundle
    which included a witness statement of 29th April 2016,  some  copy  P60
    and wage slip documentation relating to the Appellant's  former  spouse
    and some information concerning a company called Argentum  Facile  Ltd.
    Mr Diwnycz provided me with three witness statements all  made  by  one
    John Richards, an officer of Her  Majesty's  Revenue  and  Customs  and
    which concerned records held regarding the employment of the  Appellant
    and his former wife and records relating to an organisation called HM &
    Sons Salvage Trading Ltd.

 8. I have carefully considered all of the documentation before me for  the
    purposes of the remaking of this decision.

The Hearing of 5th May 2016

 9. Representation was as stated above.  I heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant.  There were no additional witnesses.  He gave  his  evidence
    with the assistance of a French speaking interpreter whom  he  appeared
    to understand throughout the course of the proceedings.  He adopted his
    witness statement of 29th April 2016.   In  cross-examination,  he  was
    asked about some receipts which were said to constitute evidence of his
    former wife's past self-employment.  He said that the signature on  the
    receipts was that of a director of HM & Sons Salvage  Trading  Ltd  and
    not the signature of his former wife.  He did not know why  his  former
    wife's signature did not  appear.   He  had  been  given  the  receipts
    because he had asked a former director of the company, a Mr  Mboungang,
    for some evidence and he had been able to trace  Mr  Mboungang  through
    his community contacts.  Mr Mboungang had also provided him  with  some
    letters confirming the previous engagement by that company of his  wife
    on a self-employed basis.  In re-examination  the  Appellant  explained
    that he had met Mr Mboungang for the first time  in  2014  having  been
    able to contact him through community links.

10. I then heard submissions from  each  representative.   In  summary,  Mr
    Diwnycz contended that there was simply no persuasive evidence  to  the
    effect that the Appellant's former spouse had been a "qualified person"
    as at the date of the termination  of  the  marriage.   Therefore,  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements contained  within  Regulation
    10 of the  2006  Regulations  and  his  appeal  must  fail.   Mr  Simo,
    submitted, in effect, that there was much in  the  way  of  documentary
    evidence regarding the Appellant's former wife's  past  employment  and
    self-employment.  He submitted that the Appellant had been  a  credible
    witness and that I should be satisfied, to a balance of  probabilities,
    that all of the relevant requirements contained within  Regulations  10
    and 15 had been met.  In particular, I should  be  satisfied  that  the
    former wife was a qualified person as at the date of the termination of
    the marriage.



My Remaking of the Decision

11. I have borne in mind all of the documentation, the oral evidence I have
    heard and the oral submissions which have been made to me.  Much of the
    evidence and submissions was concerned with the question of whether  or
    not the Appellant had successfully demonstrated that  his  wife  was  a
    qualified person at the time of the termination of  the  marriage.   It
    was accepted that if the Appellant could not show that his appeal would
    fail.

12. I accept that there is certainly some  documentation  before  me  which
    would tend to suggest that the Appellant's former wife  has  worked  in
    the UK at certain points in the past.  Mr Diwnycz, in  fact,  does  not
    dispute that.  Further, a  witness  statement  of  John  Richards  does
    demonstrate that she was working for Argentum  Facile  Ltd  during  the
    2009/2010 tax year and the 2010/2011 tax year.  Of course,  the  latter
    tax year ended on 5th April 2011.  Since the marriage was terminated on
    19th December 2011 what is said in  that  witness  statement  does  not
    directly assist with the question of whether Ms Toure was  a  qualified
    person as at 19th December 2011 but I do bear in mind it does  indicate
    something of a past work record.

13. In fact, the only documentary evidence the Appellant has relied  on  in
    demonstrating that Ms Toure was a qualified person at the time  of  the
    termination of the marriage comprises the receipts  referred  to  above
    and the letters  written  by  Mr  Mboungang  referred  to  above.   The
    receipts cover a period from late 2010 through to March  2012  and  do,
    therefore, span the period of the termination of  the  marriage.   They
    purport to show that HM & Sons Salvage Ltd made regular payments to  Ms
    Toure during  this  period,  those  payments  being  described  in  the
    receipts as  "salary".   The  receipts  indicate  that  the  money  was
    received by Ms Toure and her name appears on each  of  them  after  the
    words "received by".  There is, underneath those words and her name, on
    each receipt, a signature.  However, the oral evidence is to the effect
    that that signature is not Ms Toure's but is Mr Mboungang's.

14. Clearly, in looking at what  is  written  on  the  receipts,  they  are
    designed to indicate that  monies  have  been  paid  to  Ms  Toure  and
    received by her.  Accordingly, therefore, one would expect  Ms  Toure's
    signature to be on the receipts as an acknowledgement by her  that  she
    has received the amount of money indicated. Those  receipts  simply  do
    not make sense if they are not signed by her but are signed by  someone
    else.  In these circumstances I do not consider them to be of any value
    in demonstrating that payments were made on a  self-employed  basis  or
    indeed on any basis, by HM & Sons Salvage Ltd to Ms  Toure  during  the
    relevant period.  I  can  readily  accept  that  if  that  company  was
    genuinely making payments on a self-employed basis to Ms Toure it would
    want to keep records of those payments but  I  do  not  see  that  such
    records would be in the form of  receipts  which  it  would  have  been
    appropriate for the payee to have signed.

15. There are then the letters written by Mr Mboungang.  These letters  are
    brief and rather uninformative.  It does  seem  to  me,  however,  that
    there may have been potential value, from the Appellant's  perspective,
    in Mr Mboungang  attending  the  hearing  before  me  and  giving  oral
    evidence about the basis upon which the company of which he had been  a
    director provided work to Ms Toure if, indeed,  it  did.   However,  in
    oral evidence, the Appellant said that he had not thought about calling
    him to give evidence.  I do not believe him.   The  Appellant  has  had
    competent legal representation throughout these  proceedings.   I  feel
    sure that  he  and  his  representatives  would  have  appreciated  the
    potential value of his oral evidence and I  certainly  think  it  would
    have occurred to the Appellant to bring him as a witness.  I  conclude,
    therefore, and against that background, that when he told me he had not
    thought about calling him he was not telling me  the  truth.   That  is
    relevant to the Appellant's general credibility  and,  hence,  directly
    relevant to the question of  whether  the  claimed  evidence  of  self-
    employment which he says he obtained from Mr Mboungang was obtained  in
    the way claimed and is reliable. Further, the  fact  I  have  not  been
    given a proper explanation as to why he did not  attend  as  a  witness
    undermines what is claimed in the letters and lessens the weight I  can
    attach to them.

16. There is, I accept, some evidence to the effect that HM & Sons  Salvage
    Trading Ltd has existed as a company.  Indeed, the  statement  of  John
    Richards demonstrates that a  PAYE  employer  record  exists  for  that
    company covering the period from 19th July 2011 to 10th December  2012.
    That does not, though, of course, mean that that company  did  actually
    use the services of Ms Toure on a self-employed basis as claimed.

17. Putting all of the above together I reach a clear conclusion  that  the
    Appellant has failed  to  show  that  Ms  Toure  was  in  any  form  of
    employment or self-employment as at the date of the termination of  the
    marriage.  This means he has failed to show that she was, at that time,
    a qualified person within the meaning of the 2006 Regulations.  It  has
    not been submitted to me  that  there  is  any  basis  upon  which  the
    Appellant's appeal could succeed if he were not able to show she was  a
    qualified person at the material  time.   In  remaking  this  decision,
    therefore, I find that the Appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  that
    requirement is met and that, in consequence, his appeal must fail.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has  already  been  set  aside.   In
remaking the decision I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date:  19 May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date:  19 May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

