
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/05257/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 February 2016                        |On 29 February 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                               mrs lipi ahmad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Akhter, Counsel instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and her date of  birth  is  10
    November 1985.  The appellant and her  husband  made  applications  for
    leave to remain on 14 October 2014 and these applications were  refused
    by the Secretary of State on 5 February 2015.  The appellants  appealed
    against the decision of the Secretary of  State  and  the  matter  came
    before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Eban  who   allowed   the
    appellant's  husband's  appeal  to  the  extent  that  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  The First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    appellant's husband had been here lawfully  and  continuously  for  ten
    years and met the requirements of paragraph 276B subject to  discretion
    that was to be exercised by the Secretary of State.   This  appellant's
    case was that she met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE and that the
    decision breached Article 8.   It was accepted at the  hearing  by  the
    appellant's representative that neither appellant before  the  FtT  met
    the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  the  judge   dismissed   this
    appellant's appeal under the Rules and Article 8.

2.   Permission was granted to the appellant on 29 December  2015  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal A D Baker on the basis that Judge  Eban  who
    dismissed the appellant's appeal arguably erred in not considering  the
    appellant's immigration status as a dependent on that of her husband.

3.   I heard representations from both the  appellant's  representative  and
    Mr Tufan.  The factual matrix is somewhat unusual.   The  appellant  is
    married to her co-appellant before the First-tier Tribunal. They do not
    have children together. She came to  the  UK  in  February  2009.   Her
    husband has two sons by Ms Hoque who is a citizen of  Bangladesh.   The
    appellant lives with her husband, the children and Ms Hoque in the same
    household and the appellant is involved in the children's  lives.   The
    Judge made findings at paragraph 14 of the decision which are  not  the
    subject of challenge and which are lawful and sustainable  relating  to
    the  family's  circumstances.   The  Judge  went  on  to  dismiss   the
    appellant's appeal under paragraph 276ADE taking into account that  the
    appellant had spent most of her life in Bangladesh and prior to  coming
    to the UK she had lived with her sister.   In  addition  her  husband's
    parents live in  Bangladesh  and  the  Judge  noted  that  neither  the
    appellant nor her husband could explain what obstacles there  would  be
    to the appellant returning to Bangladesh on her own and why  she  would
    not be able to live with the  first  appellant's  parents.   The  Judge
    concluded that there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    second appellant's integration into Bangladesh.

4.   The Judge went on to consider Article  8  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, having considered the children's best interests  and  ultimately
    concluded that there was no reason why the appellant, her husband,  the
    children and Ms Hoque could not  live  together  in  one  household  in
    Bangladesh.

5.   The Judge did not consider this appellant's appeal  under  Appendix  FM
    and indeed it was not incumbent on her to do so considering that it was
    conceded that the appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.

6.   It is now  a  fact  that  the  appellant's  husband  has  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain following the Judge's determination  and  it
    is  argued  by  the  appellant  that  the  Judge,  having  allowed  the
    appellant's husband's appeal to a limited extent should have gone on to
    consider the appellant's appeal under Appendix FM.

7.   At the time of the application and the decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State the appellant's husband could not meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules under 276B although the position had changed  by  the
    date of the hearing before the FtT. However, as discretion had not been
    exercised by the respondent, it was not open to the Judge to allow  the
    appellant's husband's appeal under the Rules.  He has now been  granted
    ILR but it was not for the Judge to proceed with his wife's  appeal  on
    the basis that he had ILR at the date of the hearing or that  he  would
    be granted ILR. In any event, it does not automatically follow that the
    appellant would meet the requirements of Appendix FM on the basis  that
    her husband is settled here and the appellant's case was  not  advanced
    under Appendix FM. There is no error in the decision of the Judge.

8.   The appellant's position has changed  as  a  result  of  her  husband's
    position and it is incumbent on her now to make  an  application  under
    Appendix FM should she wish to remain here.  The decision of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Eban does not contain an error of  law  and  is
    maintained.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 25.02.16

Joanna McWilliam


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


