
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05117/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 20th August 2013                           |On 20th August 2013          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 DALJIT KAUR
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs Pettersen - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent: Mr Martin of BEAP Community Partnership


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Davies promulgated on 15th April 2013 following the merits of
        the appeal being determined on the papers at Manchester.  The issue
        was whether the Secretary of State's refusal  to  vary  Mrs  Kaur's
        leave, so as to allow her to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  the
        spouse of a person present and settled, based upon her inability to
        meet the requirements of paragraph 284 (ix) (a) of the  Immigration
        Rules, is sustainable under either those Rules or Article 8 ECHR.


     2. At paragraph 5 of the  determination  Judge  Davies  found  he  was
        satisfied  from  the  evidence   submitted,   by   reason   of   an
        International English Language Testing  Certificate  (IELTS)  dated
        7th July 2009, that she  was  able  to  meet  the  English-language
        requirements of the Rules.


     3. This finding is challenged by the Secretary of State on the  ground
        the Judge gave inadequate reasons to support his finding  that  the
        IELTS certificate dated 7th July 2009 met the requirements  of  the
        Rules.


     4. I find this a sustainable challenge as the relevant guidance  quite
        clearly states that a test certificate provided  by  this  language
        provider has a validity period of two years.  A  certificate  dated
        2009 is outside period and therefore should not  have  been  relied
        upon by the Judge as proof that Mrs Kaur was able  to  satisfy  the
        requirements of paragraph 284 (ix)(a). I find that in doing so, and
        in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  in  paragraph  5  of  the
        determination for why this qualification was  considered  suitable,
        the  Judge  has  made  a  material  error  of  law  such  that  the
        determination must be set aside.



Discussion



     5. It has been possible to proceed to re-make the decision.


     6. Prior to the hearing Mr Martin submitted correspondence in which he
        accepted that IELTS  certificates  may  have  a  two-year  validity
        period as a result of which he forwarded a copy of the results of a
        further English-language test taken through Trinity College  London
        awarding Mrs Kaur an entry-level certificate in ESOL  International
        (speaking and listening) (Entry 1) said to be at level  A1  of  the
        CEFR.


     7. In Akhtar (CEFR; UKBA Guidance and IELTS) [2013] UKUT  00306  (IAC)
        it was held that:


     (i)  Where, under Immigration  Rules,  it  was  required  that,  as  an
   English             language requirement, an individual  must  achieve  a
   certain level by             reference to the Common  European  Framework
   Reference (CEFR)             (i.e. A1, B1, B2  etc)  and  the  individual
   relies on an International                English  Language  Test  System
   (IELTS)  test  result  awarded  by                 Cambridge  ESOL,  that
   individual must necessarily rely on  the                 relevant  UKBA's
   Guidance to succeed  because  the  Rules  do  not  state               an
   equivalence between  the  IELTS  test  results  and  the  levels  of  the
   CEFR;


     (ii)     The UKBA's Guidance does not  attribute  any  mark  less  than
   level B1            to any  IELTS  score  and  so,  in  practical  terms,
   equivalence to at least               B1 must be established  even  where
   the level to be achieved is A1;


     (iii)    In order to achieve a particular CEFR level, it is not  enough
   simply to           look at the individual's overall score: the  Guidance
   requires that at             least each  of  the  individual  modules  in
   "speaking" and "listening"            has  been  assessed  at  the  level
   required.


     8. Mr Martin produce the original certificate but also a  copy  of  an
        examination report from Trinity College London stating that for the
        graded  examination  in  spoken  English,  conversation,  Mrs  Kaur
        received "A" which is stated to be a pass.  There  was  however  no
        examination report in respect of the listening element of the  test
        and in light of the fact that the guidance  requires  each  of  the
        individual modules to be assessed at the required level,  Mrs  Kaur
        is unable to show that the new qualification meets the requirements
        of the Rules on  the  evidence.   I  accept  that  the  certificate
        indicates a score of A1 and that this may be no more than a failure
        to produce the  second  examination  report.   Mrs  Pettersen  also
        submitted,  in  addition,  that  the  requirement   was   for   the
        certificate to be produced with the application and that as this is
        an after acquired certificate it would have to be  the  subject  of
        fresh    application    at    which    point     the     additional
        evidence/examination report could be provided.


     9. There is, however, an additional element to this  appeal  that  was
        not considered by the Judge as he  probably  did  not  consider  it
        necessary, namely the grounds of appeal relating to Article 8 ECHR.
        It is accepted by both advocates that Mrs Kaur has married and that
        she and her husband have a child.  They  clearly  have  family  and
        private life  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  child  is  a  British
        national. It is accepted  by  both  advocates  that  the  issue  in
        relation to the Article 8 question is one of proportionality.


    10. No removal directions have been set although it  was  not  disputed
        that Article 8 can be considered at this stage especially in  light
        of the stated intention to remove Mrs Kaur to India in the  refusal
        to vary leave.  There was no challenge the Tribunal's  jurisdiction
        to deal with this issue and having weighed the Secretary of State's
        right to have valid and workable immigration  policies  based  upon
        the  economic  well-being  of  the  United  Kingdom,   Mrs   Kaur's
        immigration history, and the findings with regard to  the  English-
        language test on the one part, and the existence of a stable family
        unit including a young child, the  fact  the  child  is  a  British
        national, the potential loss  of  the  child's  primary-carer,  the
        inability of the Secretary of State to show that it  was  necessary
        in all the circumstances for the family to be separated, and having
        considered the guidance provided by the cases of Chikwamba  (FC)  v
        SSHD 2008 UKHL 40 and Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
        Hayat; Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  Treebhowan
        (Mauritius) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054, I find the Secretary of State has
        in the circumstances of this case failed to discharge the burden of
        proof upon her to the required standard to  show  that  Mrs  Kaur's
        removal is proportionate. The hearing was conducted in English  and
        it is clear that Mrs  Kaur  understood  what  was  being  said.  On
        balance it is clear that she has the required standard of  language
        ability even though evidentially she was not able to  prove  it  in
        accordance with the requirements of the Rules/Guidance.


Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed an Article 8 ECHR grounds only.




   Anonymity.


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as there was no application for the same  and
   no grounds          for such a order have been established.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 20th August 2013












