
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05326/2013
                                                               IA/05332/2013
                                                               IA/05334/2013
                                                               IA/05335/2013
                                                               IA/05337/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th October 2013                            |On 6th November 2013       |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                Isaac Bindura
                              Rosemary Bindura
                              Ropafadzo Bindura
                              Ruponeso Bindura
                                Ioana Bindura

                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Billie, instructed by I E I Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Brewer, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These are  the  Appellants'  appeals  against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Southfield made following a hearing at Bradford on 22nd May 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Zimbabwe,  a  husband,  wife  and  their
    three children born on 31st March 1973, 9th July 1975, 31st July  2002,
    28th November  2007  and  2  February  2011  respectively.   The  first
    Appellant arrived in the UK on 7 August 2003 as a  student  with  leave
    initially until 2006, later extended until 2010.  On  15th  March  2004
    the second and third Appellants  joined  him.   The  fourth  and  fifth
    Appellants were born here.

 3. On 24th May 2008 the first Appellant was granted leave to remain  on  a
    Post-Study Work visa until 2009.  His application for further leave was
    initially refused but later granted until 2nd February 2012.

 4. On 23rd January 2012 the Appellants applied for further leave to remain
    on Article 8 grounds.  They were refused on 30th January  2013  and  it
    was this refusal  which  was  the  subject  of  the  appeal  before  Mr
    Sarsfield.

 5. The judge considered whether the third Appellant was in a  position  to
    meet the requirements of the new Rules which came into  force  in  July
    2012.

 6. He wrote as follows:

         "Under Rule 276ADE only  the  third  Appellant  meets  any  of  the
         criteria.  He is aged 10 and has been in  the  UK  for  over  seven
         years at the date of application, so when considering  his  private
         life I find he meets that requirement.  However, other factors have
         to be considered including the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8
         issues under those Rules first."

 7. He made a number of findings of fact and then wrote:

         "Turning to the Rules alone it was not  suggested  at  the  hearing
         that the Appellants met the criteria under  Appendix  FM.   I  find
         they do not do so for the following reasons:

         (a)  The adults do not qualify under E-LTRP as neither are  British
             or  settled  in  the  UK  nor  have  refugee  or  humanitarian
             protection.

         (b)  They do not qualify under E-LTRPRT as each does not have  sole
             responsibility for the children.

         (c)  EX1 does not apply as it would be  reasonable  to  expect  any
             child to return with the family to Zimbabwe as one unit if the
             parents had to return, having regard to the case  law  and  my
             other findings."

 8. The judge then considered Article 8 under the  Razgar  principles.   He
    stated  that  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 the interests and welfare of the  children  are  a
    primary consideration and referred to relevant case law.  He  concluded
    that the family could return as one unit and the  children  were  young
    enough to adapt to life in Zimbabwe and the best interests of any child
    was to be with their parents, the adult applicants.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had failed to properly apply paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules,  failed  to  identify  the  best  interests  of  the   children,
    misapplied the country guidance in CM (Zimbabwe) and failed to properly
    consider Article 8 of the ECHR.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Plumptre on  19th  June  2013
    who stated that the grounds were arguable.

11.  On  1st  July  2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

12. Mr Billie relied on his grounds.  He submitted that the third Appellant
    met the requirement of paragraph ADE both in its initial  format  which
    was operative between July and December 2012, and since  its  amendment
    in January 2013.  He argued that the judge's consideration of the  best
    interests of the children was flawed; he had failed to engage with  the
    lengthy skeleton argument which outlined why their removal could not be
    in the best interests of the children, namely the education  system  in
    Zimbabwe, the cultural and religious traditions there with  which  they
    were unfamiliar, the healthcare, the language and the first Appellant's
    prospects of obtaining employment.

13. Mrs Brewer submitted that the determination was sustainable  when  read
    as a whole and that the judge had properly weighed up the evidence  and
    come to a conclusion open to him.

Consideration of whether there is an Error of Law

14. Under paragraph 276ADE(iv) as it was between July  and  December  2012,
    the requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of  application,
    the applicant is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
    in the UK for at least seven years.

15. From December 2012 an amendment was inserted to read:

         "... and it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant  to
         leave the UK."

16. It was not argued by either party at the hearing before Judge Sarsfield
    that the Rules had direct application because the family's  application
    had been made before they came into effect.  Clearly, however, it would
    be difficult for the Respondent to argue that there  was  a  legitimate
    aim in removing the Appellants if, according to  her  own  Rules,  they
    satisfied the criteria.  It was, therefore, essential for the judge  to
    make a clear finding on whether 284ADE(iv) applied  when  reaching  his
    decision in respect of Article 8.

17. It is difficult to know what the judge meant when he said  that  "other
    factors have to be considered,  including  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 issues under those Rules  first".   The  picture  is  muddled
    further by his reference  in  paragraph  20  of  the  determination  to
    Appendix FM when he states that E-LTRP and E-LTRPT and EX1 do not apply
    without setting out what those requirements are.

18. Moreover, the judge stated that it was not  suggested  at  the  hearing
    that the Appellants met the criteria  under  Appendix  FM  when  it  is
    abundantly clear that that is exactly the submission  which  was  being
    made.

19. Furthermore, the judge's consideration of the  best  interests  of  the
    children are limited  to  the  assertion  that  it  is  in  their  best
    interests to be with their parents.  However,  clear  submissions  were
    made to him that the  conditions  in  Zimbabwe  which  this  particular
    family would face strongly  militate  against  it  being  in  the  best
    interests of their children to remove them there.  There is nothing  in
    this  determination  to  indicate  that  the  submission  and  skeleton
    argument were considered.

20. Accordingly, the judge erred in failing to take into  account  relevant
    material when reaching his decision.

21. The decision is set aside.

Further Submissions

22. Mrs Brewer submitted that the wording of the Rules as they were  as  at
    the date of decision were the relevant ones for the purpose of deciding
    the proportionality of removal.  This application was made  in  January
    2012, before the unamended Rules were implemented.  She accepted  that,
    had the application been made between July and December 2012,  the  old
    version was applicable, but since it predated them the correct approach
    would be to apply the Rules as they were in force as  at  the  date  of
    decision.

23. It was therefore for the Appellants  to  show  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the third Appellant to go to Zimbabwe. She accepted that
    as he arrived here when he was eighteen months old  he  would  have  no
    memory of Zimbabwe but  he  was  a  Zimbabwean  national.  His  younger
    siblings had been born in the UK, and would have  connections  here  in
    terms of friendships, their school and community and church.   However,
    Christianity  was  permitted  in  Zimbabwe.   There  were  no   medical
    conditions in the family which would argue against their removal there,
    and she said that at  all  times  the  first  Appellant  had  had  only
    temporary leave without any expectation of settlement.

24. Mrs Brewer accepted that the  Appellant  had  no  immediate  family  in
    Zimbabwe but submitted that, for the majority of  the  time  the  first
    Appellant was on student leave, and he would have maintained his  links
    there.  The children were of an adaptable age and could be expected  to
    resettle in their country of nationality.  The current situation  there
    was improving and whilst there was high unemployment in  Zimbabwe,  the
    first Appellant was highly educated and could  use  his  experience  of
    work in the UK to his advantage on return.

25. Mr Billie relied on his skeleton argument.  He asked me  to  apply  the
    unamended Rule ADE(iv), but even if the amended Rule was to be  applied
    it would not be reasonable to return the Appellants to  Zimbabwe.   The
    background evidence which he relied  upon  showed  a  collapse  of  the
    education system in Zimbabwe, a country where 81.6% failed  their  2012
    Zimbabwe School Examination Council ordinary level  examinations.   The
    education system there was on the verge of collapse with a shortage  of
    teachers.  The collapse of the infrastructure, particularly water,  had
    led to an increase of waterborne diseases, and whilst the situation had
    improved since 2008, that did not mean  that  the  situation  for  this
    family could  in  any  sense  be  seen  as  acceptable.   The  test  of
    reasonableness under the Rules was far less onerous than the Article  3
    test.

26. Finally, this family were model migrants, having remained  lawfully  in
    the UK and the first Appellant contributing to the economy here.   Both
    he and his wife had acquired qualifications in the UK which could be to
    the country's benefit and there would be no economic prejudice to their
    remaining here.

Findings and Conclusions

27. The Appellants enjoy substantial private life in the UK as evidenced in
    their statements and not disputed by the Respondent.

28. Removal would interfere with their right to enjoyment of their  private
    life, but would be lawful insofar as they have no basis of  stay.   The
    pursuit of a legitimate aim,  namely  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country which encompasses the need to maintain immigration  control  is
    more complex.  There is no economic benefit  as  such  to  this  family
    being removed, since the first Appellant is working.  He  has  remained
    in the UK with leave at all times, having come here as  a  student  and
    renewed his leave on that basis until he gained work  as  a  post-study
    work migrant.

29. Mrs Brewer confirmed that there was no issue under the Rules in respect
    of the third Appellant's ability to meet the  suitability  requirements
    as set out in LTR1.2-SLTR1.54.

30. The Rules have no direct application because they were not in force  in
    January  2012.   However,  if  the  third  Appellant   did   meet   the
    requirements of the Rules then the argument as to the legitimate aim in
    the context of Article 8 would be severely undermined, although I agree
    with Mrs Brewer that there is little logic in applying a Rule which was
    only in force for some six months after the  date  of  the  Appellants'
    application but had been amended before the decision was made.

31. It is difficult to see how a decision could be reached that it would be
    reasonable for the third Appellant to return to Zimbabwe unless it  was
    also found that it would not be disproportionate  for  his  parents  to
    return there.

32. In deciding whether it would be  disproportionate  for  the  first  and
    second Appellant to be removed, the best interests of the children have
    to be considered first.  The  issue  of  reasonableness  of  return  is
    clearly interlinked with the assessment of best interests.

33. The third Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe and that of course  is  a
    strong argument in favour of his return.  Indeed, there would  have  to
    be strong evidence to establish that it would not be reasonable  for  a
    child to return to his country of birth and nationality.  The fact that
    he has no memory of that country and has lived here all of his life and
    developed strong ties are relevant  considerations  as  to  whether  it
    would be in his best interests to be allowed to remain here,  but  have
    less weight in the context of assessing the reasonableness of return.

34. He is 13 years old.  He has always attended  school  in  the  UK.   The
    school system which he would be entering into in Zimbabwe appears to be
    in a state of crisis.  According to the Appellants' information, 20,000
    teachers were lost in Zimbabwe between 2004 and 2009 and the  education
    system there is a shadow of its  former  self.   Teacher  salaries  are
    poor, and as a consequence corruption in the profession has  increased.
    The affluent families send their children  to  private  schools  rather
    than risk State education.

35. It is not disputed by the Respondent that there are no immediate family
    members who could assist the family on  return.   The  first  Appellant
    says that he has no prospects of securing employment there since  there
    is massive unemployment in Zimbabwe.  It is very difficult  to  predict
    whether he will be able to find work but, without a support network, at
    least in the shorter term, it is hard to see how  the  third  Appellant
    would be able to access education of any comparable  standard  to  that
    which he has been accustomed to in the UK.

36. The strongest argument in  the  Respondent's  favour  so  far  as  best
    interests are concerned, is the return of the children to their country
    of nationality.  Beyond that, it is very difficult to  see  what  those
    best interests could be, bearing  in  mind  the  present  situation  in
    Zimbabwe which, although improving, is still critical.

37. The difficulties in the infrastructure in Zimbabwe  do  not  reach  the
    level of Article 3 risk, but nevertheless the problems with the  health
    service must be a matter of real concern to any family  returning  with
    children.

38. All of the children have effectively lived all of their lives in the UK
    and no other country.  The youngest child will know  little  else  than
    her family but the older two have developed social  and  cultural  ties
    beyond their parents.  I  conclude  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children are to remain in the UK.

39. In EM and Others (returnees Zimbabwe) CG [2011] UKUT the Tribunal held:

         "In the absence of countervailing factors, residence of over  seven
         years with children well-integrated into the educational system  in
         the UK is an indicator  that  the  welfare  of  the  child  favours
         regularisation of the status of mother and children."

40. So far as the first Appellant's immigration history is concerned, there
    are no countervailing factors.  Neither is there an economic  drain  on
    the UK's resources since he is working and contributing to the economy.

41. The appeal  succeeds  for  the  following  reasons.  It  would  not  be
    reasonable for the third Appellant to leave the UK  and  he  meets  the
    present requirements of Rule ADE(iv). There  can  therefore  not  be  a
    legitimate aim in the Respondent seeking to remove him.

42. Second, removal would be disproportionate. There is a lack  of  weighty
    reasons needed to separate a child from a community  in  which  he  has
    grown up (LD (Article 8 best interests of child) Zimbabwe  [2010]  UKUT
    278).

Decision

The  original  judge  erred  in  law.   His  decision  is  set  aside.   The
Appellants' appeals are allowed.

Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


