
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/05902/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 14 April 2015                          |On 5 May 2015               |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between

                     MICHELLE HANNAH WINDSOR-BRAITHWAITE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr P Collins counsel instructed by M J Solomon &
Partners
For the Respondent: Ms A Broklesby-Weller Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Scobbie promulgated on 9 September  2014  which  dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of leave to remain on the  basis
   of 10 years lawful residence on all grounds .
Background
3. The Appellant was born on 23 May 1975 and is a national of  Trinidad  and
   Tobago.
4. The Appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  17  October  2002  with
   entry clearance as a working holiday maker until 26  April  2004.  On  18
   October 2004 the Appellant submitted an out of time application for leave
   to remain as a work permit holder which was  subsequently  granted  on  2
   December 2004 until 31  August  2005.On  6  October  2005  the  Appellant
   submitted an out of time application for leave to remain as a work permit
   holder which was subsequently granted on 12 October 2005 until  6  August
   2008. On 6 August 2008 the Appellant submitted an application  for  leave
   to remain as a work permit holder which was granted  on  28  August  2008
   until 6 August 2013.On 6 August 2013 the Appellant applied for indefinite
   leave to remain on the basis of 10 years continuous lawful residence.
5. On 10 January  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) The Appellant could not establish that she  had  10  years  continuous
      lawful residence as there were two breaks in the period  of  residence
      when she was without leave. The circumstances in which  she  submitted
      out of time applications were not such as to warrant  an  exercise  of
      discretion.
   b) The application was considered under Appendix FM in relation to  leave
      as a partner but there was no evidence that the Appellant's spouse was
      a British citizen and if he was there were no insurmountable obstacles
      to the Appellant and her  husband  continuing  their  family  life  in
      Trinidad and Tobago.
   c) The application was considered under Appendix FM for leave  to  remain
      as a parent and the Appellant could not meet the requirements.
   d) In relation to private life there was no suggestion that the Appellant
      has no ties to Trinidad and Tobago.
   e) There were no compelling or compassionate grounds advanced to  suggest
      that a grant of leave outside the Rules was warranted.




The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Scobbie ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found :
   a) The Appellant could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276B  as
      there were two periods during which she was without leave.
   b) The Judge accepted that the Appellant's spouse and child  were  United
      Kingdom citizens.
   c) The Judge found that the Appellant could not meet the requirements  of
      Appendix FM as a partner or parent.
   d) The Judge considered EX.1 both in by  reference  to  her  relationship
      with her child and her husband applying the test  of  whether  it  was
      reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom  and  were  there
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  with  her  husband
      outside the United Kingdom.
   e) The Judge found that the Appellant  had  indicated  the  family  would
      relocate to Trinidad and Tobago if the application was refused.
   f) He found that the Appellant would prefer not to return to Trinidad and
      Tobago because her husband was a United Kingdom citizen and all  their
      friends and connections were in the United Kingdom and she would  have
      to re train in order to teach there. He found that  she  had  a  close
      relationship with her family there and she had returned  regularly  to
      visit them.
   g) The Judge found that it was in the best interests of  their  child  to
      remain with the parents and that is what the Appellant  had  indicated
      they would do. At age 1-2 the child was adaptable.
   h) The Judge did not accept that her teaching qualification was worthless
      in Trinidad and Tobago but even if there was a  period  of  retraining
      she would find work.
   i) The Appellant's husband was  currently  unemployed  but  was  fit  and
      healthy and could find work in Trinidad and Tobago.
   j) The connections the Appellant had with the Church could resume in  her
      home country.
   k) He considered paragraph 276ADE(vi) and found for the same reasons that
      there was no evidence that there would be 'very significant obstacles'
      for the Appellant and her family reintegrating into life  in  Trinidad
      and Tobago.
   l) The Judge found that there was nothing  exceptional  or  unusual  that
      would lead to a favourable result under Article 8 outside  the  Rules.


7. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :
   (a)The Judge did not properly assess whether the Appellant could meet the
   requirements of paragraph 276B.
   (b)  If  continuity  of  residence  was  broken  the  Judge  should  have
   considered whether this was a  case  where  the  Respondent  should  have
   exercised discretion in the Appellant's favour.
   (c) The Judge made no findings as to why the Appellant could not meet the
   requirements of the Rules as a partner or parent.
   (d)The Judge did not consider the two routes under EX.1 as a  parent  and
   partner.
   (e) The Judge did not properly assess whether it was reasonable  for  the
   child to leave the United Kingdom or whether  there  were  insurmountable
   obstacles to the Appellant's spouse leaving the United Kingdom.
   (f) The Judge failed to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.
8.  Permission was initially refused on 3  November  2014  and  the  grounds
   were renewed

9. On 15 January 2015 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  gave  permission  to
   appeal  stating  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  should   have
   demonstrated that he had given consideration to s117 of the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10. There is a Rule 24 response from the Respondent dated 25  February  2015
   in which it is submitted that the Judge directed  himself  appropriately.
   The Judge carried out an analysis of the  Appellant's  circumstances  and
   was entitled to  find  that  she  could  return  o  Trinidad  and  Tobago
   accompanied  by  her  child  and  husband.  While  the  Judge   did   not
   specifically refer to s 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
   Act 2002 his conclusions were consistent with the provisions.

11. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Collins  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

   b) He accepted that there was  no  merit  to  the  challenges  raised  in
      relation to paragraph 276B

   c) He relied on the case of Dube (ss117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90  (IAC)  (24
      February 2015)

   d) The Judge in considering paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  had  considered  the
      wrong version of the Rules and should have made findings  in  relation
      to whether she had ties to Trinidad and Tobago.

   e) The Judge had not assessed whether the Appellant's husband could  live
      in Trinidad and Tobago given  that  he  was  a  British  citizen  with
      Barbadian ancestry. It would not be  reasonable  for  the  Appellant's
      spouse and child to live  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  if  it  were  not
      possible.

   f) The Judge should not have refused to consider Article 8 as the test is
      not whether there were exceptional circumstances.

12. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Brocklesby - Weller submitted that :

   a) In relation to any issues in the Judges assessment of  paragraph  267B
      these were not material to the outcome.

   b) The argument that was being advanced by Mr Collins that it  might  not
      be possible for the Appellant's spouse and child to live  in  Trinidad
      and Tobago was not advanced before the Judge.  Nationality  is  not  a
      trump card.

   c) In relation to paragraph 117B and the Appellant's relationship with  a
      'qualifying child' this envisaged  the  possibility  of  circumstances
      were it was reasonable for a child to be required to leave the  United
      Kingdom. In this case the child was only 21 months old and the Judge's
      assessment of  the  circumstances  by  reference  to  EX.1  adequately
      addressed this issue: Dube found there was no  error  of  law  if  the
      Judge had applied the test he was supposed to apply according  to  its
      terms because what matters is substance not form.

   d) In relation to Article 8 Singh and Khalid [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  found
      that there was no requirement for a full consideration  of  Article  8
      outside the Rules if all of  the  circumstances  had  been  considered
      under the Rules.

13. In reply Mr Collins on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) There was nothing in the decision to show that the principles in  Dube
      had been addressed

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. This was an appeal against a refusal of leave  to  remain  based  on  10
   years lawful residence under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  Mr
   Collins properly conceded in my view that  there  was  no  merit  in  the
   grounds  which  challenged  the  Judges  findings  in  relation  to  this
   provision. The Judge was entitled on the clear  and  persuasive  evidence
   before him to find that there had been two breaks in  the  continuity  of
   the Appellant's residence such that she could not succeed under the Rules
   and both gaps were in excess of 28 days which is the  maximum  period  in
   relation to which the Respondent might exercise a discretion to grant the
   application.

16. The decision was challenged on the basis that the Judge did not set  out
   why he found that the Appellant could succeed  under  Appendix  FM  as  a
   partner or parent.  I accept that at paragraph 26 the Judge simply stated
   that he had taken into account the submissions made by  the  Home  Office
   Presenting Officer as why the only provision of Appendix FM that might be
   relevant was paragraph EX.1. I am satisfied that any failure to  set  out
   the Judges reasoning made no material difference to the  outcome  of  the
   case. The Appellant could not have succeeded under the partner or  parent
   route because she had  not  made  a  valid  application  for  limited  or
   indefinite leave to remain as required by R-LTRP 1.1(b). There  was  also
   no evidence that the Appellant  could  meet  the  financial  requirements
   accompanied by the mandatorily required documentation.

17.  I am therefore satisfied that it was open  to  the  Judge  to  conclude
   that the only relevant consideration  was  whether  the  Appellant  could
   succeed under EX.1. I am satisfied that the challenge that the judge  did
   not recognise there were two routes under EX.1 was without merit  as  the
   Judge made clear at paragraph 28 and 29 that there were  two  routes  and
   set them out properly directing himself as to what he had to consider.

18.  The Judge was entitled to proceed on the basis that the nationality  of
   the Appellant's husband and child was not determinative of this issue. Mr
   Collins raised the issue of whether  the  Judge  should  have  considered
   whether , given that the Appellant's spouse  was  a  British  Citizen  of
   Barbadian origin it was possible  for  him  to  live  with  his  wife  in
   Trinidad and Tobago . I am satisfied that the Judge asked  the  Appellant
   (as recorded at paragraph 19) why  they  could  return  to  Trinidad  and
   Tobago as a family and it was never suggested that her husband  or  child
   would not be entitled to  return  with  her.  Her  concerns  were  simply
   matters of preference.

19. In determining whether it was reasonable for the  Appellant's  child  to
   return with her to  Trinidad  and  Tobago  the  Judge  set  out  adequate
   findings in relation to the child's best interests factoring in its young
   age and adaptability (paragraph 34). In relation to  whether  there  were
   insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant's spouse relocating with her it
   is clear from  the  Judges  findings  that  the  matters  raised  by  the
   Appellant  could  not,  on  any   rational   analysis,   be   viewed   as
   'Insurmountable  obstacles'  .  The  Appellant  raised  difficulties   in
   relation to her husband finding employment but had conceded that  he  was
   unemployed in the United Kingdom; while she suggested that  her  teaching
   qualification was not transferable the Judge rejected this  evidence  and
   while he did not refer to it there was evidence in the  bundle  from  the
   work permit application of 2004 in which it was clear at question 45 that
   it was anticipated that she would use the teaching skills she acquired in
   the United Kingdom on return to her home country.

20. In relation to which version of  paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  applied  I  am
   satisfied that this is a challenge with no  merit.  The  version  of  the
   Rules that applied at the date of the decision and that the Judge  should
   have applied was whether the Appellant had 'no ties'  with  Trinidad  and
   Tobago. Given that  she  had  given  evidence  of  a  large  family  both
   immediate and extended which she had visited every 2-3 years she  clearly
   had not lost ties with her home country.

21. The Judge at paragraph 41 decided that there  was  'nothing  exceptional
   or unusual about the Appellant's case which would lead  to  a  favourable
   consideration outwith the Rules' and  therefore  carried  out  no  Razgar
   style assessment. This approach is challenged. I am satisfied that having
   reviewed the guidance given in  Singh  and  Khalid  in  which  the  court
   endorsed the view at paragraph 65 that there is no need to conduct a full
   separate examination of  article  8  outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the
   circumstances of a particular case, all the issues have been addressed in
   the consideration under the Rules. The Judge in this case found as a fact
   at paragraph 41 that all the issues had been addressed by application  of
   the Rules and indeed no issues were raised before  the  Judge  or  indeed
   before me that had not been addressed by the application  of  the  Rules.
   Whether he used the word exceptional, unusual or indeed compelling  I  am
   satisfied that he was clear that there were no additional factors to take
   into account.

22. Given my finding that  it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  an
   assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules was not necessary in this  case
   I am satisfied that he was not obliged to consider section  117B  of  the
   Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as this would only have  been
   necessary if such a free standing consideration had been made.

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
4.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
