
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05431/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 July 2013                                  |On 7 August 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE



                                   Between

                                obed thompson
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior  Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Obed Thompson, was born on  24  August  1990  and  is  a
    citizen of Ghana.  The appellant had appealed against the  decision  of
    the respondent dated 8 February 2013 refusing  his  application  for  a
    residence card as a confirmation of right of residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom  as  a  dependent  family  member  of  an  EEA  national.   The
    respondent had not been satisfied in relation to Regulation 7(1)(b)  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (hereafter
    referred as the "2006 Regulations").

 2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gladstone)   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 17 May 2013 dismissed the appeal.  Permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge Blandy on 6 June 2013.

 3. In the Upper Tribunal at Bradford on 8 July 2013 , Mrs R  Pettersen,  a
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer appeared for the respondent.  The
    appellant appeared in person and was  accompanied  by  his  father.  He
    appeared to be unaware that his  previous  solicitors  (Alpha  Shindara
    Legal) had ceased to act for him; the representatives  had  written  to
    the Tribunal at the beginning of July 2013 to indicate that  they  were
    no longer acting for appellant.  I  explained  the  procedures  of  the
    Tribunal to the appellant and told him to indicate to me if he did  not
    understand any part of the proceedings.  The appellant did not  require
    an interpreter.

 4. As noted above the appellant had been  refused under paragraph  7(1)(b)
    of the 2006 Regulations:



         "7.-(1) Subject to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
             Regulations the following persons  shall  be  treated  as  the
             family members of another person-

             (a)  his spouse or his civil partner;

             (b)  direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil
         partner who are-

                  (i)  under 21; or

                  (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;

             (c)  dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or that
                  of his spouse or his civil partner;

             (d)  a person who is to be treated as the family member of
                  that other person under paragraph (3).

             (2)  A person shall not be treated under paragraph  (1)(b)  or
                  (c) as the family member of  a  student  residing  in  the
                  United Kingdom after the period of three months  beginning
                  on the date on which the student is admitted to the United
                  Kingdom unless-

                  (a)  in the case of paragraph (b), the person is the
                      dependent child of the student or of his spouse or
                      civil partner; or

                  (b)  the student also falls within one of the other
                      categories of qualified persons mentioned in
                      regulation 6(1).

             (3)  Subject to paragraph (4), a person  who  is  an  extended
                  family member and has  been  issued  with  an  EEA  family
                  permit, a registration certificate  or  a  residence  card
                  shall be treated as the family member of the relevant  EEA
                  national for as  long  as  he  continues  to  satisfy  the
                  conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5) in relation
                  to that EEA national and the permit, certificate  or  card
                  has not ceased to be valid or been revoked.

             (4)  Where  the  relevant  EEA  national  is  a  student,  the
                  extended family member shall only be treated as the family
                  member of that national under paragraph (3) if either  the
                  EEA family permit was issued under regulation  12(2),  the
                  registration certificate was issued under regulation 16(5)
                  or the residence card was issued under regulation 17(4)."


 5. The appellant had been 22 years old at the date of the refusal  of  his
    application to the respondent.   He  had  been  unable,  therefore,  to
    satisfy the provisions of paragraph 7(1)(b)(i) of the Regulations.   In
    order to show that he was a family member of his father in  the  United
    Kingdom for the purposes of the Rules he was,  therefore,  required  to
    show that he satisfied 7(1)(b)(ii), that is, that he  was  a  dependent
    upon his father or his father's spouse/civil partner.

 6. At [16] of his determination, Judge Gladstone had observed  that  there
    was  a  substantial  balance  on  the  appellant's  bank  account  and,
    moreover, that he was earning more each month in  net  wages  than  his
    father.   The appellant at the initial hearing confirmed that that  was
    still the case. In the light of that evidence and the application to it
    of the Regulations, I find that Judge Gladstone was  right  to  dismiss
    the appeal for the same reason that  the  respondent  had  refused  the
    application.

 7. The grant of permission refers to the case of Dauhoo (EEA Regulations -
    Regulation 8(2)) [2012]  UKUT  79  (IAC).   That  case  considered  the
    position of extended family members under the 2006  Regulations.   Even
    assuming that the appellant would be  able  to  show  that  he  was  an
    extended family member (notwithstanding the fact that he was  a  direct
    descendant of his UK sponsor and father) he would have to  have   shown
    prior dependency upon his father before he came to the United  Kingdom.
    Alternatively, the  appellant  would  have  had  to  have  shown  prior
    membership of a household and present membership of  the  household  of
    his father.  There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal which
    indicated that this appellant had been living with  his  father  abroad
    before he came to this country or that he had been dependent  upon  his
    father whilst he was living abroad. Judge Blandy, granting  permission,
    appeared to assume such prior dependency.  However, as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal noted in its determination, the burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    appellant and I cannot see  that  he  has  discharged  that  burden  in
    respect of his dependency/ household membership prior to coming to this
    country.

 8. Article 8 has also been raised in the grounds of appeal.  At [20] Judge
    Gladstone observed that:

         "The appellant is an adult.  I  found  there  was  no  evidence  of
         financial dependency on the sponsor.  There  was  no  reference  to
         Article 8 in the appeal grounds. There was no evidence before me to
         consider Article 8 other than the appellant having last entered the
         United Kingdom in February 2012 and that he has been working for  a
         period of time."

 9. Judge Gladstone's analysis is brief  but  I  consider  it  to  be  both
    accurate and adequate. Indeed, far from there being any special ties of
    dependency between the adult appellant and his  father,  the  appellant
    has shown that, other than living in  his  father's  household,  he  is
    capable of managing his own life independently as is shown by the  fact
    that he enjoys a higher income than his father.

DECISION

10. This appeal is dismissed





Signed                              Date 30 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

