
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05542/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2nd August 2016                         |On 16th August 2016            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Ajwinder Singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ahmed (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   It is convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant, Mr  Ajwinder  Singh,  is  a  citizen  of
    Egypt.  His appeal against a decision to remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi ("the judge")  in
    a decision promulgated  on  27th  October  2015.   The  judge  made  an
    assessment under the Immigration Rules ("the rules"),  in  relation  to
    paragraphs 276B and 276ADE and concluded that  the  appellant  had  not
    made out his case.  She made a finding of fact that he had been present
    in the United Kingdom since August 2004, without any leave  to  remain.
    She then proceeded to make  an  assessment  outside  the  rules,  under
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention and concluded by allowing  the
    appeal on this basis.

2.   The Secretary of State, the respondent before the  judge,  applied  for
    permission to appeal on the basis  that  the  judge  erred  in  several
    respects.  First, although she  found  that  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  rules,  she  made  no  finding
    regarding sub-paragraph (1)(vi), in relation to  significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration into the  country  of  his  nationality,
    India.  The very general finding that  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE were not met as the appellant had been  present  here  for  only
    about eleven years was insufficient.  A finding regarding obstacles  to
    integration was required  before  the  judge  could  properly  consider
    whether an Article 8 assessment outside the rules was required.

3.   Secondly, the judge erred in relation to section 117A to D of the  2002
    Act.  Little weight was required to be given to the appellant's private
    life, under section 117B(4)(a) and as the appellant had not shown  that
    he had learned English or that he was  financially  independent,  these
    factors fell to be weighed against him and as illustrating  the  public
    interest in his removal.  Similarly, the judge appeared to give  weight
    to the absence of offending behaviour or reliance upon public funds but
    these were not properly to be taken into account  as  positive  factors
    and, in any event, the judge's findings in this context overlooked  the
    lengthy period of illegal residence and evasion of immigration control.
     Finally, the judge appeared to overlook that the appellant  could  re-
    establish himself and his private life in India, following his return.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
    13th April 2016.  No rule 24  response  was  made  on  the  appellant's
    behalf.

5.   Ms Ahmad said that reliance was placed upon the written  grounds.   The
    judge moved from a conclusion that the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the rules, at paragraph 41 of the decision, immediately
    to an Article 8 assessment outside the rules, at paragraph 42.  She did
    so without considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and  this  was  a  clear
    error of law in the light of  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  and
    paragraph 51 in particular of the judgment in that case.  As the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in Miah [2016] UKUT 00131 shows, Home Office guidance
    issued to decision makers  ranks  as  a  relevant  consideration.   The
    current guidance shows that there must  be  an  assessment  of  whether
    there are very significant obstacles to integration into the country of
    return, with the starting point being that an applicant will be able to
    integrate, unless he or she can demonstrate why this is not  the  case.
    The judge made no findings under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and erred as a
    result.

6.   In addition, the judge failed to identify any compelling  circumstances
    explaining why he felt able to make an assessment  outside  the  rules.
    The consideration of section 117A  to  D  of  the  2002  Act  was  also
    insufficient as it was  far  too  brief.   There  was  nothing  in  the
    decision to show that she properly took into account all  the  discrete
    factors in that part of the statute.

7.   Mr Ahmed said in response, taking section 117A to  D  first,  that  the
    judge had in fact given sufficient reasons for her overall  assessment.
    Paragraph 43 of the decision showed, for example, that  she  was  aware
    that the appellant had  not  learned  to  speak  English  and  had  not
    integrated into the wider community and it was clear from paragraph  42
    that she was aware of his precarious immigration status,  seen  in  the
    light of his presence in the United Kingdom for eleven  years,  as  she
    found.  The evidence before  her  also  included  an  ESOL  certificate
    regarding the speaking element of English.  The judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had worked illegally, again at paragraph 43 of the  decision.
    The judge also took into account the  extraordinary  delay  in  dealing
    with the appellant's application for leave, between 2009 and  2015  and
    the decision showed that this was a salient feature in her decision  to
    go outside the rules to make an  overall  Article  8  assessment.   The
    period of delay of six years was clearly a key  factor.   Although  the
    judge had not used the particular  phrase  "compelling  circumstances",
    these could be seen in her decision.

8.   Turning next to the justification for  moving  from  the  rules  to  an
    Article 8 assessment outside them, the appellant relied  on  Singh  and
    Khalid [2015] EWCA Civ 74 and particularly paragraph 60 of the judgment
    onwards.  In effect, a second stage assessment would always be  present
    and a decision maker had to ask whether the  factual  matrix  satisfied
    the requirements of the rules and, if not, whether to go on to consider
    the position outside them.  Accepting  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 had emphasised that a failure to  meet  the
    requirements of the rules had to be taken into the second stage of  the
    analysis, paragraph 43 of the decision contained sufficient to  explain
    the judge's decision to allow the appeal.  The delay  point  was  there
    and the findings of fact in that paragraph and  in  the  following  one
    bore directly on the prospects of integration into India,  even  though
    that factor was not expressly mentioned.

9.   Even if an error were found in relation to the link between  the  rules
    and Article 8 outside them, the error was not material.   Overall,  the
    judgment was soundly reasoned.

10.  In reply, Ms Ahmad said that it was clear from  Khalid  and  Singh,  at
    paragraph 64 for example, that  it  was  not  always  necessary  to  go
    outside the rules.  Both SS (Congo) and Agyarko went further  and  made
    it clear that compelling reasons were  required  to  be  identified  to
    explain why an Article 8 assessment outside  the  rules  was  required.
    The judge's failure to make a finding on 276ADE(1)(vi) was significant.

11.  At paragraph 43 of the decision, there was nothing  to  show  that  the
    judge fully appreciated the importance of section 117B of the 2002 Act,
    which required little weight to be given to a private life  established
    in certain circumstances.  The errors were material and  it  was  clear
    that if the Secretary of State's guidance had been taken  into  account
    and the judge had properly considered  all  of  paragraph  276ADE,  she
    might very well have reached a different conclusion.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  There has been much guidance given recently by the Court of  Appeal  on
    the correct approach to the rules, section 117A to D of  the  2002  Act
    and the  relationship  between  the  rules  and  a  broader  Article  8
    assessment made outside them.  It is clear from SS (Congo) and  Agyarko
    in particular that considerable care is required on the part of  courts
    and Tribunals in cases where the requirements of the rules in paragraph
    276ADE and Appendix FM are not met.  Judges are  required  to  identify
    "compelling reasons" why an assessment outside them is required and the
    particular failure in an individual case to meet  the  requirements  of
    the rules retains  its  weight  and  legal  significance  in  any  such
    assessment.

13.  The difficulty with the decision in the  present  appeal  is  that  the
    judge has moved swiftly from finding that the requirements of the rules
    were not met by the appellant  to  an  assessment  outside  them  under
    Article 8 without identifying the compelling reasons which justified or
    explained that step.  The  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  judge  in
    paragraphs 43 and 44 do not explain which aspects  of  the  appellant's
    case amount to compelling reasons.  The long delay of some six years in
    dealing with the application for leave was given weight  by  the  judge
    but as this period of time simply enabled the appellant to continue  to
    develop his private life ties and to work illegally, it  is  not  clear
    why it would amount to a  compelling  circumstance.   Moreover,  it  is
    difficult to see how many of  the  findings  in  those  paragraphs  can
    sensibly be seen as  anything  other  than  adverse  factors,  as  they
    include the appellant's limited English, his failure to integrate  into
    the wider community and his illegal work.

14.  Secondly, the findings regarding the requirements of the rules are  not
    complete.  Ms Ahmad is right to point to the  absence  of  any  finding
    regarding the prospects of  reintegration  into  India,  following  the
    appellant's removal.  In the light of the judge's finding of fact  that
    he has been present here for about eleven years, waiting for a decision
    from the Secretary of State for six of them, and  as  the  overwhelming
    bulk of his private life has been established within his own  community
    while he has been here, the importance of a discrete finding  regarding
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) is apparent.  In  order  to  properly  consider
    whether  compelling  reasons  were  present,  requiring  an  Article  8
    assessment outside the rules, a  full  rules-based  assessment  was  an
    essential first step.

15.  Thirdly, I conclude that the judge's brief mention of section  117A  to
    D of the 2002 Act in paragraph 43 is  insufficient  to  show  a  proper
    engagement with the discrete factors set out there.  For  example,  the
    absence of any leave given to the  appellant,  his  immigration  status
    being precarious or unlawful, required the judge to begin with  section
    117B(4) and (5).  As now explained by the Court of Appeal  in  Rhuppiah
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803, a court  or  Tribunal  must  have  regard  to  the
    consideration that little  weight  should  be  given  to  private  life
    established  in  certain  circumstances,  albeit  that  this  normative
    guidance may be overridden  in  an  exceptional  case  by  particularly
    strong features of the  private  life  in  question.   The  very  brief
    mention of the section itself is insufficient to show  that  the  judge
    has fully engaged with the particular features of the statutory scheme.

16.  I conclude that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    material errors of law and must be set aside and remade.   In  a  brief
    discussion regarding the appropriate venue, there was  some  canvassing
    of whether some of the judge's findings of fact might be preserved  but
    I conclude that none can and that the remaking should proceed on  a  de
    novo basis.  Given the extensive fact-finding that will be required and
    the passage of time since the decision was promulgated, the appropriate
    venue is the First-tier Tribunal, in Birmingham, before a  judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and shall be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal, at Birmingham, before a  judge  other  than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Obhi.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date 16/08/2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
