









                               UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th July 2013                               |On 26th July 2013          |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                               mr zohaib khan


                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Sulehria
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 2nd March  1985.
    On 23rd March 2012 he made an application for leave to remain as a Tier
    4 (General) Student Migrant under the Points-Based System.

 2. That application was refused by the Respondent on 31st January 2013 (my
    emphasis). A reason for refusal letter dated  31st  January  2013  (and
    attached to the file papers) was served on the Appellant.

 3. The Appellant appealed that refusal and asked  for  a  hearing  on  the
    papers. The matter was dealt with at Manchester by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Davies. He allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 23rd April 2013.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal that decision and permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Renton.  Thus  the  matter  comes
    before me.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Avery appeared on behalf of the  Respondent
    and Mr Sulehria on behalf the Appellant. Mr Avery's submission followed
    the lines of his application seeking permission. He submitted that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination  was  erroneous  in  law  and
    could not stand, because the Judge had failed altogether to  deal  with
    the core evidence, before him.

 6. The Respondent's decision in refusal is contained  in  a  letter  dated
    31st January 2013. Inexplicably the Judge did  not  connect  with  that
    evidence but instead looked at a  refusal  letter  dated  15th  October
    2012. Accordingly there were no findings made relevant to the  decision
    which had been made by the Respondent and therefore the Judge had erred
    to such an extent that the matter needed to  go  back  and  be  reheard
    afresh.

 7. Mr Sulehria tried valiantly to resist this  course,  but  said  nothing
    that could persuade me that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
    fallen into error. It is clear from any reading of the papers that  the
    Judge has taken into account the  wrong  refusal  letter,  despite  the
    correct one being there on file.

My Findings

 8. I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    contains an  error  in  that  the  Judge  has  inexplicably  overlooked
    relevant evidence. Therefore none of the findings made by the Judge can
    stand. The matter needs to be reheard afresh.  This  is  a  case  which
    falls squarely within paragraph 7 of the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement. This matter will therefore be remitted to Manchester Hearing
    Centre for a fresh hearing before a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other
    than Tribunal Judge Davies.

 9. I consider that no further directions are necessary at this stage.  Any
    listing  of  this  appeal  is  a  matter  for  the  Resident  Judge  in
    Manchester, who will list according to her procedures.









Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law such that it is set aside and will be remade.




Signed:                                      Date: 26th July 2013

