
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05429/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                            MALCOLM LLOYD CLARKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Minhoo, Solicitor, Kulendran Immigration Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Symes  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 7 August  2015.   The  appellant's
    case was advanced on the  basis  that  his  removal  would  breach  his
    Article 8 rights, in the light of  family  ties  he  claimed  with  his
    children here.  It appears that he has five in all, two of  them  under
    the age of 16.  All the children are British citizens.

2.   The judge found that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    rules") were not met in relation to family life.  He concluded that the
    appellant did not meet the requirement of paragraph E-LTRPT.2.5 as  the
    evidence did not show that he was taking and intended  to  continue  to
    take an active role in his children's upbringing.  He also  found  that
    the private life requirements of the rules were not met.   Towards  the
    end of his decision, the judge went on to consider whether the decision
    to remove the appellant breached his Article  8  rights  (or  those  of
    others) and took  into  account  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  in
    considering "the public interest question".  Overall, he concluded that
    removal would not be disproportionate and so he dismissed the appeal.

3.   In grounds in support of an application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was contended that the judge erred in failing  to  fully  consider  the
    appellant's  relationships  with  his  partner  and  children.   Family
    members were at court and gave supporting evidence.  The  relationships
    were genuine and  there  was  no  proper  consideration  of  the  rules
    regarding children who had lived in the United Kingdom  for  more  than
    seven years.  The judge failed to make a best interests  assessment  in
    accordance with section 55 of the 2009 Act and failed to apply guidance
    given in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 26 November 2015 on the basis  that
    the judge may have erred in failing  to  give  sufficient  reasons  for
    finding that the relationships between the appellant and  his  children
    were not genuine.  In a brief Rule 24 response, the Secretary of  State
    contended that the judge made findings  which  were  open  to  him  and
    directed himself appropriately.  He  made  a  clear  finding  that  the
    appellant had not shown that he took an active role in  the  children's
    upbringing and so it was difficult to see how  any  further  assessment
    under section 55 of the 2009 Act was required or material.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Minhoo said that the  judge  made  a  mistake  in  his  decision  in
    relation to the name of the appellant's representative.  Mr V Kulendran
    of Kulendran Immigration Law Chambers appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, but another person's name was  shown.   I  observe  that  the
    Record of Proceedings does indeed  show  that  Mr  Kulendran  appeared,
    whereas another's name appears in the promulgated decision.   Sensibly,
    Ms Minhoo did not seek to argue that this mistake revealed  a  material
    error of law.

6.   Ms Minhoo drew attention to the Secretary  of  State's  letter,  giving
    reasons for the removal decision.  At paragraph 20, mention was made of
    section 55 of the 2009 Act and the best interests  of  the  appellant's
    children.  DNA evidence was made available to confirm that he  was  the
    father of the two youngest.  In his decision, the judge failed to  give
    adequate reasons for concluding that no genuine relationship  with  the
    appellant was shown.  The appellant had been present in the  children's
    lives since 1999.  No section 55  assessment  was  made  by  the  judge
    regarding these family members, each of them under the age of 16.

7.   At paragraph 10 of the decision, the judge was rather  imprecise  about
    the  evidence  summarised   in   that   paragraph.    The   appellant's
    recollection was that he was questioned by the two representatives  and
    by the judge but there was no mention of this in the  decision.   There
    was  correspondence  before  the  Tribunal  regarding  the  appellant's
    children but the  judge  did  not  give  this  sufficient  weight.   At
    paragraph 11 the judge reached his conclusion that  the  appellant  had
    not shown a genuine relationship but without a  section  55  assessment
    having been made and without  regard  to  ZH  (Tanzania).   Again,  the
    judge's findings at paragraph 12 were rather vague.  The mother of  the
    children was present at the hearing but she and the appellant felt that
    they were given no adequate opportunity to explain matters.  Ms  Minhoo
    accepted that the appellant was represented throughout.

8.    It  appeared  that  the  judge  based  his  adverse  findings  on  the
    relationship between the appellant and the children's mother, with whom
    he did not live.  However, the appellant lived with the children  until
    2003, when the youngest was born.  The relationship between the  adults
    then came to an end.  Nonetheless, the appellant played and was able to
    continue to play an active part in the children's lives.

9.   At paragraph 13 of the decision, the judge did not  provide  a  summary
    of the questions he put to the appellant and so  it  was  difficult  to
    tell what emerged from them. There was no mention of section 55 of  the
    2009 Act and nothing dealing with the impact on  the  children  of  the
    appellant's removal, or indeed the impact  on  the  appellant  in  this
    context.

10.  Ms Pal said that the  grounds  amounted  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's conclusions and the findings of fact he made.  At paragraph 11,
    the judge set out that he had taken into account the oral evidence  and
    the witness statements.  He was entitled to summarise  the  appellant's
    evidence as vague at paragraph 12 and again at paragraph  13  and  gave
    adequate reasons for his findings. The judge concluded that  no  family
    life between the appellant and his children was shown.    Having  found
    no family life, there was no need for him to go further in relation  to
    section 55 of the 2009 Act.

11.  The judge was entitled to find that the appellant could  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  rules  and  that  the  removal  decision  was  a
    proportionate response.   There was no challenge in the grounds to  the
    private life findings.  The judge was not required to set  out  in  any
    particular form the questions he put to the appellant. In any event,  a
    request might have been made for sight of the Record of Proceedings  or
    the appellant's representative might have  produced  a  note  of  them.
    Overall, the judge properly weighed the evidence  before  him  and  the
    decision should stand.

12.  In a brief reply, Ms Minhoo said that the Tribunal was obliged to  make
    a proper section 55 assessment but the judge  failed  to  do  so.   The
    starting point was that a child was entitled to be brought up  by  both
    parents.  The two youngest children were under the age of 16.



Conclusions on Error of Law

13.  I am grateful to the two representatives for the careful way  in  which
    they put their cases.  I conclude that no material  error  of  law  has
    been shown and that the decision should stand.  Read  overall,  I  find
    that the judge gave cogent and sustainable reasons for finding that the
    requirements of the rules were not met, in relation to family life  and
    private life. He went on to make an Article 8 assessment more  broadly,
    apparently outside the rules, but, again, no  error  of  law  has  been
    shown in relation to the substantive analysis  he  made.   The  overall
    conclusion, regarding the rules and the lawfulness and  proportionality
    of removal, was open to him on the evidence.

14.  Ms Minhoo is correct in pointing to the absence of any express  mention
    of section 55 of the 2009 Act.  On the other hand, the summary  of  the
    evidence which appears at paragraphs 7 to 10 of the decision,  and  the
    judge's assessment at paragraphs 11 to 13, show that he was well  aware
    of the circumstances of the children of the family. His key finding was
    that the appellant had not shown that he enjoyed a genuine relationship
    with the children, so that the requirement of paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4 was
    not met.  In making this finding,  the  judge  took  into  account  the
    vagueness of the evidence before him, the brief witness  statements  in
    virtually identical form and the absence  of  any  detail  showing  the
    frequency or quality of the appellant's involvement in the lives of his
    children.   The judge concluded that the evidence did not show that his
    presence had a material impact  on  their  upbringing.   There  was  no
    supporting evidence from any external or independent source.

15.  In the light  of  that  assessment  of  the  evidence,  the  judge  was
    entitled to make the findings he did.  I  accept  Ms  Pal's  submission
    that nothing further was  required  and  the  absence  of  any  express
    mention of section 55 of the 2009 Act falls  far  short  of  showing  a
    material  error  of  law.   Again,  the  judge  did  not  overlook  the
    circumstances of the children and the  adverse  finding  regarding  the
    absence of a genuine relationship which made  any  real  difference  to
    their lives undermined the appellant's family life case.

16.  There has been no challenge to the private  life  findings.  The  judge
    was entitled to conclude that the requirements of the  rules  were  not
    met in this context.  He took into account the family relationships  as
    components of the appellant's private  life.   In  the  proportionality
    assessment, the judge took into account section 117B of the  2002  Act,
    weighing the relevant factors in paragraph 17 of the decision.

17.  The judge's analysis is consistent with guidance given   by  the  Court
    of Appeal in AJ (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191 and  the  absence  of  any
    express mention of Section 55 of the 2009 Act  does  not  amount  to  a
    material error of law.  I conclude that the judge was entitled to  make
    the adverse findings he did, in relation to the family life and private
    life ties claimed by the appellant.  As no material error  of  law  has
    been shown, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Decision

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

19.  There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

