
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05842/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 25 November 2014                        |On 31 December 2014            |
|Oral Judgment given                        |                               |


                                   Before

                             THE HON. LORD BURNS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MS GALYNA KANTANIST
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Kosarenko, Legal Representative, Sterling & Law
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a  determination
    of Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manuell  promulgated  on  13
    August 2014, following a hearing at Richmond  on  11  August  2014,  in
    which he allowed the appeal of the Appellant before him, the Respondent
    before us today, against the refusal of the Secretary of State to issue
    her with a derived residence card on the basis of her claim to  be  the
    primary carer of an EEA national child under Regulation 15A and 18A  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended.

2.    Judge Manuell set out the background to the case in the early part  of
    the determination and the evidence and submissions he considered before
    setting out his findings in  Section  D.   The  Judge  noted  that  the
    evidence of the appellant before him and her partner, Mr  Shostak,  was
    supported by documentary material that was tested in  cross-examination
    and that both witnesses gave evidence openly and clearly.  The Tribunal
    accepted that both were reliable witnesses.

3.    In paragraph 12 Judge Manuell made the following finding:

         "In the tribunal's view, it is highly  significant  that  Christina
         who is the child is of tender years, barely two years  old.   While
         Mr Shostak is an experienced parent it is obvious and no reflection
         to him, that he cannot be sensibly regarded as able to care for his
         two year old daughter in the same way as  her  mother.   His  frank
         opinion was that if the mother, i.e. the appellant,  had  to  leave
         the United Kingdom, then Christina would have to go with her."

4.    In paragraph 13 Judge Manuell comments upon the fact that -

       . Mr Shostak is responsible for maintaining a total of nine people  -
         the appellant herself, his mother, his soon to be ex-wife, his five
         children and himself;

       . He refers to his mother being elderly, having  a  large  number  of
         serious health problems including dementia;

       . The fact Mr Shostak has a variety of business  interests  which  no
         doubt require his careful and active attention, and

       . that whilst it is perhaps possible that he  could  afford  to  hire
         child care for Christina and home help for his mother,  that  would
         obviously be costly and would be unsatisfactory in the child's case
         compared to the care available from her own mother.

    The Judge found there is no realistic alternative to enable Christina's
    continued presence in the EU than  the  simultaneous  presence  of  her
    mother.

5.    The Secretary of State  challenges  that  conclusion  on  one  ground,
    namely a failure to resolve conflicts of fact or  opinion  on  material
    matters, alleging that the Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    failed to engage with the grounds submitted on 18 August 2014 and  that
    this is a case in which the British citizen would be able to remain  in
    the United Kingdom if  the  Appellant  were  required  to  leave.   The
    grounds at paragraph 4 refer to the case  of  MA  &  SM  (Zambrano:  EU
    children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 380 to which we shall refer later
    in the determination.

6.    The father's position is relevant when one looks  at  Regulation  15A,
    which was introduced into the Regulations to enable an individual,  who
    has  no  right  of  residence  on  any  other  basis  set  out  in  the
    Regulations, to succeed in certain limited circumstances.  One of those
    is that the applicant is the primary carer of an EU national child  and
    that removal of the primary carer, i.e. the applicant from  the  United
    Kingdom, will result in the EU national child also having to leave  the
    United Kingdom or to leave the territorial boundaries of  the  European
    Union.  It is not disputed before us that the issue  in  this  case  is
    whether arrangements exist such that the child would not have to  leave
    the European  Union  and  therefore  not  be  deprived  of  the  rights
    available to her as a union citizen.  It is for that reason  the  Judge
    was required to consider, with appropriate care, whether there  was  an
    alternative person in the United Kingdom able, and we stress that  word
    able, to provide the care that the child Christina required.

7.    The case of MA & SM (Zambrano) is of particular relevance.   Mr  Tufan
    referred us to a number of paragraphs of that determination, the  first
    of which set out the principle regarding the right of an EU citizen  to
    enjoy the substantive benefits of rights flowing from or deriving  from
    that citizenship.  More particularly  he  referred  to  the  Tribunal's
    findings in paragraphs 55 and 56 relating to the application of the  EU
    principles to the second appeal  before  them.   In  paragraph  55  the
    Tribunal found:

         "Turning to the application of the Zambrano principle to the second
         appeal, whilst we accept that if JM and FM were both to  reside  in
         the United Kingdom without their mother life would be difficult for
         the sponsor and indeed the  children,  we  do  not  accept  that  a
         refusal to admit the applicant to the United Kingdom would  deprive
         either JM or FM of the genuine enjoyment of the  substance  of  the
         rights associated with their status as EU citizens".

    That last phrase is relied upon by Mr Kosarenko before us  today  which
    is an undisputed principle.  However, in paragraph 56 the Tribunal went
    on to state the following:

         "There is no suggestion that the sponsor is not capable of  looking
         after JM and FM. He has tailored his  working  hours  thus  far  to
         ensure that they fit in with the need to care for JM, and  we  have
         no doubt he would also ensure that  FM  was  similarly  cared  for.
         There mere fact that the sponsor cannot be as  economically  active
         as he would wish, because of his care responsibilities  to  JM  and
         FM, is not sufficient to support a conclusion that JM and FM  would
         be denied the genuine enjoyment of their EU citizenship rights, nor
         would this be the case even if the sponsor were  required  to  stop
         working altogether. The right of residence is a right to reside  in
         the territory of the EU. It  is  not  a  right  to  any  particular
         quality of life or to  any  particular  standard  of  living.  (See
         Dereci at paragraph 68, and Harrison at paragraph 67)."

8.    We also referred at the opening of the appeal to an  additional  case,
    that of Maureen Hines v London Borough of Lambeth [2014] EWCA Civ  660,
    on the basis we had considered this judgment as part of our preliminary
    discussions.  In that case the Court of Appeal examined the test  under
    Regulation 15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations.
     It was considering whether requiring a child to seek alternative  care
    within the statutory system, such as adoption or  foster  care  if  the
    primary carer was removed, was acceptable.  It found in most cases that
    it was not, but the Court also went on to state the following:-

         "It was also said however that all things being equal  the  removal
         of a child from the care of one responsible parent to the  care  of
         another responsible  parent  would  not  normally  be  expected  so
         seriously to impair his quality and standard of life that he  would
         be effectively forced to leave the UK."

    That is an accurate summary of the principles that are applicable in  a
    Regulation 15A case.

9.    If  one  applies  those  principles  to  the  determination  of  Judge
    Manuell, it is arguable  that  he  applied  the  wrong  legal  test  in
    paragraph 12.  The test is not whether the  care  that  Christina  will
    receive from Mr Shostak is the same as that her mother would give  her.
    Ordinarily the standard of care that would  be  given  by  the  child's
    mother where the mother is the primary carer would be better than  that
    which could  be  offered  by  a  working  father.   It  is  a  material
    misdirection in law to consider that that was a factor determinative of
    the decision which was made.

10.   The second error is that in paragraph 13. Judge  Manuell  went  on  to
    consider the current arrangements for Mr Shostak and found  that  those
    arrangements suggested that, although he  may  want  to  care  for  the
    child,  there  was  no  realistic  alternative  other  than  to  enable
    Christina's continued presence in the United Kingdom being cared for by
    her mother.  We find the Judge failed to consider  whether  alternative
    arrangements could be made, what those  arrangements  were,  how  those
    arrangements  could  be  put  into  place,  and  whether,  under  those
    arrangements, appropriate care could be provided.  This is a child  who
    is now over 2 years of age (but was barely 2 years of age at  the  time
    of the decision)  with no special needs, and for whom it has  not  been
    shown that her requirements are other than the normal ones of  a  child
    of  this  age,  albeit  that  what  is  being  proposed  is  that   the
    arrangements would not enable the child to enjoy the company  and  care
    of her mother.

11.    The  errors  in  the  determination  are  material  such   that   the
    determination is set aside.   The  factual  findings  regarding  family
    constitution, the  issues  of  Mr  Shostak's  employment  and  business
    activities and those of his mother and his other domestic  arrangements
    involving other children are not contested and are preserved  findings.



12.   However, when we move on to consider the re-making of the decision  in
    light of the information and evidence that is available (all  of  which
    stands) we substitute the following decision. Our decision is that  the
    appeal is dismissed.  The reasons for that finding is, following  MA  &
    SM, that all possible arrangements have to be considered and  shown  to
    be such that it was  necessary  for  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. The evidence would have to show that any care that Mr  Shostak
    was able to provide for Christina would be of such a poor standard that
    it would seriously impair her quality and standard of life,  such  that
    she would be effectively forced to leave the United Kingdom.  It is not
    a comparison between mum's care and dad's care.   It  is  necessary  to
    show that the standard of care that Dad would give, even if he  had  to
    give up all his business interests and become  a  permanent  carer,  is
    such that the child would be forced to leave the European Union.   That
    has not been proved or substantiated on the evidence and  therefore  we
    have no choice but to dismiss this appeal.


Decision

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside the
    decision of the original Judge. We remake the decision as follows. This
    appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity.

14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. We make
    no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed      Date 31st December 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


