
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR/KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05529/2014
                                                               IA/05541/2014
                                                               IA/05535/2014
                                                               IA/05546/2014
                                                               IA/05553/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2014                            |On 15 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SL (FIRST APPELLANT)
                            GL (SECOND APPELLANT)
                            OL (THIRD APPELLANT)
                            AL (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                            KL (FIFTH APPELLANT)
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimants:     Miss R Akhter (Counsel instructed by Owens
Solicitors)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Nigeria and are all members of the  same
    family. Their dates of birth are  as  follows:  22  November  1971,  14
    November 1972, 22 November 2003, 19 February 2007  and  12  June  2012.
    (For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as the Secretary of
    State, who is the appellant in this matter, and to the Claimants.)

Background

2.   The main Claimant, SL, entered the UK on 23 August 2004 as  a  visitor.
    She returned to Nigeria and made a second visit to  the  UK  from  July
    2005 to January 2006.  Thereafter she returned to the UK  in  September
    2006 as a student and was granted extensions of stay in  that  capacity
    until January 2009 and subsequently until 31 December 2013.  Her  leave
    was curtailed on 30 November 2013. She (and her family  as  dependents)
    made an application for leave to remain on the grounds of  private  and
    family life as two of her children had been  resident  in  the  UK  for
    nearly seven years.  GL, the Claimant's husband, and OL entered the  UK
    in 2005 as visitors and were granted leave to remain in line  with  the
    main claimant until 31 December 2013.   The fourth and fifth  Claimants
    were born in the UK.

3.   The Secretary of State refused the applications under Appendix  FM,  as
    neither the claimant nor her husband met the requirements as  either  a
    partner or a parent. The exceptions in paragraph  EX.1  did  not  apply
    because they did not  meet  the  eligibility  requirements.   Paragraph
    276ADE did not apply as the claimants had not lived for long enough  in
    the UK.  The applications for the children were refused on the  grounds
    that they failed to establish continuous residence  in  the  UK  for  a
    period of seven years as at the date of  application  and  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK with their parents.
     The Reasons for Refusal Letter did not address the best  interests  of
    the children or Section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2009.

4.   The Tribunal  allowed  the  appeals  on  human  rights  grounds  having
    considered Article 8 ECHR.  The Tribunal took into  account  the  eight
    years' residence, good  immigration  history  and  ability  to  make  a
    contribution through  employment  to  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country.  The Tribunal followed AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] INLR 407,  R
    (on the application of MM and Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  985.  It
    had regard to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002  (the  2002  Act)  dealing  with  public  interest.  The  best
    interests of the children were  considered  having  regard  to  MM  and
    Others and MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Section 117B(6)
    of  the  2002  Act.   The  Tribunal  found  that  the  best  interests,
    particularly for the two older children, lie in  remaining  in  the  UK
    where they established strong ties and were progressing well at school.
     The Tribunal found that it would not be reasonable to expect  them  to
    return to Nigeria given that they were integrated into life in the  UK.
    Further the Tribunal found there were no matters  that  might  outweigh
    the child's best interests [31].

Grounds of Application

5.   Ground 1

    The Tribunal erred in its  approach  to  Article  8  as  it  failed  to
    consider the Gulshan and Nagre tests (Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)
    and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)) in terms of compelling circumstances
    not recognised by the  Rules  and  the  issue  of  unjustifiably  harsh
    outcome.

6.   Ground 2

     The Tribunal failed to provide  adequate  reasons  why  the  claimants'
    circumstances were either compelling or  exceptional  and  why  it  was
    unreasonable to expect the children to  leave  the  UK.   Reliance  was
    placed on EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.   The
    children would be able to continue their education in  Nigeria  and  it
    would not be unduly harsh or unreasonable  for  them  to  do  so.   The
    Tribunal erred by  failing  to  consider  the  education  available  in
    Nigeria and that to provide education in the UK would amount to a drain
    on public resources. The decision to remove them was  proportionate  in
    order to maintain a fair and effective immigration system.

Permission to appeal

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne
    on 30 October 2014.

8.   Judge Osborne stated:

         "In  an  otherwise  focused  determination  in  which   the   judge
         manifestly engaged with the evidence, it is  nonetheless  at  least
         arguable that the judge failed to adequately consider the  cost  of
         the public purse  in  providing  education  to  these  three  young
         children.  To that extent it is arguable that the  judge  conducted
         an inadequate balancing exercise upon the issue of proportionality.


         As this arguable error of law has been identified  all  the  issues
         raised in the grounds are arguable".


Rule 24 Response

9.   On behalf of the claimants a response was submitted dated  19  November
    2014.

10.  In considering the "Gulshan/Nagre test", the Tribunal had regard to  MM
    and Others (cited above) which considered all recent case law including
    Gulshan and Nagre and at paragraph 128 stated:
         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate, save for the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to consideration outside of the Rule,
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside  the  Rules.  I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.  If   the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim. That will have to be  determined  by
         the relevant decision-maker".


11.  It is submitted that the Tribunal undertook a comprehensive  assessment
    of the evidence including having specific regard to the public interest
    at [22] and [26].  The Tribunal also had regard to Section 117B(6)  and
    the best interests of the  children.   The  Tribunal  made  a  specific
    finding that the parents were likely  to  contribute  to  the  economic
    wellbeing of the country.

The Hearing

Submissions

12.  Mr Duffy relied on the grounds and confirmed the Secretary  of  State's
    current position was that there remained a two stage test  for  Article
    8; the first was the Gulshan test,  which  the  Tribunal  arguably  had
    failed to deal with, and then if applicable Article 8 ECHR.

13.  Miss Akhter relied on the Rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal's approach was entirely in keeping with the decision in MM and
    Others.  In any event  the  Tribunal   rightly  considered  the  claims
    outside the Rules as the children had not reached  the  required  seven
    years' residence at the time of application, although at  the  date  of
    hearing they qualified under Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

14.  As to the second ground of  appeal,  Miss  Akhter  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal  fully  considered  the  public  interest  and  directly  made
    reference to the public purse.  It  went  through  factors  highlighted
    under Section 117 and it could not therefore be said that  it  had  not
    taken the  public  interest  into  account.   The  case  was  different
    factually from EV (Philippines).  Here there was evidence of employment
    and that the parents would not be a burden on  the  State.  The  oldest
    child came to the UK when she was 3 years old and  had  now  spent  the
    majority of her time in the UK.  Two of the children were born  in  the
    UK and the second child was now over 7  years  of  age.   The  Tribunal
    found that there were few matters weighing  in  favour  of  the  public
    interest.

15.  Mr Duffy responded that the comments made in MM and Others were  obiter
    and ought not therefore to be relied on.  Section 117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act was a part of the  overall  assessment  to  be  carried  out.   The
    Tribunal failed to conduct a full analysis of the best interests of the
    children following guidance in EV (Philippines) and  MK  (India).   The
    Tribunal failed to identify why it  was  unreasonable  to  relocate  to
    Nigeria.  The Tribunal needed to have considered the  circumstances  in
    Nigeria.

16.  At the end of the hearing I found that there was no  error  of  law  in
    the decision which shall stand.  I now give my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

17.  I find no material error of law disclosed in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  I am satisfied that the Tribunal followed  a  legally
    correct approach  following  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgment  (albeit
    obiter) in MM and Others which is quoted above in  paragraph  10.   It
    stated that the so called Gulshan test does not add  anything  to  the
    assessment in Article 8 cases.  It was therefore open to the  Tribunal
    to adopt this approach.   Indeed  such  an  approach  has  since  been
    confirmed by the Upper Tribunal in immigration judicial  review  in  R
    (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
    [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC). I find that the first ground  of  appeal  has
    not been made out.

18.  Turning to the second ground, the public interest, I am satisfied  that
    the Tribunal engaged in a detailed  consideration  of  public  interest
    factors separately from and including factors outlined in  Section  117
    of the 2002 Act, said to reflect the Secretary of State's views on  how
    and what weight is  to  be  attached  to  public  interest.   Whilst  I
    acknowledge that the Tribunal made no specific reference to the cost of
    education, it is clear that it took into account any  potential  burden
    on the State insofar as the main claimants are concerned and found none
    (26). Furthermore, given that the Tribunal placed  considerable  weight
    on the interests of the children and the fact that  two  children  meet
    the criteria under Section 117B(6) as "qualifying children", it can  be
    assumed that the issue of cost of education has implicitly  been  taken
    into account.  There is no specific requirement in paragraph  117  that
    highlights  the  issue  of  the  cost  of  education.   The  Article  8
    assessment was fully and comprehensively carried out  by  the  Tribunal
    and with reference to relevant case law.  I accept the submission by Ms
    Akhter that EV Philippines is distinguished on the facts in this  case,
    in particular having regard to the positive immigration history of  the
    main claimants, their employment in and economic  contribution  in  the
    UK, the length of residence and degree of integration of  the  children
    in the UK.  I find no  basis  whatsoever  for  any  argument  that  the
    Tribunal's balancing exercise  on  the  issue  of  proportionality  was
    inadequate.  In short this ground amount to  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision made by the Tribunal.  It is hard to see that there could have
    been any other outcome.

19.  Finally, I turn to the point  made  concerning  the  reasonableness  of
    returning to Nigeria.  The Tribunal clearly considered this  issue  and
    the ample evidence before it, in particular letters from  the  children
    in support of their private lives and integration in the UK [5 & 6].

20.  The Tribunal specifically considered [29 onwards] the issue of how  the
    assessment is to be made having regard to  the  public  interest.   She
    placed weight on the interests of the children for whom  it  was  found
    there would be considerable distress at the prospect of  leaving  their
    friends and family in the UK and the fact  of  their  integration  into
    life in the  UK.   Furthermore,  the  Tribunal  placed  weight  on  the
    statutory scheme incorporated in Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  which
    provides that where the children have lived in the UK for  seven  years
    and where it is found that it would be unreasonable for them to live in
    another country, the public interest does not require  removal.   I  am
    satisfied that the Tribunal engaged in making an overall assessment  of
    the children's lives and having regard to likely their circumstances if
    returned  to   Nigeria,  which  is  an  entirely  sensible  and  proper
    approach.

Decision

21.  There is no material error of law in the decision, which  shall  stand.



22.  The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.


Anonymity order

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise the appellant is
    granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Dated 14.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

    No fee award is made because the claimants  did  not  meet  the  strict
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and it was necessary for them  to
    appeal and produce further evidence for their appeal to succeed.


Signed        Dated 14.12.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
