
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05698/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th January, 2016                 |On 27th January 2016                 |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Raja Hassan Abbas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, Counsel instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this appeal the appellant is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion, I shall refer to her as  being  "the
    claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  15th  January,  1962.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom in January, 1995 and  claimed  asylum.
    His claim was refused on 8th October, 1997.  He was  served  with  form
    IS.82E on 31st May, 1997 and he remained in the United Kingdom  without
    leave.  On 5th August, 2014 application was  made  on  his  behalf  for
    leave to remain based on his family and  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His application was refused by the claimant and  he  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Alan  J  M  Baldwin
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 17th July, 2015.  He noted  that  there  was
    now DNA evidence from which he subsequently made findings that children
    the respondent claimed were his were almost certainly related to him as
    his children and he dealt with an issue which  concerned  the  claimant
    relating to the use of the name Singh on the birth certificates.

4.   The judge refers to the Immigration Rules relating to  Article  8,  but
    then proceeded to consider the appeal outwith the Immigration Rules and
    he purported to allow the respondent's appeal on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    because he did not have sole responsibility for his  children  and  his
    immigration status and the use of aliases weighs against him.  He found
    that the interests of the appellant's children were such that it  would
    be disproportionate to remove the respondent.

5.   Dissatisfied with that decision the claimant  sought  and  was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The claimant points out in
    her grounds that the judge had failed to consider the respondent's case
    under the Immigration Rules prior to making an assessment under Article
    8 outside those Rules.

6.   In addressing me today Mr Clark suggested that the  whole  approach  of
    the judge was wrong and fell foul of  the  guidance  given  in  SSHD  v
    Bossade [2015] UKUT 00415 and SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.
    Judge Baldwin should, he suggested, have first  considered  whether  or
    not the respondent could bring himself within the Immigration Rules and
    then considered whether there were any compelling circumstances such as
    would permit the judge to  allow  the  respondent's  Article  8  appeal
    outside the Rules.  The proportionality consideration undertaken by the
    judge was flawed, he suggested, because the public interest needs to be
    considered in the light of the Rules.

7.   Mr Solomon urged me to find that there was no error and suggested  that
    the judge had considered the Immigration Rules at paragraphs 16 and  25
    of the determination and was entitled to conclude at paragraph 25  that
    the respondent could not satisfy the Rules and to go on  to  find  that
    the respondent's removal would be  proportionate.   He  suggested  that
    there  is  a  muddling  of  the  consideration   of   the   Article   8
    proportionality,  but  the   judge   has   nonetheless   undertaken   a
    proportionality exercise and noted that the  respondent  and  his  wife
    have not only different nationalities,  but  also  different  religions
    such that he is a citizen of Pakistan and a Muslim and cannot  live  in
    India and his wife is  a  Sikh  and  a  citizen  of  India  and  cannot
    therefore live in Pakistan.  It would be impossible for  them  to  live
    elsewhere.  They have two children aged 4 and 10 who are  both  British
    subjects and the judge was entitled to proceed as he did.

8.   Counsel relied on the decision of  the  President  sitting  with  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Frances  in  Treebhawon  and  others  (section  117B(6))
    [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC) and  suggested  that  what  the  judge  had  done
    complied with  that  decision  although  that  decision  had  not  been
    promulgated at the date of the judge's determination.

9.   In response to Mr Clark suggested that the judge had erred and  pointed
    out that in Treebhawon the  Tribunal  were  considering  the  situation
    where the First-tier Tribunal had applied the Immigration  Rules.   The
    circumstances not covered by the Rules had not been considered  because
    the judge had simply taken Section 117B(6) to enable  him  to  consider
    the matter outside  the  Rules.   However,  the  Rules  must  first  be
    considered to identify those  matters  which  need  to  be  taken  into
    consideration in considering whether there are compelling circumstances
    such as would justify a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

10.  I find that the judge did err in law for the reasons clearly  given  by
    Mr Clark and that his error cannot be said not to be material.  It  may
    well be that if the appellant's appeal is considered correctly by first
    considering his entitlement under the Rules that  the  same  conclusion
    may result.  Nonetheless I believe that in dealing with the  matter  in
    the way in which Judge Baldwin did he has erred  and  I  am  minded  to
    remit to the First-tier.

Notice of Decision

I therefore remit this appeal to be heard by the First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
judge other than Alan J M Baldwin.

No anonymity direction is made.





Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
