
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05166/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20 August 2015                    |On 25 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                      MISS NIRIA MARIA HERRERA AGUDELO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rene, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

    1. The Appellant is a national of Colombia.  She arrived in the UK on 11
       April 2000 with leave as a visitor.  On 10 June 2013, she applied for
       leave to remain as the parent of a person present and settled in  the
       UK.  The Respondent refused her application on 18 December  2013  and
       she was thereafter given notice of removal which gave her a right  of
       appeal.

    2. The Appellant was born on 20 July 1946 and is therefore now  aged  69
       years.  She has two adult children,  Reinaldo  Velazquez  and  Sandra
       Velazquez.  Both are resident and settled in the UK.   The  Appellant
       lives with Reinaldo,  who,  however,  works  away  during  the  week.
       Reinaldo has a child of a previous relationship, Jacob, who was  born
       on 8 February 1999 and is therefore now aged 16.  He lives  with  his
       mother but stays with his father and grandmother every  week  or  two
       for the weekend.  His grandmother looks after him, cooks for him  and
       the two have a close, loving relationship.   Sandra  Velazquez  lives
       with her own family in a property separately to the  Appellant.   She
       has two children.  Daniela was born on 12 December 1996  and  is  now
       aged 18 years.  Angelica was born on 22 January 2012.   The  evidence
       is that Sandra and the children see the Appellant every week and they
       have a strong bond.  The Appellant took Daniela to  and  from  school
       between the ages of 5 and 12 years (therefore some 6 years ago).

    3. The Appellant has an elder brother in Colombia.  She  has  occasional
       telephone contact with him but  they  are  not  close.   He  has  two
       children living in Colombia.  The Appellant has no property or assets
       in the UK or Colombia.  She is financially supported by her son  with
       whom she lives and who is able  to  meet  all  her  financial  needs,
       including paying for private healthcare.

    4. The Appellant's appeal came before First-Tier Tribunal Judge Grice on
       19 March 2015.  It was accepted that the Appellant could not meet the
       requirement of the Rules on which  she  relied.   The  appeal  turned
       therefore on Article 8 ECHR and whether the Appellant's removal would
       breach her human rights.   The Judge accepted the evidence as set out
       at [2] and [3] above but found that the Appellant was unable to  meet
       the Rules as set out in Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.  She went on
       to consider Article 8 ECHR  outside  the  Rules  but  held  that  the
       decision to remove  the  Appellant  was  not  disproportionate.   The
       appeal was therefore dismissed in a decision promulgated on 27  March
       2015 ("the Decision").

    5. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Nicholson on the basis that the  Judge  should  have  considered  the
       Appellant's case on the basis of both family  and  private  life  and
       that  the  Judge  had  not  considered  the  best  interests  of  the
       Appellant's grandchildren.   The Judge found that the  other  grounds
       were less meritorious but did not confine the  grant  of  permission.
       The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to determine  whether  the
       First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law.




Submissions

    6. Mr Rene drew my attention to [62] of the  Decision  where  the  Judge
       indicated that "this is a private life appeal with weak  evidence  to
       support it".   That  was  inconsistent  with  [58]  where  the  Judge
       accepted that the Appellant's close ties were "almost entirely in the
       UK".  The  Respondent  and  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is
       entirely financially dependent on her adult son in the UK.  That,  Mr
       Rene submits, falls squarely within the test laid  down  in  Kugathas
       for dependency going beyond the usual ties between adults.  The Judge
       should therefore have considered family life as well as private life.
        If the Judge had done so, she would have  to  consider  the  factors
       cumulatively under both family and private life and her failure to do
       so amounted to a material error of law.

    7. Mr Rene also submitted that the Judge erred at [74] by speculating as
       to the burden which the Appellant might be to the State if leave were
       granted.  He submitted that, as a  dependent  relative,  her  sponsor
       would be required to sign a form providing financial sponsorship.   I
       pointed out that the Appellant  could  not  succeed  as  a  dependent
       relative and whilst leave would be granted, if she succeeded, on  the
       basis that she should not have recourse to public funds,  this  would
       not generally preclude access to  the  NHS.   Mr  Rene  pointed  out,
       though, that the evidence was that in the  past  when  the  Appellant
       experienced health problems, her son paid for private treatment [23].
        He therefore submitted that the Judge had embarked on  impermissible
       speculation.

    8. Turning to the Appellant's relationship with  her  grandchildren,  he
       submitted that the Judge had not considered section  55.   The  Judge
       noted that the children's parents are in the UK [51] and  noted  that
       there would be impact on the grandchildren at  [45]  and  [46].   The
       Appellant plays an important role in the lives of her  grandchildren.
        Section 55 should therefore be considered.

    9. In relation to section 117B,  Mr  Rene  submitted  that  due  to  the
       Appellant's age, she would  not  be  required  to  be  proficient  in
       English in order to settle in the UK and therefore the Judge erred in
       taking the fact she speaks no or little  English  into  account  when
       considering the public interest.  I noted  that  this  was  a  rather
       different consideration, namely whether the Appellant would  be  able
       to integrate and the fact that there would be no  formal  requirement
       to obtain an English language certificate under  the  Rules  did  not
       seem to me to mean that this was not a factor which could and  should
       be taken into account when considering the public interest.

   10. Mr Walker submitted that  the  Judge  had  properly  considered  both
       family and private life.  He drew my attention to the  conclusion  at
       [76] that removal would be a  proportionate  response  when  balanced
       against both private and family life.  Consideration was given to the
       impact on the Appellant's family at [75] and the Judge noted at  [70]
       that there was an issue whether there  was  family  or  private  life
       before going on to consider proportionality.

   11.  In  relation  to  the  grandchildren's  best  interests,  Mr  Walker
       submitted that the Appellant's direct family i.e.  her  children  are
       now adults (as noted  at  [65]).   The  welfare  of  the  Appellant's
       grandchildren lies with the parents who care for them.   He  accepted
       however that when looking  at  family  life,  that  family  life  was
       enjoyed with all the family and not just with the adult son  on  whom
       the Appellant is dependent.   He submitted though that, in any event,
       consideration of family life in addition to private  life  would  not
       affect the proportionality balance.  The Appellant was  supported  by
       her son before she came to the UK and the Judge noted that this would
       continue if she returned [75].

   12. In response to a question from me and in reply, Mr Rene  very  fairly
       accepted that he was not saying that the outcome would necessarily be
       any different if family life and section 55 were  considered  but  he
       submitted that the errors were material because it was possible  that
       I could reach a different view and conclude that  there  would  be  a
       breach of Article 8 when considering the close  family  relationships
       and the fact that the Appellant  had  developed  those  relationships
       over a period of fourteen to fifteen years.

   13. Both representatives accepted that, if I were to  find  an  error  of
       law, I could go on and re-make the decision.  There was  accepted  to
       be  no  need  for  any  further  evidence,  there  was  no  issue  of
       credibility in relation to the evidence and there  was  no  need  for
       further submissions as those made to the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       were fairly recorded in the Decision and  I  had  heard  all  further
       submissions about the correctness of the Decision in the  context  of
       the error of law submissions.

   14. I indicated that I would reserve my decision in relation  to  whether
       there is an error of law in the Decision and would provide that  with
       reasons and would also re-make the decision with reasons in the event
       that I found a material error of law.  I therefore turn to  do  that.



Error of law decision and reasons

   15. After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral submissions, I
       am satisfied that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Decision  involved  the
       making of an error of law.

   16. The Judge did not properly consider whether  there  exists  a  family
       life which deserved to be given due consideration in  the  Article  8
       proportionality balance.  There are references to family life in  the
       conclusion at [76] and at [70] and [71] when referring to the  Razgar
       test.  However, I  cannot  find  on  the  basis  of  the  very  brief
       consideration of the impact on the Appellant's family at  [75]  that,
       even if the Judge thought that family  life  was  relevant,  she  has
       properly considered it.  I also find that the Judge erred in  failing
       to consider section 55 when looking at the impact of removal  of  the
       Appellant on her minor grandchildren.  It  may  be  that  this  is  a
       further indication that the Judge did not consider family life to  be
       relevant.

   17. In this case, the Appellant is clearly entirely financially dependent
       on her son (as indeed she appears  to  have  been  when  she  was  in
       Colombia).  There is therefore an additional  dependency  beyond  the
       usual emotional ties which justifies a finding that the Appellant has
       family life with her adult son.  It would  be  artificial  for  these
       purposes to find that family  life  is  only  with  that  son  and  I
       therefore accept Mr Walker's concession  both  that  this  case  does
       require consideration of the Appellant's family life  and  that  this
       family life is with her whole family.

   18. I do not accept that there is any error in the Judge's  consideration
       of the relevant section 117B factors but that is  irrelevant  in  any
       event in light of the above findings as I  will  need  to  reconsider
       section 117B when re-making the decision as family life will now need
       to be encompassed in the balance with the public interest.

Decision and reasons

   19. Having found an error of law, I therefore set aside the Decision  and
       proceed to re-make it.  The representatives agreed  that  no  further
       evidence was required and the  Judge  found  the  Appellant  and  her
       family entirely credible.  I have therefore taken into  account  when
       re-making the decision, the evidence as set out at [13]  to  [48]  of
       the Decision.  I have also read and taken into  account  the  written
       statements of the Appellant, her son Reinaldo, her  daughter  Sandra,
       her granddaughter Daniela, the letter from her grandson Jacob and the
       documents in the  Appellant's  bundle.   I  do  not  repeat  what  is
       recorded in the Decision but I do note that in fact the  relationship
       between the Appellant and her now  adult  granddaughter  is  probably
       closer than the Judge recorded as it is said that Daniela lived  with
       her uncle and grandmother between the ages of 5 and 12 years so  that
       the bond  between  them  is  probably  even  closer  than  the  Judge
       recorded.

   20. I accept that the Appellant has a close family life with her children
       and grandchildren.  I also find that in the fifteen  years  that  she
       has lived in the UK she will  have  developed  a  private  life  here
       although I find that the evidence shows that this is intertwined with
       and inseparable from her family life as her life  generally  revolves
       around her relationships with her children and grandchildren.   There
       is no evidence of interaction with friends or  the  wider  community.
       She does not speak English which is bound to  make  such  interaction
       difficult.  I accept also that, in Colombia she  has  few  relations,
       limited it appears to her brother and his family with  whom  she  has
       little contact.  She would also find it difficult to reintegrate  and
       to survive financially although her son has indicated that  he  would
       continue to maintain her as he used to do.

   21. I accept that removal of the Appellant will  impact  on  her  family.
       Both her son and daughter very understandably wish her to  remain  in
       the UK and express concern about her future if returned to  Colombia.
       Her grandson, Jacob, notes that his grandmother  cooks  for  him  and
       does his washing when he visits his father and her  at  weekends  and
       that he would be "extremely happy" if she could stay.  He  also  says
       that it would be difficult for him to travel to Colombia so he  would
       completely lose the connection with her. I find  that  this  probably
       overstates the position as his father has visited his grandmother  in
       Colombia from the UK and could no doubt do so again and take his  son
       with him.  Jacob is also now aged 16 years and  within  a  few  years
       will be an independent adult who could take the opportunity to  visit
       his grandmother in her home country.   However, I accept that  travel
       to Colombia for the family members in the UK is costly  and  involves
       travelling a significant distance so that visits would  probably  not
       be frequent.

   22. Daniela lived with her grandmother for seven years of  her  life  and
       she therefore understandably considered her "like  a  mother"  during
       those years.  She sees her grandmother on a weekly basis.   She  says
       that she does not want her grandmother to be removed and is concerned
       about the lack of family in Colombia to look after the  Appellant  in
       her old age.  Daniela is of course no longer a child but I  recognise
       that the removal of the Appellant would impact on her  no  less  just
       because she has reached adulthood.  She is though now of an age where
       she could visit her grandmother  on  her  own  if  her  circumstances
       allow.

   23. In relation to section 55, the Appellant's removal would  undoubtedly
       have an adverse impact on Jacob and Angelica who the  Appellant  also
       sees on a weekly basis.  Angelica is at a very young age and  may  be
       less affected;  there  is  no  evidence  about  the  care  which  the
       Appellant gives to Angelica beyond visits.  However,  I  accept  that
       there would still be some impact.  Best interests  are  of  course  a
       primary although not the primary  consideration.  In  terms  of  best
       interests, whilst I do not doubt the  genuineness  of  the  affection
       which the Appellant's grandchildren have for her and  she  for  them,
       and that they would prefer for her to stay in  the  UK,  I  am  quite
       unable to find that removal would significantly  interfere  with  the
       grandchildren's best interests.  None of them live with the Appellant
       on a permanent basis and their main  carers  are  their  own  parents
       (Sandra in the case of Daniela and Angelica and Catherine  and  to  a
       more limited extent Reinaldo in the case of Jacob).   That  situation
       will continue  without  any  real  disruption  if  the  Appellant  is
       removed. In any event, the  best  interests  of  a  child,  whilst  a
       primary consideration, can  be  outweighed  by  other  countervailing
       interests which I  consider  below  in  the  context  of  the  public
       interest.

   24. Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  protects  the
       right to private and family life. However,  it  is  not  an  absolute
       right. The state is able to lawfully interfere  with  an  appellant's
       private and family life as long as it is pursuing  a  legitimate  aim
       and it is necessary and proportionate in all the circumstances of the
       case. The starting point is the basic principle that a state has  the
       right to control  the  entry  and  residence  of  people  within  its
       borders.  There  is  a  strong  public  interest  in  maintaining  an
       effective system of immigration control. The immigration rules, which
       set out the requirements for leave to enter and remain in the UK, are
       the main  guide  to  what  decisions  are  likely  to  be  considered
       reasonable and proportionate. It is still  possible  for  cases  that
       fall outside those requirements to engage the operation of Article  8
       but  only  if  there  are  compelling  circumstances  that  are   not
       sufficiently recognised under the immigration rules: see Huang v SSHD
       [2007] UKHL 11, Patel & Others v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  72,  R  (on  the
       application of MM & Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and SS (Congo)
       v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

   25. The Appellant cannot succeed  under  Appendix  FM  to  and  paragraph
       276ADE of the Immigration Rules. It is not suggested that there would
       be "very significant obstacles" to reintegration in Colombia for  the
       purposes of paragraph 276ADE.  The Respondent did  not  dispute  that
       the Appellant's Article 8 claim  should  be  considered  outside  the
       Rules and there are elements of her claim which cannot adequately  be
       considered within the confines of the Rules (particularly in relation
       to family life).  I therefore turn to consider whether removal  would
       breach the Appellant's Article 8 rights when considered  outside  the
       Immigration Rules.

   26. In the case of Razgar, Lord Bingham set out a step by  step  approach
       to the consideration of an Article 8 challenge to removal as follows:-



           (1)   Will the proposed removal be an interference by  a  public
                authority with the exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
                respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

             2) If so, will such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
                gravity as potentially engage the operation of Article 8?

             3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

             4) If so,  is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
                society in the interests of national security, public safety
                or  the  economic  well-being  of  the  country,   for   the
                prevention of disorder  or  crime,  for  the  protection  of
                health or morals, or for the protection of  the  rights  and
                freedoms of others?

             5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the  legitimate
                public end sought to be achieved."

   27. In this case, the first four questions are clearly to be answered  in
       the affirmative.  The only issue which remains, therefore, is whether
       removal is proportionate when the Appellant's private and family life
       as set out above is balanced against  the  public  interest  in  this
       case.

   28. In relation to the public interest, Parliament introduced via section
       19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  a  number  of  public  interest
       considerations to which I am bound to have  regard  when  considering
       whether an immigration decision breaches a person's Article 8 rights.
          Those  are  set  out  at  sections  117A-B  of  the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as follows:-

           Article 8 of the ECHR: public interest considerations

           117A  Application of this Part

           (1)   This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

           (a)   breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                 family life under Article 8, and

           (b)   as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
                 Rights Act 1998.

           (2)   In considering the public interest question, the court or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

           (a)   in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
      117B, and

           (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                 to the considerations listed in section 117C.

           (3)   In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
           the question of whether an interference with a person's right to
           respect for private and family life is justified under Article
           8(2).

           117B  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
      all cases

           (1)   The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
           the public interest.

           (2)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

           (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

           (3)   It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
           financially independent, because such persons-

           (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

           (4)   Little weight should be given to-

           (a)   a private life, or

           (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
                 established by a person at a time when the person is in the
                 United Kingdom unlawfully.

           (5)   Little weight should be given to a private life
           established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
           status is precarious.

           (6)   In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-



           (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

           (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom.

   29. As section 117B(1) makes clear, maintenance of effective  immigration
       control is in the public interest.  In this case, as the Judge  noted
       in the Decision, the Appellant and her  family  gave  a  very  honest
       account as to the Appellant's immigration history.  She came  to  the
       UK as a visitor with a clear intention not  to  return  to  Colombia.
       She accepts that she lied to the immigration officer on entry and she
       knew it was wrong for her to stay.  Her son admitted that he had  not
       made any application on the  Appellant's  behalf  shortly  after  her
       leave expired or indeed for a further thirteen years because,  as  he
       candidly accepted, "she was too young and was unlikely to be accepted
       - [they] would not be able to demonstrate a strong family  connection
       in such a short space of time".

   30. Section 117B(2) also weighs against the Appellant.  I do  not  accept
       Mr Rene's submission that the public interest in  a  person  speaking
       English is reduced or irrelevant in this case because the Rules would
       not require the Appellant to be proficient in order to  settle.   The
       purpose of section 117B(2) is to set out the public interest in those
       being allowed to remain in  the  UK  being  able  to  integrate  into
       society.  I fully accept that the consideration at section 117B(2)(a)
       may be less relevant in this case as that is aimed at the  impact  of
       an (in)ability to speak English on a person's  employment  prospects.
       Due to the Appellant's age there is no suggestion that she  would  be
       able to work.  However, I consider that the Appellant's inability  to
       speak English is a factor which does weigh in the balance against her
       in relation to her ability to integrate.  I also note that  there  is
       no evidence of the Appellant's integration into  UK  society  in  the
       fifteen years that she has  been  in  the  UK  which  reinforces  the
       relevance of this factor in the public interest.

   31. Section 117B(3) is largely neutral in this case.   The  Appellant  is
       not, strictly speaking, financially independent as she is  completely
       reliant on her son to maintain her.  It is also possible that,  given
       her advanced age, she would need to have increasing recourse  to  the
       NHS in the coming years although to date she has not and when she has
       needed healthcare, her son has paid for this  privately.   That  does
       not though mean to say that she would not have need  for  the  public
       health service or even recourse  to  benefits,  particularly  if  her
       son's circumstances  were  to  change.   Clearly  she  could  not  be
       expected to work at her  age.   Even  if  she  is  considered  to  be
       financially independent and would not have recourse to  public  funds
       in the future, this factor does not weigh in the  Appellant's  favour
       as a  positive consideration in the public interest balance  (see  AM
       (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).

   32. Sections 117B(4) and (5) are of particular importance in  this  case.
       As set out at [29] above, this is a case where the Appellant with the
       assistance of her family  have flouted UK immigration  laws,  knowing
       that they were doing so and have deliberately delayed  in  making  an
       application for leave to allow the Appellant to build up a family and
       private life in the UK whilst here unlawfully.  They knew  full  well
       that her presence has been unlawful and deliberately  did  not  apply
       for leave sooner on the basis that they did  not  consider  that  she
       could succeed until she was older and had formed closer ties  in  the
       UK.  In those circumstances, I give little weight to the  family  and
       private life which I have set out at [20] to [23] above.

   33. I have carefully considered the Appellant's family and private  life,
       and also the impact of her removal on her family in the UK.   I  take
       account of the closeness of the relationships which the Appellant has
       in the UK and that she does not have  close  relatives  in  Colombia.
       She would of course be able to continue her ties with her  family  in
       the UK via modern means of communication but that is not the same  as
       day to day contact in person.  Her family would be able to visit  her
       in Colombia and she may  be  able  to  visit  the  UK  (although  her
       immigration history may well make that difficult).   Removal  of  the
       Appellant would no doubt be upsetting for her family in  the  UK.   I
       also take account of the fact that it would be very difficult for her
       to reintegrate in Colombia but she would have the  financial  support
       of her son, she speaks the language and would be able to make friends
       and possibly re-establish contact with her brother and his family.

   34. Removal  of  the  Appellant  will  undoubtedly  interfere  to  a  not
       insignificant extent with her family and private life and will impact
       also  on  her  family  members  in  the  UK   including   her   minor
       grandchildren. However, taking account of all of  the  considerations
       set out at [20] to [23] above and weighing in the balance the  public
       interest considerations set out at [28] to [32] above,  I  find  that
       removal of the Appellant is nonetheless a proportionate response when
       weighed against the maintenance of immigration control.  I  therefore
       dismiss this appeal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the decision

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it. For the avoidance  of
any doubt, I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
rights grounds.


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
