
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05566/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th January 2016                 |On 29th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR MD FARID AHMED
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Home office presenting officer)
For the Claimant: Mr M Hasan (Kalam solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
there is a material error of law in the decision and reasons  of  the  First
Tier Tribunal (Judge T. Jones) (FtT)  promulgated  on  31st  July  2015,  in
which the FtT allowed the appeal under the Immigration rules, to the  extent
that the matter was remitted to the Secretary of State for reconsideration.



Background

2.   The Claimant made an application  for  leave  under  the  Points  based
scheme, Tier 4 (general).  The Secretary of State  refused  the  application
on the grounds that the Claimant failed to  provide  bank  statements  (with
the application) that showed funds were available for the  specified  period
of 28 days.  At the hearing the Claimant produced the  bank  statements  fro
the relevant period.

3.   The FtT considered the position at the  date  of  the  application  and
found that the Claimant failed to meet the rules as  to  finance.   However,
the FtT went on to find that the Secretary of State ought  to  have  allowed
the  additional  bank  statements  under  the  evidential  flexibility  rule
245AA(b)(iv), and decided that the decision was not  in accordance with  the
law.

Grounds of application for permission

4.   The Secretary of State argued that the FtT  erred  in  law  by  finding
that the evidential flexibility rules were applicable.

Permission granted

5.   Permission was granted on the grounds  that  the  FtT  misapplied  Rule
245AA and failed to recognise that the absence  of  the  financial  evidence
for the 28 day period was fatal to the appeal.

Submisssions

6.   Both representatives made submissions which are recorded in the  Record
of proceedings.

Discussion and conclusion

7.   The main focus in this appeal is the applicability of  paragraph  245AA
of the Immigration rules, known as the evidential flexibility  rule.   I  am
satisfied that the FtT erred in misapplying that rule and  considering  that
it was capable  of  rectifying  an  application  that  failed  to  meet  the
specified requirements for a Tier 4 application.   The  Claimant  failed  to
provide evidence of his  bank  statements  covering  the  specified  28  day
period with his application for leave.  Although  he  produced  the  further
evidence at the date of hearing, the FtT could  not  take  it  into  account
pursuant  to  section  85A  Nationality,  Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002.
Paragraph 245 allows for evidence to be  admitted  where  it,  for  example,
forms part of a sequence that is missing, is  in  the  wrong  format,  is  a
copy, and  does  not  contain  all  of  the  specified  information.   I  am
satisfied that the  Claimant  failed  to  provide  the  requisite  specified
documents with his application and which was  fatal to his  application  and
which the Secretary of State correctly refused.  The Secretary of State  was
under no duty under paragraph 245AA or otherwise  to  contact  the  Claimant
seeking the specified documents that  were  missing.   Whilst  acknowledging
that the bank statements failed to cover the period by a  short  time  only,
nevertheless the Rules were not met. The decision taken by the Secretary  of
State was entirely lawful.

Decision

8.   There is a material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision,  which
shall be set aside.

I remake the decision on the evidence that was before the FtT.

There is no need for any further hearing before this Tribunal.

The appeal is dismissed on Immigration grounds as the documentary  evidence,
in the form of the bank statements, did not meet  the  requirements  of  the
rules as at the relevant time.




                               Signed   Date 29.1.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER
                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 29.1.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


