
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05882/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27 June 2014                                 |On 2 July 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                             miss mashuda aktar
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L.Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Borsada sitting on 27  March  2014)  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal on the papers against the decision by the  respondent
    to refuse to vary her leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4
    Student Migrant.  Permission to appeal on  error  of  law  grounds  was
    granted by Judge Cruthers on 12 May 2014. The First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not make an anonymity order, and I do not consider that such  an  order
    is required for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The application made on 1 June 2013 was refused on 20 January 2014. The
    ground of refusal was that the claimant had  claimed  30  points  under
    Appendix A for a valid CAS.  The  Tier  4  Sponsor  register  had  been
    checked on 20 January 2014, and Mancunia College was not listed  as  of
    this date. As she had not provided a valid CAS, the SSHD was  not  able
    to assess whether she met the requirements for  maintenance,  and  thus
    whether she was entitled to the award of points under Appendix C.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The evidence before Judge Borsada was that the  claimant  had  received
    notification at the end of October 2013 from the  Home  Office  of  the
    revocation of the licence of Mancunia College, and she had  varied  her
    application for leave to remain in consequence of this notification  by
    obtaining a new CAS from a different sponsor, which she  had  submitted
    to the Home Office within 60 days.

 4. Judge Borsada found that the SSHD had given the  claimant  60  days  to
    obtain a new CAS by letter dated 29 October 2013, and that the claimant
    had provided "that information" within the allotted time. He could find
    no valid reason why the  application  was  rejected,  and  allowed  the
    appeal.

Reasons for Finding an Error Of Law

 5. There is no error of law challenge by the SSHD to the implicit  finding
    by the judge that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law
    because the claimant had provided evidence that she had obtained a  new
    CAS in December 2013. Accordingly, as Mr Tarlow accepts, the SSHD ought
    to have taken into account the new CAS when making a  decision  on  the
    claimant's application, and the SSHD was wrong to treat the claimant as
    continuing to rely on an old CAS issued by Mancunia College.

 6. The judge's error lies solely  in  him  allowing  the  appeal  outright
    instead of allowing it on the ground  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, and  remitting  the  application  for  further
    consideration by the SSHD in the light of the new CAS.   The  SSHD  had
    hitherto made no assessment as to whether the claimant had provided the
    specified evidence to show that she met the maintenance requirement  in
    Appendix C., and it was not open to the judge to usurp the role of  the
    primary decision-maker on this issue. Furthermore, he did  not  purport
    to do so. No finding is made on the topic of  maintenance.    Thus  the
    only possible outcome, following the  finding  that  the  claimant  had
    provided a valid CAS within the 60 day period afforded to  her  by  the
    SSHD, was that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  outright  the  claimant's
appeal against the refusal of leave to remain contained  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision is set aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's  appeal  is  allowed  on  the  ground  that  the
decision appealed against is not in accordance with the law,  and  a  lawful
decision on the claimant's varied application for leave to  remain  (relying
on a new CAS) is awaited. The claimant's application for leave to remain  as
a Tier 4 student migrant is remitted to the SSHD for further consideration.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
