
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05287/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2017                            |On 06 February 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

                              CECILE TIANARIVO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr S Stanton of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Ms R Moffatt of Counsel, instructed by ATLEU


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Madagascar, born on 1 September 1986.  On 10 September 2010 she arrived
    with entry clearance as a Domestic Worker which leave was  extended  on
    two occasions so as to expire on 25 March 2014.  In  time  she  made  a
    further application  which  was  refused  whereupon  she  made  another
    application which was  also  refused.   She  then  applied  to  make  a
    voluntary departure and stated she could not afford the ticket and  was
    then arrested. On 15 September 2014 she sought asylum on the basis that
    she was a victim of trafficking.

 2. She was referred to the Competent Authority which  decided  there  were
    reasonable grounds to believe she could be a victim of trafficking  but
    reached a conclusive grounds decision on 5 January  2015  that  on  the
    balance of probabilities she was not a victim of trafficking.

The Home Office Decision

 3. Also on 5 January 2015 the Applicant to whom  I  shall  refer  as  "the
    SSHD" refused her claim  for  international  surrogate  protection  and
    under Article 8 of the European Convention.

 4. The Respondent found the Applicant had not given a credible account  of
    the circumstances and basis for her claims that she would  be  at  risk
    and would not be able to integrate into life in Madagascar on return.

 5. On or about 6 February 2015 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended (the 2002 Act).  The  grounds  refer  to  the  solicitors  only
    having been instructed in the same week and not  having  been  able  to
    interview the Applicant in her first language.  The Applicant had  been
    interviewed by the SSHD in English.  The other grounds are formulaic or
    generic.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 6. The Applicant did not give oral testimony at the hearing  before  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Farmer on the basis of  advice  given  in  a
    report prepared by Dr E Walsh, a clinical psychologist.  There were  no
    other witnesses.

 7. The Judge concluded that  the  Applicant's  account  was  credible  and
    accepted the evidence of Dr Walsh.  She considered the  inconsistencies
    which  had  been  identified  in  her  account  did  not   damage   her
    credibility, referring to the Country Expert report of Dr L Freeman who
    found the Applicant would be at risk  on  return  to  Madagascar  as  a
    female former victim of trafficking.  She allowed the appeal on  asylum
    grounds and having done so purported to allow it also  on  humanitarian
    protection  grounds,  although  the  two  are,  in   effect,   mutually
    exclusive. She also allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  by
    reference to Article 3 of the European Convention.

 8. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the Judge  had
    failed to give adequate reasons for her findings on  material  matters;
    had  failed  to  address  the  apparent   inconsistency   between   the
    psychologist's report recommending that she did not give oral testimony
    and the Applicant's full articulation of her claim when interviewed  by
    the SSHD and her lengthy witness statements.  Further, until Dr Walsh's
    report of 24 February there had been no suggestion that  the  Applicant
    had medical or psychological issues.

 9. The SSHD was of the view that in the light  of  the  evidence  and  the
    Judge's failure to address  various  indentified  inconsistencies,  her
    reliance on the claimed exploitation of the Applicant and  her  medical
    condition was irrational and in any event was a material error of  law.



10. The Judge had failed to give reasons why she accepted  the  Applicant's
    testimony that she was not in contact with any family in Madagascar and
    would have no support on return was also an error of law.

11. On 12 December 2016 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Simpson  granted
    permission to appeal on the ground that there were issues  in  relation
    to Dr Walsh's report being submitted  very  late.  The  Judge  arguably
    ought to have subjected it to considerably more scrutiny than  she  did
    which together with the other grounds disclosed arguable errors of law.



The Upper Tribunal hearing

12. The Applicant was not present at the hearing.

Submissions for the SSHD

13. Mr Stanton for the SSHD relied on the detailed grounds for  appeal  and
    especially the paragraphs relating  to  the  Judge's  treatment  of  Dr
    Walsh's report and that in paragraphs 15 and 23 the Judge had not given
    reasons for her positive credibility finding and had not addressed  the
    inconsistencies raised by the SSHD in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

Submissions for the Applicant

14. Ms Moffatt relied on the response filed under Rule 24 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   The  response  includes  a
    statement by  Dr  Walsh  setting  out  her  academic  and  professional
    qualifications and experience.  The response asserts that  taking  into
    account Dr Walsh's experience the Judge was entitled  to  rely  on  her
    report including her diagnosis that the Applicant suffered  from  post-
    traumatic stress disorder.

15. The Judge had summarised the SSHD's reasons for refusal  at  paragraphs
    18 and 19 of her decision and having given detailed reasons for finding
    the Applicant to be credible was not required to make specific findings
    on every factual matter  in  dispute.   The  Applicant  relied  on  the
    decision in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC).



16. He continued that there was medical evidence before the Judge that  the
    Applicant suffered  from  depression  and  her  failure  to  produce  a
    psychologist's report until very shortly before the  appeal  was  heard
    should not be held against the Applicant.  There was no reason for  the
    Judge to have discounted Dr Walsh's report.  The Judge was entitled  to
    rely on the report and there was nothing in it which could be impugned.



17. The Judge did not need to make specific  credibility  findings  because
    she had summarised the Respondent's reasons for refusal  at  paragraphs
    18 and 19 of her decision and had then relied on the  medical  evidence
    at paragraph 23 of her decision.  She had addressed the inconsistencies
    at paragraphs 24 and 27 and the general credibility  findings  made  at
    paragraphs 22 and 29 were open to her.

18. Having found the Applicant credible, the Judge's findings that she  had
    no family from whom she could seek support on return to Madagascar were
    open to her.

Consideration and Conclusion

19. The Judge's summary of the main points  from  the  SSHD's  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter did not excuse her from the need to address those points
    or at least the more material ones.  This was particularly  so  because
    there was no oral testimony from the Applicant or anyone for her.

20. The Judge gave little or no reasons why she  accepted  the  Applicant's
    evidence as credible.  Referring to paragraphs  24-28  and  33  in  her
    decision, various findings of consistency are made but  consistency  is
    not the same as  credibility.   Further  and  more  importantly,  these
    findings do not adequately address the matters raised  in  the  reasons
    letter.

21. I take into account the learning in JL (medical reports -  credibility)
    China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC). Given the distinguished curriculum vitae
    disclosed in Dr Walsh's statement filed with the  Applicant's  Rule  24
    response, it is unfortunate that at least some of this was not included
    in Appendix C to her report.  Reference at the hearing was made to  the
    SSHD's policy about reports from the Helen Bamber Foundation  but  this
    report of Dr Walsh appears not to have been prepared under its auspices
    and therefore  the  guidance  will  have  no  application.   The  Judge
    evidently placed great weight on Dr Walsh's report but failed  to  give
    adequate reasons why or to direct herself that it was not the  function
    of Dr Walsh to assess the credibility of the Applicant.  That  was  the
    function of  the  Judge  and  her  decision  does  not  show  that  she
    adequately performed that function.  This is a material error of law.

22. Finally, the decision does not give a sufficiently reasoned explanation
    why the appeal was allowed so that the SSHD as the losing party was not
    adequately informed why she had lost.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law such that it should be set aside in its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    shall be heard afresh in its entirety.  It is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh in accordance with Section 12(2)(b) of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and paragraph 7.2 of the
    Senior President's Practice Statement of 10 February 2010 (as amended).



Anonymity

24. There was no request for an anonymity order  or  direction  and  having
    considered the appeal I do not find any is warranted.



SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.


    The appeal of the SSHD is to that extent allowed.


    No anonymity order or direction is made.



Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  02.
ii. 2017




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

