
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05864/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2016                             |On 11 May 2016                |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                ARSLAN AHMAD
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Schwenk of Counsel instructed by Whitestone
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Pickup,  promulgated  on  3  June  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse his application for an EEA residence card as confirmation of his
    right to reside in the United Kingdom.




 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "However, it is arguable that the judge has not given  adequate  weight
    to the evidence  that  the  parties  are  expecting  a  child  together
    (paragraph 18 of the decision) or the documentary  evidence  suggesting
    cohabitation.  It is also arguable that the judge has  failed  to  make
    findings on those matters."


 3. The Appellant and EEA Sponsor  attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  oral
    submissions from both representatives.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Schwenk submitted that there was a fundamental flaw in the decision
    in that the judge had applied the  burden  of  proof  incorrectly.   In
    paragraph [10] the judge referred to the burden of proof  the  shifting
    to the Appellant.  He had failed to distinguish between the  legal  and
    the evidential burden.  I was referred to the cases of Agho [2015] EWCA
    Civ 1198 and Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14, in particular paragraph  [13]  of
    Agho.  He submitted that the burden of  proof  did  not  shift  to  the
    Appellant to show that it  was  not  a  marriage  of  convenience.   It
    appeared that the judge had followed  the  case  of  IS  (marriages  of
    convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031.  Agho was clear that this case
    should not be followed.  Neither Agho nor Rosa changed  the  principles
    set down in Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).  He submitted that the  Respondent's  decision
    was wrong as it had quoted IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia.  I was
    referred to paragraph [7] of the decision.


 5. Mr. Schwenk submitted that the Respondent had  failed  to  provide  the
    interview record but at paragraph [15] to  [17]  of  the  decision  the
    judge gave weight to the interview.  I was referred to the case of Miah
    (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC).
     The interview had featured prominently  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter and in the decision.


 6. I was referred to paragraph [6] of Agho and the fact that  it  was  two
    limbed test.   First of all the marriage must have  been  entered  into
    for the purposes of gaining admission, and secondly it must  have  been
    entered into without the intention of  matrimonial  cohabitation.   The
    Respondent's case must be that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  not
    cohabiting, yet the judge had failed  to  consider  a  huge  amount  of
    evidence of cohabitation.  I was referred to pages 130 to  259  of  the
    bundle which were documentary evidence of cohabitation.


 7. At pages 72 to pages 85 was evidence that the Sponsor had been pregnant
    at the time of  the  hearing.   The  judge  had  referred  to  this  at
    paragraph [18].  It  was  a  very  short  decision  and  there  was  no
    explanation of on what basis the judge could reasonably  conclude  that
    the Appellant and Sponsor were not matrimonially cohabiting.


 8. There was an evidential burden on the Appellant to produce evidence  to
    counter the suspicion of the Respondent.  No reasonable judge could say
    that the Appellant had not done this.  The  Appellant  had  provided  a
    huge  bundle  of  documents  to  demonstrate   cohabitation   and   his
    relationship with the Sponsor.  However, the judge had addressed all of
    this in just one  paragraph,  [18].   This  was  inadequate  given  the
    complexity and depth of the evidence.


 9. With reference  to  paragraph  [19]  of  the  decision,  all  of  these
    applications had been granted, and all of them pre-dated the  marriage.
    This was an irrelevant consideration.  In summary,  he  submitted  that
    the error regarding the burden of proof was  so  fundamental  that  the
    whole decision was flawed.


10. Mr. McVeety submitted that permission had not been granted on the basis
    that the judge had applied the burden of proof incorrectly.  There  had
    been no application to amend the grounds of appeal which submitted that
    the judge had applied too high a burden  of  proof,  not  that  he  had
    incorrectly shifted the burden of proof.


11. Even if the amendment to the ground was  accepted,  paragraph  [19]  of
    Rosa provided that the evidential burden shifted to the  Appellant  and
    this is what the judge had done in paragraph [10].  The judge  had  not
    said whether it was the legal or evidential  burden,  and  it  was  not
    possible to read into paragraph [10] that the  judge  had  shifted  the
    legal burden of proof to the Appellant.  He submitted  that  the  judge
    had followed Papajorgji.


12. In relation to the interview record, the Appellant had  not  asked  for
    this document to be produced.  The case of Miah had not  been  referred
    to in the grounds of appeal.  It had not been argued in the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the interview record had not been provided.   It had  not
    been submitted that evidence of the interview could not be  relied  on.
    Even if the reasons for refusal letter had been  wrong,  that  was  not
    under appeal now.  There was no material error in the judge's  decision
    in respect of the interview record.  It could not be an error  for  the
    judge to rely on a document which had been unchallenged.


13. In relation to the requirements of  cohabitation,  I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 10 of Rosa.  There was no cohabitation consideration  in  EEA
    cases.  Cohabitation did not equal marriage.


14.  Mr.  McVeety  accepted  that  the  decision  had  not  considered  the
    documentation methodically.  However, nobody  had  ever  heard  of  the
    Marriage Investigation Bureau and the judge had rejected  the  evidence
    in relation to this.  He accepted  that  the  decision  was  brief  but
    submitted that it did not need to be lengthier.  The relevant time  for
    consideration of whether a marriage was a marriage of  convenience  was
    the intent at the beginning.  He submitted that paragraphs [11] to [16]
    contained findings which were open to the judge.  Paragraph [18] should
    not be considered in isolation.


15. In response Mr. Schwenk submitted that the burden  of  proof  had  been
    raised as an issue in the grounds of appeal but, if I was not with  him
    on that, it was Robinson obvious.  Agho and Rosa were not  out  at  the
    time that the grounds been drafted.  The decision letter  had  got  the
    law wrong, and the judge appeared to have adopted the same approach  as
    the reasons for refusal letter.  He accepted that there was a different
    definition of marriage of convenience in paragraph [10] of  Rosa  which
    did not set out a two stage test, and he  accepted  that  there  was  a
    tension there.   He  submitted  that  Papajorgji  and  Agho  should  be
    preferred for the definition of a marriage of convenience.


16. He submitted that the evidence of the pregnancy  was  important  as  it
    went to  the  matrimonial  cohabitation.   They  cohabited  before  the
    marriage and she was pregnant after marriage.  The situation after  the
    marriage could cast light on the intention of the parties at  the  date
    of the decision  and  this  was  significant  evidence  of  matrimonial
    cohabitation.  The nature of the relationship had not changed  and  the
    pregnancy was proof of that.


Error of law

17. It is fair to say that many of the  issues  argued  before  me  at  the
    hearing were not raised in the grounds  of  appeal,  and  some  of  the
    issues raised had not been raised at  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


18. The grounds of appeal did not submit that the  judge  had  shifted  the
    burden of proof from the Respondent to the Appellant when he should not
    have done, but instead submitted that the judge had  applied  a  higher
    burden of proof than he  should  have  done.   Paragraph  [10]  of  the
    decision states as follows:


    "I am satisfied that the Secretary of State has discharged the  initial
    burden of proof to show reasonable suspicion that this is a marriage of
    convenience and that therefore the burden shifts to  the  Appellant  to
    demonstrate on the balance of probabilities that it is not  a  marriage
    of convenience."


19. While the judge might have been clearer, I find that he is  aware  that
    the initial burden of proof rests on the Respondent  to  demonstrate  a
    reasonable suspicion that the marriage is a  marriage  of  convenience.
    It is also clear that he finds that the Respondent has discharged  this
    burden.  He has then stated that the burden shifts to the Appellant  to
    demonstrate that the marriage is not a marriage of convenience.  It  is
    true that the burden does shift to the Appellant at this point, but  it
    is an evidential burden rather than a legal  burden.   The  grounds  of
    appeal did not argue that the judge had shifted  the  legal  burden  of
    proof, and this point was raised for the first time at the hearing.


20. I find that it cannot be read from this paragraph that  the  judge  has
    shifted the legal burden to the Appellant rather  than  the  evidential
    burden.  However, be it legal or evidential, I find that his  treatment
    of the evidence provided by the Appellant to address  the  Respondent's
    concerns is inadequate.


21. I find that, in order to address the evidential burden,  the  Appellant
    provided extensive corroborative documentary evidence to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  As accepted  by  Mr.  McVeety,  this  was  not  methodically
    considered.  Paragraph [18] of the decision states:


    "I take into account the documentation suggesting cohabitation, and the
    photographs and other evidence, but that does not mean the marriage  is
    not one of convenience entered into for the sole purpose  of  remaining
    in the UK."


22. This one sentence is the extent of the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    documentary evidence  which  the  Appellant  provided.   The  Appellant
    provided in excess of 100 pages of documentation showing  cohabitation.
    The  judge  states   that   the   documentation   provided   "suggests"
    cohabitation, but he does not make a finding as to whether or  not  the
    Appellant and Sponsor  were  cohabiting.   Neither  does  he  make  any
    findings regarding the length of  time  for  which  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor cohabited.  I find that this failure adequately to consider the
    evidence, and the failure to make a finding as to whether  or  not  the
    Appellant and  Sponsor  were  living  together,  given  the  volume  of
    evidence provided by them, is an error of law.  I find that  the  judge
    has failed to consider the extent to which the documents provided  meet
    the evidential burden placed on the Appellant to address the reasonable
    suspicion of the Respondent, and he has failed to consider the evidence
    in the round.


23. It is also in paragraph [18] that the issue of the Sponsor's  pregnancy
    and her earlier miscarriage in 2014 is mentioned.   However  the  judge
    merely states that he has taken  these  matters  into  account  without
    making  any  finding  as  to  whether  or  not  they  are  evidence  of
    matrimonial cohabitation.  He has failed to explain why  he  has  given
    them no  weight.    This  failure  to  give  reasons  for  why  he  has
    attributed no weight to them is an error of law.


24. I have taken into account the judge's findings in  paragraphs  [11]  to
    [16], and it is of course correct that paragraph  [18]  should  not  be
    considered in isolation.  However, the judge has failed  to  take  into
    account the totality of the evidence.  He has failed  to  consider  his
    findings in relation to  the  oral  evidence  in  the  round  with  the
    documentary evidence, and the evidence of the pregnancy.  He has failed
    to explain why he has attributed no  weight  to  the  evidence  briefly
    referred to in paragraph [18].  I find that these errors  are  material
    given the nature of the Appellant's appeal.


25. In relation to paragraph [19], I accept Mr. Schwenk's  submission  that
    this is an irrelevant consideration given that the Appellant's previous
    applications for leave to remain were granted and that they related  to
    his position in the United Kingdom as a student.


26. Paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to the overriding objective,  I
    find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


27. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    it aside.


28. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 6 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

