
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05910/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 30 September 2014                          |on 1 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                ZEESHAN RASHID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) These are the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal:

    Ground 1


    1. At paragraph 4 the judge records that the eldest child, who was born
       in and lived in the United Kingdom all his life, is 9 years old (dob
       10  October  2014).   As  was  submitted  ...  that  child  has   an
       unassailable right to register as a  British  citizen  on  his  10th
       birthday if he remains in the United Kingdom until 19 July 2014 (see
       s.1(4) British Nationality Act 1981) and therefore is  the  relevant
       date, as the 19th July 2014 is  89  days  before  the  child's  10th
       birthday.  That is a matter of law  that  is  deemed  to  be  within
       Judicial Knowledge.  The judge should therefore have had  regard  to
       the fact that if the appellant successfully avoided removal for less
       than 4 months his child would be entitled to register as British.


    2. The judge should also have been aware  the  family  returns  process
       takes many months to effect removal.  On balance the child is likely
       to be in the United Kingdom on 19th July 2014.  The  issue  of  best
       interests was therefore not about  the  disruption  of  sending  his
       children to Pakistan but the double disruption of the children being
       sent to Pakistan and then returning with the other appellants on the
       basis of Zambrano.  The judge left those matters out of account  but
       they were material.  In so failing the judge erred in law.

    Ground 2


    3. At paragraph 49 the  judge  makes  references  to  Zoumbas.   In  PW
       (Petitioner) 2014 DSOH 64 (issued on the last day  for  lodging  the
       present application) it was said in relation to the matter  referred
       to in paragraph 49 of the decision in the present case:


           [29] Mr Komorowski (Counsel for the Secretary of State) advanced
           two somewhat contradictory arguments.  First, he submitted  that
           the decision of Lord Tyre was contrary to that  of  the  Supreme
           Court in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
           [2013] 1 WLR 3690.  In the course of discussion, I understood Mr
           Komorowski no longer to insist on that line.  He reverted to his
           second argument, which was that in  light  of  the  decision  in
           Zoumbas, whether or not that was consistent with IE, the law  on
           this matter was now clear and therefore did  not  amount  to  an
           important  point   of   principle   or   practice   upon   which
           clarification was needed.


           [30] It seems to me that ground 7 does raise an important  point
           of principle or practice.  The law does not appear to be  clear,
           as evidenced by the  fact  that  Mr  Komorowski  initially  took
           Zoumbas to be contrary to IE  before,  so  it  appeared  to  me,
           accepting that it was not.  In paragraph 39 of the FTT decision,
           the judge appears to accept that the best interests of the child
           "is a matter which has to  be  addressed  first  as  a  distinct
           enquiry" and that factors relating to the  public  interest  and
           the maintenance of effective immigration control must  not  form
           part of that  consideration.   But  that  is  not  the  same  as
           recognising that the best interests [of] the child should not be
           assessed on the basis that the parent will necessarily leave the
           UK.  If, as it seems to me there may be  standing  the  apparent
           difference between IE and Azimi-Moayed, there is uncertainty  on
           this point, or a difference of view, then it is something  which
           must be clarified.


    4.  ... in light of that passage the judge in the present case erred in
       law.


    Ground 3


    5. The judge erred at paragraph 50 in holding the primary focus of a  9
       year old child is his parents.


    Ground 4


    6. The judge at paragraph 50 and 52 placed undue weight  on  the  older
       child not being British when that  child  was  within  4  months  of
       having an unassailable right to British citizenship.

2) On 12 June 2014 I granted permission  to  appeal,  giving  the  following
   reasons:


    Judges are not expected  to  conjure  up  every  argument  which  might
    conceivably be made, in the absence of submission,  particularly  where
    an appellant has been professionally represented.  While this grant  of
    permission is not restricted, I doubt if there is a realistic  prospect
    of error of law being found to arise from the judge's failure  to  take
    the lines proposed at grounds 1 and 4.


    Ground 3 does not seem to be more than a disagreement.


    The points which appear to me  to  require  debate  before  answer  are
    whether there is any tension between IE (Petitioner)  [2013]  CSOH  142
    and Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UK UT00197 (IAC), and  whether  the  citation  from  PW
    illustrates any error in the application of Zoumbas by the FtT Judge.


3) Regarding grounds 1 and 4, Mr Mackay said there was mention in the First-
   tier Tribunal of the right in due course of the eldest child to apply for
   UK citizenship, although no  argument  was  developed  on  the  basis  of
   Zambrano.  The judge did not mention the point, which  was  an  error  of
   law.

4) As to ground 2, Mr Mackay said that there is a conflict  between  IE  and
   Azimi-Moayed.   In IE at paragraph 14 Lord Tyre said that  the  SSHD  was
   not entitled to proceed on the assumption of removal of the  parent  when
   assessing the best interests of the children.  The  judge  in  this  case
   failed to assess to assess whether it would be  in  the  children's  best
   interests to remain on the assumption their parents would be here.   That
   was logically the first question.

5) Mr Mackay had nothing to add to ground 3, and accepted that  on  its  own
   it would not disclose material error.  He submitted that grounds 1, 2 and
   4 disclosed error such that the  decision  needed  to  be  remade.   That
   should be approached on the basis that the best interests of the children
   would not be served by removal of  their  parents.   There  was  still  a
   proportionality issue, but it was not reasonable to remove a 10 year  old
   child who has been brought up here throughout his life,  attends  primary
   school, belongs to UK society, and will  shortly  be  in  a  position  to
   register  as  a  citizen.   Stability  and  continuity   in   educational
   provisions was desirable.  There was no compelling reason to disrupt that
   length of residence and depth of ties.

6) Mr Matthews submitted that grounds 3 and 4  are  only  disagreement  with
   the relative weight given  to  factual  matters  before  the  judge,  and
   disclose no legal error.  He criticised the proposition in ground 1  that
   a judge should not decide a case on the facts  as  they  stood,  when  no
   member of the family was a citizen or entitled to register  as  such.   A
   judge should decide as if  his  decision  will  be  accepted  and  become
   effective, not on the assumption of  further  resistance  and  delay.   A
   similar argument was rejected in IE.  Ground 2 might gain  some  traction
   from PW, but that case was the subject of a reclaiming  motion,  and  the
   point was resolved by Zoumbas.  IE was referred to by both sides  in  the
   Supreme Court in Zoumbas, where the Court had not called upon the SSHD to
   reply.  The point had not been overlooked, and Zoumbas did not leave  any
   real doubt.  The same challenge as in this ground of appeal was  recorded
   at paragraph 3 (iv), and rejected at paragraphs 24 - 25.   There  was  no
   conflict among the authorities binding  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which
   correctly applied Zoumbas from paragraph 48 onwards of the determination.
    In assessing the best interests of the  children,  the  judge  correctly
   excluded the conduct of the parents. The judge was entitled to take  that
   factor into account in the eventual proportionality assessment,  and  the
   immigration history was an unedifying one, including a fraudulent  asylum
   claim, an attempt to blame that on a  solicitor,  going  to  ground,  and
   working unlawfully.

7) I asked Mr Matthews what would follow from a finding that  the  interests
   of the children should firstly have been assessed on the assumption their
   parents would remain.  He submitted that while no doubt it  would  be  in
   the best interests  of  the  children  to  be  with  their  parents,  the
   proportionality assessment would eventually be the same.

8) Mr Mackay in reply said that as to the right  to  citizenship  this  case
   was stronger that IE, where that was not assured and  lay  years  in  the
   future.  In this case the matter did not depend  on  any  discretion  but
   within a short time would become an entitlement.  That was strong  enough
   to be a factor in the proportionality assessment, even at the date of the
   First-tier Tribunal decision.

9) I reserved my determination.

10)  I do not think the prospect of  the  elder  child  registering  in  the
   future as a British citizen is  a  significant  matter  which  the  judge
   failed to take into account.  The point was canvassed, but a  judge  does
   not have to record every detail.  It is correct in  principle  to  decide
   cases on the facts as  they  stand  at  date  of  decision,  not  on  the
   assumption that the result will be resisted into the future.

11) Neither in the First-tier Tribunal nor in the Upper Tribunal  was  there
   any attempt to substantiate the proposition that  there  is  a  principle
   stated in Zambrano which will entitle this family as a whole to return to
   the UK.

12) I do not think that Zoumbas leaves any  significant  doubt.   The  point
   now argued did not help the appellants in  that  case.   The  judge  here
   meticulously applied Zoumbas at paragraphs 48 -53.

13) Even if the question should firstly  have  been  asked,  how  would  the
   interests of the children best be served if their parents remain here,  I
   do not think that difference of approach would be  an  illuminating  one.
   Without doubt the interests of the  children  would  best  be  served  by
   remaining with their parents either in the UK or  in  Pakistan,  and  the
   eventual proportionality issue is the same.

14) I am fortified in that view by a case in the Court of  Appeal  to  which
   Mr Matthews made passing reference, EV (Phillipines) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
   Civ 874.  The following is from the judgement of Christopher Clarke LJ:
   1. More important for present purposes is to know how the tribunal should
      approach the proportionality exercise if it has  determined  that  the
      best interests of the child or children are that they should  continue
      with their education in England. Whether or not it is in the interests
      of a child to continue his or her education in England may  depend  on
      what assumptions one makes as to what happens to  the  parents.  There
      can be cases where it is in the child's best interests  to  remain  in
      education in the UK, even though one or both parents  did  not  remain
      here. In the present case, however, I take the  FTT's  finding  to  be
      that it was in the best interests of the children  to  continue  their
      education in England with both parents living here. That assumes  that
      both parents are here. But the best interests of the child are  to  be
      determined by reference to the child alone without  reference  to  the
      immigration history or status of either parent.
   1. In determining whether or not, in a case such as the present, the need
      for immigration control outweighs the best interests of the  children,
      it is necessary to determine the  relative  strength  of  the  factors
      which make it in their best interests to remain here; and also to take
      account of any factors that point the other way.
   1. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children will depend
      on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length  of  time
      that they have been here; (c) how long they have  been  in  education;
      (c) what stage their education has reached; (d) to  what  extent  they
      have become distanced from the country to which it  is  proposed  that
      they return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to
      what extent they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties
      in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which  the
      course proposed will interfere with their family life or their  rights
      (if they have any) as British citizens.
   1. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic an answer falls
      to be given to the question: is it in the best interests of the  child
      to remain? The longer the child has been here, the more  advanced  (or
      critical) the stage of his education, the looser  his  ties  with  the
      country in question, and the more deleterious the consequences of  his
      return, the greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.
      If it is overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that  he  should
      not return, the need to maintain immigration control may well not  tip
      the balance. By contrast if it is in the  child's  best  interests  to
      remain, but only on balance (with  some  factors  pointing  the  other
      way), the result may be the opposite.
   1. In the balance on the other side there falls to be taken into  account
      the strong weight to be given to  the  need  to  maintain  immigration
      control in pursuit of the economic well-being of the country  and  the
      fact that, ex hypothesi, the applicants have no entitlement to remain.
      The immigration history of the parents may also be  relevant  e.g.  if
      they are overstayers, or have acted deceitfully.

   2. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of the
      children must be made on the basis that the facts are as they  are  in
      the real world. If one parent has no right to remain,  but  the  other
      parent does, that is the background against which  the  assessment  is
      conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the
      background  against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  Thus  the
      ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
      follow the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?
   The next passage is from the judgement of Lewison LJ:
   1. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
      follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would be
      separated and the children would be deprived of the right to  grow  up
      in the country of which they were citizens.
   1. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none of the
      family is a British citizen. None has the  right  to  remain  in  this
      country. If the mother is removed, the father has no independent right
      to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is entirely  reasonable
      to expect the children to go with them. As the immigration judge found
      it is obviously in their best interests to remain with their  parents.
      Although it is, of course a question  of  fact  for  the  tribunal,  I
      cannot see that the desirability of being educated at  public  expense
      in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the children of  remaining  with
      their parents. Just as we cannot provide  medical  treatment  for  the
      world, so we cannot educate the world.
   1. In fact the immigration  judge  weighed  the  best  interests  of  the
      children as a primary consideration, and set against it  the  economic
      well-being of the country.  As  Maurice  Kay  LJ  pointed  out  in  AE
      (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ
      653 at [9] in conducting that exercise it would have been  appropriate
      to consider the cost to the public purse  in  providing  education  to
      these children. In fact that was not something  that  the  immigration
      judge explicitly considered. If anything, therefore,  the  immigration
      judge adopted an approach too favourable to the appellant.
15) The appellant has not shown that the  determination  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law,  and  that
   determination shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                1 October 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
