
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05324/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S O S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Asiimwe of Pillai & Jones, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, I shall use  the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  when
    the Secretary of State was the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Benin who applied to vary  her  leave  to
    remain. Her application was refused and a decision was made  to  remove
    her by way of directions under  s47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The appellant appealed  that  decision  and  her
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Moran ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 6 July 2015.

 3. Given my references to the appellant's personal circumstances and those
    of her children an anonymity direction is appropriate.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  This was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on 15 October 2015 who distilled the  grounds
    "to complaints that the Tribunal

          a) failed to identify any 'compelling circumstances' that merited
             consideration of the appellant's appeal outside the parameters
             of paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  [SS  (Congo)
             [2015] EWCA Civ 387]

          b) failed  to  assess  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
             children by asking whether it was reasonable to expect them to
             follow the appellant to her country of origin, given that  the
             appellant did not have a right to remain in the United Kingdom
             [EV (Philippines) and others [2014] EWCA Civ 874]

          c) failed to have regard to the public interest in ensuring  that
             the appellant was financially independent [section 117B(3)]

          d) failed to have regard to  the  requirement  to  attach  little
             weight to appellant's private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom,
             given that it had been established at a time when she had only
             limited leave to remain [section 117B(5)  and  AM  (S  117  B)
             Malawi [2015] UKUYT 0260 (IAC)]."

    FTTJ Kelly found that these grounds were arguable  and,  if  made  out,
    were capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

 5. Thus the appeal came before me.

 6. For the respondent, Mr Walker relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.   Mr
    Asiimwe, for  the  appellant,  conceded  that  the  decision  contained
    material errors of law. Both Mr Walker and Mr Asiimwe submitted that it
    was appropriate for me to make a finding to that effect and to  proceed
    to remake the decision.  Both representatives made oral submissions  on
    the substantive issue, namely the appellant's appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.  However, in the course of making those oral submissions a new
    issue came to light, one which had not been identified before the First-
    tier Tribunal: the respondent's two removal decisions in respect of the
    appellant and her eldest child were for removal to different countries.
    In the case of the appellant her  removal  was  to  be  to  Benin,  her
    country of nationality, whereas in the case of the  appellant's  eldest
    child, a Nigerian citizen, her removal was to be to Nigeria.  Thus  the
    appellant and her eldest child  would  not  be  removed  together.   Mr
    Walker immediately conceded that this was not appropriate and that  the
    matter should be reconsidered by the  respondent.   Mr  Asiimwe  agreed
    with this proposal.

 7. My task is to decide whether the decision of the FTTJ contains  one  or
    more material errors of law.  I am satisfied that, for the reasons  set
    out in the grounds of appeal and accepted by both parties, the decision
    of the FTTJ contains material errors  of  law.  Furthermore,  the  FTTJ
    omitted to take into account the  respondent's  failure  to  take  into
    account her own guidance on the issue of  family  removal  (Enforcement
    Instructions and Guidance, Chapter 45, Families and  children,  Section
    (b), Family returns process, operational guidance, version 4).   Whilst
    the appeal lies against the  immigration  decision,  not  the  proposed
    country of removal, the proposed destinations of the appellant and  her
    eldest dependent child are relevant factors in considering  the  impact
    of removal on their family life.  This is particularly  the  case  with
    regard to consideration  of  the  interests  and  welfare  of  the  two
    children, including the separation of the eldest child from his  mother
    and the lack of evidence of reception facilities in  Nigeria  for  that
    child.

 8. For these reasons, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  FTTJ  contains
    material errors of law.  I  therefore  remake  it  and  find  that  the
    respondent's decision to remove the appellant is not in accordance with
    the law, there being  no  indication  the  respondent  has  taken  into
    account her own guidance on family removals or any explanation for  her
    departure from that  guidance  which  provides  that  the  respondent's
    family returns process applies to all families with a  dependent  child
    or children (aged under 18) where an adult family member is  liable  to
    be removed as a person refused  leave  to  remain.   Children  in  such
    circumstances "will either be removed as a dependant of that adult,  or
    may be reasonably expected to  accompany  them".   The  respondent  has
    clearly departed from her own guidance in making the decision to remove
    the appellant to Benin, in circumstances where her eldest child  is  to
    be removed to Nigeria.  I take into account the  oral  submissions  for
    the parties that the matter should be reconsidered by  the  respondent.
    I find that the respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law
    and that it remains outstanding for a lawful decision to be made.

Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of material errors on points of law.

10. I set aside the decision.

11. I remake the decision in the appeal  by  allowing  it  to  the  limited
    extent that the respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law
    and remains outstanding for the respondent to make a lawful decision on
    the appellant's application.


Signed      A M Black  Date: 18 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      A M Black  Date: 18 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

