

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05908/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision and Reason Promulgated     |
|On 4th March and 27th May 2015         |On 3rd June 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                            ANGEL NAEVEH GRIFFITH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

             IMMIGRATION OFFICER, Heathrow Airport (Terminal 3)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     on 4 March 2015, Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed
by Latta &  Co., Solicitors; on 27 May 2015, Mr R Gibb, of Latta & Co

For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION and REASONS


 1. The appellant filed notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on 29th
    January 2014.  The attached decision to be brought under appeal was the
    Immigration Officer's refusal on 12th January 2014  of  an  application
    made on 13th June 2012 "for indefinite leave to remain as the child  of
    a parent present and settled in the UK whilst  you  were  on  temporary
    admission in the UK".  Also attached is a "reasons for refusal  letter"
    dated 28th October 2013 and signed on behalf of the Secretary of State.
     Although it may make no practical difference, I think  the  respondent
    in these proceedings is  correctly  the  Immigration  Officer  not  the
    Secretary of State.

 2. There on file an "additional respondent's bundle" listing  items  A,  B
    and C but which has attached a further series of items,  without  index
    or pagination.  Among these further items is an  Explanatory  Statement
    signed by an Immigration Officer and by a Chief Immigration Officer  on
    11 March 2014, supplementing the reasons for refusal in  light  of  the
    appeal  grounds.   (These  further  items  may  be  from   an   initial
    respondent's bundle, although it is difficult to tell.)

The hearing on 4 March 2015 - error of law.

 3.  Designated  Judge  Murray  dismissed   the   appellant's   appeal   by
    determination promulgated on 14th August 2014.  On 8 December  2014  UT
    Judge Warr took the view that although the matter  was  perhaps  finely
    balanced, as a young child was involved it was  appropriate  to  extend
    time and to grant permission to appeal to the UT.

 4. Mr Caskie, who was not the author of the grounds of appeal to  the  UT,
    did not rely upon them in any detail although he contended  that  there
    was sufficient in their terms and in the grant of permission  on  which
    to base his arguments.  Although the grounds say that the appeal should
    have succeeded under the Immigration Rules (paragraph 301  rather  than
    298) Mr Caskie accepted that there was no error in  the  outcome  under
    the Immigration Rules.  He submitted  that  the  judge  took  a  "case-
    hardened" approach to the evidence from the sponsor which led her  also
    to doubt for no good reason the evidence that the  appellant  (who  did
    not give evidence orally)  wished  to  remain  in  the  UK.   In  those
    respects and more generally he  contended  that  the  judge  approached
    Article 8 of the ECHR on a mistaken  view  of  the  facts  and  of  the
    outcomes open to the family members affected.

 5. Mrs Saddiq argued that the evidence, particularly from the sponsor, had
    rightly  been  found   to   be   self-contradictory,   incomplete   and
    unsatisfactory.  The sponsor had given various different accounts.  She
    had been capable of organising her own visa to come  to  the  UK  as  a
    spouse and it must have been evident from that procedure that she  also
    needed a visa for her  daughter.   The  judge  had  been  right  to  be
    sceptical and had not  simply  taken  a  case-hardened  attitude.   The
    situation raised major questions about the best interests of the  child
    and the proper procedure for moving  residence  of  a  child  from  one
    country to another, leaving one parent behind, and where a court in the
    country of nationality had been involved in  regulating  matters.   The
    decision makers involved rightly formed serious concerns and reasonably
    requested appropriate evidence which the sponsor and  appellant  failed
    to produce over a lengthy period, with no  good  explanation.   It  was
    evident that further court documentation  including  a  parenting  plan
    existed and that the sponsor was under a duty to  notify  the  relevant
    authorities of changes in parenting arrangements and of any  change  of
    address.  Although concerns about the consent of the father had to some
    extent  been  mitigated  by  the  telephone  call  made  initially   by
    Immigration Officers soon after arrival in the UK,  that  remained  the
    only evidence from him.  Even if he was not  particularly  co-operative
    there was no sensible explanation of why other  evidence  was  missing.
    Removal of a child from one  jurisdiction  to  another  without  proper
    parental and court documentation was a very  serious  matter.   Without
    production of the evidence there had to remain concerns that there were
    reasons for non-disclosure going beyond the  feeble  explanations  from
    the sponsor.

 6. As to Article 8, Mrs Saddiq submitted that there was no material  error
    at paragraph 64 of the determination.  If error were to be  found,  she
    asked for the adverse factual findings to be preserved in any  remaking
    of the decision.

 7. I indicated that in my view the determination errs as follows:

      i) The principle to be derived from  Chikwamba  is  that  applications
         should not routinely fail only on the procedural  ground  that  the
         application should be made from the home state.  However, this  was
         not  a  case  where  the  only  justification  for   refusing   the
         application was that it should be made from abroad.  The respondent
         had other substantial concerns.

     ii) If this had been a "Chikwamba case" there would have been  no  good
         reason for the appeal not to succeed.  Serious shortcomings can  be
         identified on the part of the sponsor but  not  of  the  appellant.
         There would be no good reason for enforcing her return if  it  were
         no more than a formality to secure re-entry.

    iii) The judge assumes without examination there is  an  alternative  of
         the sponsor, stepfather and appellant taking up family life in  the
         USA.  There were good reasons to think that that  might  not  be  a
         realistic possibility.

     iv) The most likely outcome of  enforcement  of  the  adverse  decision
         would be that the appellant's mother would also return to the  USA,
         that they could not readily return to the UK,  that  the  sponsor's
         partner would not be able to live in the USA on a  permanent  basis
         for reasons both practical and legal, and the present  family  unit
         would be split up.  It did not follow that the  appeal  had  to  be
         allowed under Article 8, but that  could  only  be  resolved  on  a
         realistic appraisal of the likely outcomes.

 8. The determination therefore needed to be set  aside  and  the  decision
    remade.  As to any preserved findings, it was sufficient to indicate as
    follows.  There is no legal error in the judge's adverse  view  of  the
    sponsor's evidence.  The judge did not reach  a  conclusion  about  the
    appellant's preferences.  However, I thought (a) it  is  understandable
    given her age that it was not thought necessary for her  to  give  oral
    evidence, and (b) the natural expectation is that  she  would  wish  to
    continue living with her mother as she always has, wherever her  mother
    might live.

 9. In course of submissions and on reference to  the  Rules  the  position
    taken for the appellant about remaking  the  decision  came  to  be  as
    follows.  As at the date of the First-tier Tribunal  the  appeal  could
    not have succeeded under the Immigration Rules, principally because the
    sponsor did not then have indefinite leave to remain.   She  has  since
    secured that  status.   The  appellant  seeks  to  show  that  she  now
    qualifies for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules, Appendix FM,
    Section E-LTRC (conveniently to  be  found  in  Phelan  and  Gillespie,
    Immigration Law Handbook, 9th ed., at pp. 1160 - 1162).  She would rely
    upon the alternative in E-LTRC.1.6(b):

         "the  applicant's  parent  has  had  and  continues  to  have  sole
         responsibility for the child's upbringing or the applicant normally
         lives with this parent and not their other parent."

10. Mr Caskie accepted that the requirement cannot be met  by  a  de  facto
    situation brought about regardless of the law.   Arrangements  must  be
    shown to be legal and  acceptable  to  the  other  parent,  or  to  the
    authorities in the jurisdiction of origin, or both.

11. The appellant would also rely on  paragraph  E-LTRC.2.3(a)(vi)  on  the
    basis  that  the  sponsor's  partner  receives  personal   independence
    payment.   There  was  some  evidence  on  file,  although  Mr   Caskie
    acknowledged it was not presently sufficient to  establish  the  point.
    Nor is there evidence to meet the  rest  of  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules, including those relating to accommodation.

12. The papers in this case were not in good order.  The responsibility lay
    partly with the parties and also perhaps  in  less  than  perfect  file
    keeping by the FtT and  the  UT.   The  parties  did  not  comply  with
    directions issued on 16th February 2015  for  service  of  bundles  and
    indexes.  It was not  desirable  that  there  should  be  multiple  and
    confusing sets of similar documents, but it was hoped that there  might
    be greater clarity at the next hearing by way of properly  indexed  and
    paginated inventories  of  the  evidence  relied  upon  to  remake  the
    decision.

13. In terms of good practice, of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, of  the  UT  Practice  Directions  and  of  the  directions
    mentioned, the appellant's representatives should  have  been  able  to
    invite the UT to make the decision without adjournment.  Failing  that,
    the UT would have been justified in dismissing the appeal  because  the
    appellant, having been given every opportunity over a period of several
    years, has failed to bring the evidence obviously required  to  support
    her case.  However, given the history to date and as the appellant is a
    child, I agreed that the hearing should be adjourned.

14. Mr Caskie said that to obtain further documentary evidence from the USA
    might involve instructing agents there.  He asked for  two  months  for
    the appellant to do assemble her case.

15. The appellant through the sponsor and legal  representatives  thus  had
    yet another opportunity to put matters right.  If that opportunity  was
    not taken, the  case  would  fail  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Failing satisfactory evidence under the  Rules,  it
    was difficult to see that there might be success outside the Rules.

16. A decision and directions in terms of this  determination  up  to  this
    point were issued to the parties on 6 March 2015.







The hearing on 27 May 2015 - remaking the decision.

The appellant's position.

17. The appellant filed a "consolidated inventory of productions" including
    a skeleton argument and further evidence.

18.  The  further  materials  include  a  notarised  statement   from   the
    appellant's father dated  7  April  2015  and  communications  with  an
    attorney in Tennessee.  The skeleton argument explains that  these  aim
    to show that the Court there has been advised of the change of  address
    to the UK and that the present arrangement is "legal and acceptable  to
    all parties concerned".

19. The argument next identifies that (contrary to the line advanced at the
    previous hearing) Appendix FM of the Rules does  not  apply,  and  that
    this is a case governed by paragraph 298.  Mrs Saddiq agreed,  so  that
    is the provision I consider.

20. Paragraph 298 provides:


       The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite  leave  to
       remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents or  a
       relative present and settled in the United Kingdom are that he:


       (i) is seeking to remain with a parent, parents or a relative in one
       of the following circumstances:


       (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom; or
       (b) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and  the
       other parent is dead; or
       (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and  has
       had sole responsibility for the  child's  upbringing  or  the  child
       normally lives with this parent and not their other parent; or
       (d) one parent or a relative is present and settled  in  the  United
       Kingdom and  there  are  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
       considerations which make exclusion of  the  child  undesirable  and
       suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care; and


       (ii) has or has had limited leave to enter or remain in  the  United
       Kingdom, and


       (a) is under the age of 18; or
       (b) was given leave to enter or remain with  a  view  to  settlement
       under paragraph 302 or Appendix FM; or
       (c) was admitted into the UK in accordance with paragraph  319R  and
       has completed a period of 2 years limited leave as the  child  of  a
       refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection who is now present
       and settled in the UK or  as  the  child  of  a  former  refugee  or
       beneficiary of humanitarian protection who is now a British Citizen,
       or
       (d) the applicant has limited leave to enter or remain in the United
       Kingdom in accordance  with  paragraph  319X,  as  the  child  of  a
       relative with limited leave to remain as a refugee or beneficiary of
       humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom and who is now present
       and settled here; or
       (e) was last given limited leave to remain under paragraph 298A; and


       (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried, and has  not
       formed an independent family unit; and


       (iv) can, and  will,  be  accommodated  adequately  by  the  parent,
       parents or relative the child was admitted to join, without recourse
       to public funds  in  accommodation  which  the  parent,  parents  or
       relative the child was admitted to join, own or occupy  exclusively;
       and


       (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the  parent,  parents
       or relative the child was admitted  to  join,  without  recourse  to
       public funds; and


       (vi) does not  fall  for  refusal  under  the  general  grounds  for
       refusal, and

       (vii) if aged 18 or over, was admitted to the United  Kingdom  under
       paragraph 302, or Appendix FM, or 319R or 319X and has  demonstrated
       sufficient  knowledge  of  the  English  language   and   sufficient
       knowledge about life  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
       Appendix KoLL.

21. The argument concedes that the  appellant  cannot  meet  298(ii).   She
    meets 298(iii).  It is submitted  that  she  can  be  accommodated  and
    maintained without recourse to  public  funds,  any  shortfall  in  the
    income of her mother and step-father  being  made  up  by  third  party
    provision.  Therefore, it is said, it is  only  because  the  appellant
    does not have limited leave to enter or  remain  that  her  case  falls
    under Article 8.  "The only way that she  could  bring  herself  within
    paragraph 298(ii) would be by returning to the USA to apply  for  entry
    clearance.  It has already been held that such a requirement  would  be
    contrary to Article 8 ...  the  fact  that  she  meets  all  the  other
    requirements of the relevant rule must be strongly  in  her  favour  in
    terms of the said Article".  The  argument  asks  accordingly  for  the
    appeal to be allowed under Article 8.

The respondent's position.

22. Mrs Saddiq did not accept that the appellant met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 298 apart from (ii).  She pointed out that  the  sponsor  and
    her husband both presently depend on public  benefits.   There  was  no
    schedule of income and expenditure to show how the appellant was to  be
    accommodated and maintained without recourse to  public  funds.   Third
    party support is permissible in principle but all that was put  forward
    was a vague assurance from  the  husband's  sister,  with  an  indirect
    indication that his parents would also help if required by letting  the
    parties move back in with them.  Third party support had to be  assured
    and quantifiable.   There was also the possibility that  support  might
    lead to some reduction of  benefits.   The  case  fell  well  short  of
    paragraph 298.   The  Article  8  issue  was  therefore  not  a  simple
    "Chikwamba question" of whether the  appellant  should  comply  with  a
    formality.

23. The sponsor had changed her version of events and  her  description  of
    the child's father, had been tardy or had failed to  produce  important
    evidence, and had rightly been found to be an unreliable witness.   The
    evidence should be examined in that light.  There was no full  copy  of
    the divorce decree.  It referred to a parenting plan  but  no  copy  of
    that in either its original or amended version had ever been  produced.
    The latest explanation, in the father's affidavit, was that a  workmate
    accidentally threw it out and as the sponsor was  out  of  the  country
    nothing could be done to replace it.  That was  unsatisfactory.   There
    was no apparent reason why the sponsor could not sign such an agreement
    while abroad.  The father now said that he wanted matters  resolved  so
    that the original intention  of  the  appellant  visiting  him  in  the
    summers could be fulfilled.  That was understandable but it had  to  be
    wondered what pressure might be  put  upon  him  in  that  light.   His
    affidavit mentioned the appellant also seeing her brothers and  sisters
    in the USA.  The sponsor had not previously disclosed the existence  of
    such siblings (presumably half-siblings).  There was a  discrepancy  in
    the documentary evidence, being a change of date in the notification to
    the court of a UK address.  The case raised serious  issues  concerning
    the best interests of a child.  The respondent was entitled  to  expect
    clear evidence about such  matters.   The  sponsor  had  at  one  stage
    maintained that the father did not wish anything to do with the  child,
    but it now emerged that it was the  sponsor  by  her  actions  who  had
    thwarted contact.  It would be perverse for the case to  succeed  under
    Article 8 when it arose entirely from the sponsor taking her child from
    the USA to the UK  without  the  proper  permissions  to  do  so.   The
    appellant lived in the USA until age 8, and has lived in the UK to  age
    11.  Her mother could return with her.  She clearly  has  a  number  of
    relatives in the USA, including grandparents, with whom the sponsor had
    said she might stay on a  visit.   It  was  not  shown  that  her  best
    interests would be adversely affected by  return.   Even  if  the  case
    resulted in the sponsor "getting her way", her conduct so far suggested
    there was  no  guarantee  that  she  would  facilitate  visits  by  the
    appellant to her father and other  family  in  the  USA.   Any  adverse
    effects on the family life of the sponsor and  her  partner  should  be
    given little weight.  The case  smacked  of  the  sponsor  holding  the
    respondent and the tribunal  to  ransom.   The  case  did  not  warrant
    consideration outside the Rules.  Alternatively, and  taking  the  best
    interests  of  the  child   into   consideration,   the   outcome   was
    proportionate.

Response for appellant.

24. Mr Gibb acknowledged that a financial schedule should ideally have been
    provided, but said that was not practicable because  the  sponsor  only
    recently  gave  up  employment  for  health  reasons  and  her  benefit
    entitlement had not yet been resolved.   She  had  worked  consistently
    since she came to the UK and hoped to be able to return  to  employment
    soon.  While it was difficult to  pinpoint  likely  future  income  any
    shortfall from the expected (benefit equivalent) levels would be small.
     There was no reason to doubt the support offered by the sister of  the
    sponsor's husband and by his parents, with whom they could reside again
    if necessary.  The primary consideration was the best interests of  the
    child and that should outweigh any impact on public  funds.   The  best
    outcome for her would be one which maintained the status quo and  which
    was now shown to suit both her  parents.   The  situation  was  brought
    about not by the appellant but by the  sponsor.   The  appellant  as  a
    child should not suffer for the sponsor's actions.  To uproot her would
    lead to loss of connection with relatives here to whom she  has  become
    close - the sponsor's husband and his sister and parents.   If she  had
    leave that would enable her also to have contact with her relatives  in
    the USA.  There was nothing sinister in non-production of the parenting
    plan, because there was now evidence from the father who explained  its
    absence and that all it said of relevance went to visitation and travel
    expenses.  If the appellant had to remove, the  family  here  would  be
    split up.  That would impact on the  family  life  interests  of  those
    persons here who had naturally taken on an important role in her  life.
    It would involve the family's main breadwinner  (the  sponsor)  leaving
    the UK.  Any public funds impact from allowing the appeal was likely to
    be temporary and minor.

Conclusions.

25. Parties were at odds over whether  any  adverse  inferences  should  be
    drawn from ongoing failure to disclose full  legal  documentation  from
    the USA and whether the father's now stated position should  be  viewed
    sceptically  because  of  possible  pressure  from  the   sponsor.    I
    understand why the respondent continues to express  doubts,  and  there
    are still gaps in the evidence, but as a whole it does  now  show  that
    arrangements are legal and acceptable to the other parent  and  to  the
    authorities in the jurisdiction of  origin.    The  appellant's  father
    said at the outset when telephoned by the respondent  that  he  had  no
    objection to the appellant living in the UK.  He  confirms  that  in  a
    recent affidavit.  There is evidence from an attorney that  this  is  a
    situation of no concern to the court.  It is unsurprising  that  unless
    objections are raised by  one  of  the  parents,  the  court  does  not
    intervene.  I do not infer that the full versions of the divorce decree
    and parenting agreements contain something sinister which  the  sponsor
    has been at pains to conceal.  The explanation is  more  likely  to  be
    muddling along by both parents rather than an attempt by the sponsor to
    hide something significant from the respondent and the tribunal.

26. The dispute over "near-compliance" with  paragraph  289  of  the  Rules
    falls to be resolved in favour  of  the  respondent.   It  is  for  the
    appellant to make her case.  The evidence falls short  of  establishing
    that more likely than  not  she  can  be  accommodated  and  maintained
    without resort to public funds.  The submissions that there would be no
    shortfall, or that it would be minor and temporary, or that it would be
    made up by third parties,  are  an  over-optimistic  gloss  on  a  weak
    evidential base.

27. Having resolved those factual disputes, this is not a Chikwamba case in
    the sense that an appellant might be excused the formality of  applying
    from abroad when she would otherwise be likely to succeed.   She  would
    not at this  time  be  likely  to  succeed  under  the  Rules  on  such
    application.  It is worth noting however that there probably have  been
    stages  in  the  history  of  the  case  when  the  accommodation   and
    maintenance requirements would have been met.

28. That leaves an Article 8  judgment  to  be  made,  in  which  the  best
    interests of the appellant, as a child, are a primary consideration but
    not a paramount one.  Her interests do not dictate the outcome.

29. The sponsor has brought  about  the  situation  by  her  disregard  for
    important legal  requirements  (not  mere  formalities)  affecting  the
    appellant, so little weight should be given to any  adverse  effect  on
    the sponsor.  That criticism does not attach to her husband but  family
    disruption does often arise  from  the  operation  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He might have to live apart from his wife but visits  can  take
    place in both directions and there is some possibility of life together
    on a more settled basis at some future  stage  e.g.  if  and  when  the
    requirements for the appellant's entry to the UK under the Rules  could
    be met, or on other change of circumstances.  On return to the USA  the
    appellant would be distanced but  not  necessarily  entirely  separated
    from the relatives of the sponsor's husband.  She  would  have  contact
    with her father, siblings and grandparents which presumptively would be
    of considerable value to her.  Those features would at  least  counter-
    balance the loss of contact with persons in the UK who do not stand  in
    such close degrees of relationship.  The absence of  contact  with  the
    appellant's father and other relatives in the USA for three years,  and
    non-compliance with the parenting agreement, are due to the sponsor not
    to any  obstructive  bureaucratic  attitude  of  the  respondent.   The
    respondent's position has been in my opinion  well  judged  throughout.
    It would have  been  cavalier  in  respect  of  the  interests  of  the
    appellant to have taken any other approach.  It is only  at  this  very
    late stage that anything like satisfactory evidence of the position  in
    respect of the child's father and the court in Tennessee  has  emerged.



30. All that said, I think  that  the  most  beneficial  outcome  from  the
    appellant's point of view is as wished by both her  parents,  who  have
    her interests at heart: that she should continue  to  reside  with  her
    mother in the UK and be able to visit her father in the USA.  She would
    then have contact with both parents and with wider family on both sides
    of the Atlantic.  There is strength in the respondent's objections that
    the sponsor should not  be  allowed  to  gain  from  her  irresponsible
    conduct, but any  penalty  for  that  should  not  be  applied  to  the
    appellant.  A decision made now has to acknowledge the reality  of  the
    situation three years on from arrival.  In all the  circumstances,  and
    although on a fine balance, I do not think it is reasonable to  require
    the appellant to leave the UK.  This is a case where the better outcome
    for the child outweighs the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control through the Rules.

31. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside,  for  the
    reasons given under the heading of error of law above; and the decision
    is remade, on the basis of the best  interests  of  the  appellant,  by
    allowing the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

32. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            29 May 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

