

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05466/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 November 2013                            |On 4 November 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                        MR MUKTADHIR AHMED CHOUDHURY

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M. Bhuiyan
For the Respondent:    Mr. J Parkinson, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 21 August 1986.  He
    has been granted permission to appeal the determination of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver allowing his appeal against the respondent's
    decision dated 6 February 2013 to refuse to grant him leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 student to the limited extent that he is granted 60 days in
    order to amend his application. The respondent's decision was that the
    bank documents on which the appellant relied to show that he met the
    maintenance requirements were from the Bangladesh Commerce Bank Ltd,
    which was not on the acceptable list of financial institutions.

2.   The appellant's application which led to the respondent's decision was
    made on 18 October 2012.

3.   The judge recorded at paragraph 4 of the determination that the list
    of financial institutions from Bangladesh from which the UKBA would
    accept financial statements to support visa application made under the
    points based system was issued on 2 October 2012 and withdrawn on or
    before 16 October 2012.  It was not reinstated until December 2012.
    The Bangladesh Commerce Bank Ltd was not then listed in table 12 to
    appendix P of the rules.  At the date of the application the relevant
    was not listed; by the date of decision it was.

4.   The judge went on to say that had the application been determined by
    the respondent promptly his application would have succeeded.  It was
    only because of delay by the respondent that at the date of decision,
    he did not satisfy the changed requirements.  Instead of offering him
    the chance to rectify what had now become a deficiency in satisfying
    the maintenance requirement, the respondent chose to make the decision
    well over 3 months after the application.  The judge said that the
    question which arises is that raised in Thakur (PBS Decision - common
    law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 of basic common law
    fairness.  The judge said that the point has been considered in
    subsequent cases which were not particularly helpful in deciding this
    case.

5.   The judge found that it was the respondent's action in reinstating the
    negative list which caused the application to fall foul of the new
    rules and it is because this was not drawn to the attention of the
    appellant, even though the reinstatement was envisaged in the notice by
    which the negative list was withdrawn, that he held that the appellant
    should have been given a change to cure the defect that had arisen in
    his application.  The judge noted that in a notice issued by the
    British High Commission in Dhaka on 18 November 2012 it was stated that
    "the UKBA" intends to make changes to the immigration rules that will
    bring the lists into effect for all PBS visa applications submitted
    from 13 December 2012."  The appellant may have realised that the list
    was to be reinstated but now when that would be or what the
    consequences of that reinstatement would have been.  The 60 day
    extension allowed in sponsor revocation cases would appear to be
    appropriate in these circumstances also.

6.   The judge allowed the appellant's appeal to the extent that he is
    granted 60 days in order to amend his application.

7.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal on the basis that it is
    arguable that the judge erred in qualifying the extent to which the
    appeal was allowed.

8.   It was not disputed by the parties that the Statement of Changes in
    Immigration Rules HC760 announced in November 2012 clearly confirmed
    that the list of acceptable financial institutions in Bangladesh would
    be effective for all PBS visa applications from 13 December 2012.  The
    question posed by Mr. Parkinson was - did the Secretary of State have
    in place transitional provisions for applications to be considered
    under whatever rules applied at the time the application was made until
    HC760 came into force?  The answer was "no" because we could not find
    any such transitional provisions.

9.   Accordingly, I find that the Secretary of State was wrong to apply
    Immigration Rules HC760 to the appellant's application as it was not in
    force when the appellant made his application in October 2012.

10.  Accordingly, I find that the judge was wrong to qualify the extent to
    which he allowed the appellant's appeal.  I set aside the judge's
    decision.


11.  I remake the decision and allow the appellant's appeal.





Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
