
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05402/2014
                                                               IA/05403/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th September 2014                          |On 16th October 2014       |
|Prepared 24th September 2014                    |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                     mS bALWINDER kAUR (FIRST appellant)
                    MR PARMINDER SINGH (SECOND appellant)
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms E. Greenwood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are both citizens of India.  The first Appellant  who  I
    shall refer to as the Appellant was  born  on  16th  April  1971.   The
    second Appellant who is the son of the first Appellant and who I  shall
    refer to as P. was born on 11th November 1998 and is therefore  now  15
    years of age.   The  Appellants'  appealed  against  decisions  of  the
    Respondent dated 12th January 2014  to  refuse  their  application  for
    settlement outside the Immigration Rules and to remove  them  from  the
    United Kingdom by way of directions under Section 10 of the Immigration
    and Asylum Act  1999.   Their  appeals  against  those  decisions  were
    dismissed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lawrence  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 12th  May  2014.   The  Appellants  appeal  with  leave
    against his determination and the matter  comes  before  me  to  decide
    whether there is an error of law in the Judge's decision such  that  it
    falls to be set aside and remade failing which the  decision  of  first
    instance will stand.

2.   The Appellants entered the United  Kingdom  on  3rd  November  2010  as
    visitors with leave to remain until 3rd May 2011.  They did  not  leave
    the United Kingdom within the time stipulated but overstayed.   P.  was
    enrolled in the English school system and remains a  pupil  whilst  the
    Appellant has been working

3.   On 20th June 2012 the Appellants were encountered at their  address  by
    the Respondent and served with notice informing them they  were  liable
    to removal.  On 10th July 2013 the Appellant submitted  an  application
    for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Her application was made on two grounds.  The  first  was  that
    removal would expose  the  Appellants  to  ill  treatment  contrary  to
    Article 3 (prohibition of torture) of the Human Rights Convention.  The
    second was that the Appellants' removal  to  India  would  breach  this
    country's obligations under Article 8 (right to respect for private and
    family life) of the Human Rights Convention. The burden of establishing
    either breach rested on  the  Appellant.  The  standard  of  proof  for
    Article 3 was that there was  a  reasonable  likelihood  of  risk  (the
    "lower standard"), for Article 8 it was the normal  civil  standard  of
    the balance of probability

The Proceedings at First Instance

4.   The Appellant told the Judge that she had had an arranged  marriage  at
    the age of 18 years to a man called Jasvinder Singh.   The  couple  had
    three children P. and two daughters (who remain in  India).   Mr  Singh
    was  an  alcoholic  and  there  was  domestic   violence   during   the
    relationship.  He died on 29th August 2003 and the  Appellant  and  her
    three children continued to live at Mr Singh's family home.  After  his
    death the Appellant's in-laws' behaviour towards her  changed  as  they
    blamed her for Mr Singh's death.  She was considered to be "bad  luck",
    women stopped talking to her, she was  considered  as  dirt.   She  was
    sexually harassed by a brother of her late husband.  She was then  told
    to leave home. The daughters did not wish to join the Appellant as they
    had been brainwashed by the Appellant's mother-in-law.   P.  did  leave
    with the Appellant moving first to the Appellant's parents but as  they
    did not wish to accommodate the Appellant and P. both had to move  out.
    The Appellant was advised to leave India and after the  service  of  an
    agent was secured  she  left  for  the  United  Kingdom  with  P.   The
    Appellant never intended to leave  the  United  Kingdom  once  she  had
    arrived here.  Within three months of arrival  P.  was  admitted  to  a
    school and continues with his education.  As a widow the Appellant  was
    likely to face ill-treatment in India as Indian society  did  not  look
    kindly on widows.

5.   In his  determination  the  Judge  considered  the  issue  of  societal
    attitudes towards women in India see paragraphs 23  to  30.   He  found
    that the Appellant had given contradictory  evidence  to  him  about  a
    number of issues.  He did not find it plausible  that  the  Appellant's
    mother-in-law would eject the Appellant and P.  from  the  family  home
    only to accommodate them in another house for two years until 2002.  At
    paragraph 32 he said "I do not find the [Appellant]  has  told  me  the
    truth in this regard."  When the particular facts  of  the  Appellant's
    case were scrutinised the Judge found they did not stand up.   Applying
    the lower standard of proof to the Article 3 claim he  found  that  the
    Appellant had not discharged the burden upon her.

6.   At paragraph 37 the Judge went on to consider P.'s claim to  remain  in
    this country on the basis of his educational  requirements.   He  found
    that P. could readapt  to  life  in  India  and  reintegrate  into  the
    educational system there.  The issue the Judge decided was  whether  P.
    could access education in India "and the answer to that question is  in
    the affirmative" (paragraph 38).  The Judge directed  himself  that  he
    had to consider the best interests  of  P.  and  considered  the  Upper
    Tribunal authority of Azimi-Moayed.  In a somewhat ambiguous  paragraph
    41 the Judge wrote:

         "Insofar as P. is concerned I find his best interests have not been
         considered to the fullest.  I find that his  removal  from  the  UK
         does not undermine the need to safeguard and promote his welfare."

7.   The Judge directed himself at some length on  the  case  law  of  Green
    [2013] UKUT 00254, Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 and MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA
    Civ 1192 and a number of other authorities.  At paragraph 49 the  Judge
    stated:

         "The Appellants will be removed as a single family unit.  There  is
         therefore no evidence that there is to be any  disruption  in  them
         enjoying family life with each other in India.  There is nothing to
         indicate that the Appellants cannot replicate any private life they
         have established in the UK  in  India.   The  first  Appellant  was
         working in the same sort of area she now  works  in  the  UK.   The
         second Appellant attended school in India as he has done in the UK.
          The Appellants may not wish to return to India.  However  personal
         preference is not the issue".

    He dismissed the appeals.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Appellant appealed against that decision  arguing  that  the  Judge
    had made unreasonable  findings.   It  was  unreasonable  to  base  his
    decision on an expectation that the Appellant's  mother-in-law  to  act
    reasonably.  The Appellant had been consistent about  the  conduct  she
    faced from her mother-in-law including the addresses she had stayed at.
      The  Judge  was  making  unsupported  findings  in   describing   the
    educational system in the United Kingdom and India  as  the  same  (and
    thereby playing down the risk of disruption to P's education).

9.   The Judge had failed to make relevant findings  that  were  crucial  to
    the Appellants' Article 8 case.  There  were  no  findings  about  P.'s
    special educational requirements, his ties to the UK or  the  state  of
    education in India.  Without such findings the Gulshan  assessment  was
    highly flawed.  The Judge had been asked to consider objective evidence
    from the Country of Origin Information Report that went directly to the
    Appellants' case.

10.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal White on 30th July 2014.  In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote that he was satisfied that the Judge  had
    arguably made an error of law for the following reasons:

         "(a) In concluding that P. could adapt to the education  system  in
             India it is arguable that the Judge failed properly to  engage
             with the fact that P. has a statement of  special  educational
             needs.

          (b) In paragraph 41 of the determination the Judge states that the
             best interests of P. 'have not been considered to the fullest'
             yet (arguably inconsistently) the Judge  proceeds  to  dismiss
             P.'s appeal.

          (c) It is arguable that the Judge is in error in stating that 'the
             new Article 8 Rules is a complete code  for  applications  for
             private life and family life' (paragraph 46).

          (d) The Gulshan/Nagre/Shahzad approach to Article 8 adopted by the
             Judge at paragraph 46 is arguably wrong in  the  light  of  MM
             [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128."

11.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  8th
    August 2014 stating that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    directed himself appropriately.  He had properly applied  the  relevant
    case law of Azimi-Moayed as it applied to P.  His findings  were  fully
    reasoned and sustainable on the facts.

The Hearing before Me

12.  In  submissions  Counsel  argued  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  his
    assessment of Article 8.  The Judge should have gone on to consider  if
    there were  good  arguable  grounds  for  considering  the  application
    outside the Rules.  The Judge had failed to make clear findings on what
    evidence he accepted and what he rejected.  Counsel's skeleton argument
    dated 17th September 2014 cited paragraph 128 of MM. The  objective  of
    the new Rules was to address more explicitly than previous  Immigration
    Rules had done the factors under which case  law  weigh  in  favour  or
    against a claim by a foreign national to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    based on Article 8. The new Rules would guide the  decision  makers  in
    most cases but in those that were not covered by  the  new  Immigration
    Rules only if there was an arguable case that there may be good grounds
    for granting leave to remain outside the Rules by reference to  Article
    8 would it be necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on  to  consider
    whether there were compelling circumstances to grant such  leave.   The
    Judge had adopted the wrong approach to Article 8 at  paragraph  46  of
    his determination.  He was wrong to say  that  the  new  Rules  were  a
    complete code.  There were arguably good grounds for granting leave  to
    remain outside the Rules and the Judge should have gone on to  consider
    whether there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised
    under them.

13.  In EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the Court of  Appeal  had  held
    that a decision as to what was in the best interests  of  the  children
    would depend on a number of factors such as their age, length  of  time
    they had been in  the  United  Kingdom,  how  long  they  had  been  in
    education, what stage their education has reached, to what extent  they
    have become distant from the country to which it is proposed that  they
    return, how renewable their connection with it may be, to  what  extent
    they will have linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to
    life in that country and the extent to which the course proposed  would
    interfere with their family life or their rights if they  have  any  as
    British citizens.

14.  The finding that there was no difference between the education  systems
    in India and the United Kingdom was without foundation.  The Judge  had
    failed to take account of the fact that  P.  was  approaching  critical
    exams in the UK or that he had been referred for an assessment  of  his
    special educational needs.  The  Judge  had  failed  to  make  specific
    findings as to the Appellant's account of her ill-treatment  in  India.
    P.'s best interests could not be properly assessed  without  regard  to
    the level of hardship likely to face the Appellant and therefore him on
    return.   The  determination  had  failed  to  take  into  account  key
    considerations regarding the best interests of P. as  indicated  in  EV
    (Philippines).  P. had reached a critical stage in  his  education  and
    would not be able to simply pick up in India where he left off  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He had spent all of his teenage years  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The connections with  India  had  been  severed  because  the
    Appellant would be forced to live as an outcast in Indian society  even
    before she left India.

15.  Although the Judge had considered  the  objective  evidence  about  the
    position of women in India he had not applied it.  Whilst there was  an
    education system in India the extent to which P. could engage in it was
    a matter of judgment.  The idea that P.  could  slip  into  the  Indian
    educational system was simply wrong.  There was no basis  on  which  to
    make that finding.  P.'s special educational needs  was  an  additional
    hurdle for him to re-engage with.  The Respondent had a  discretion  to
    act outside the Rules  otherwise  the  Rules  would  not  be  a  lawful
    approach to Article 8.  The Judge had misinterpreted the authorities.

16.  Briefly in response the Presenting Officer stated  that  there  was  no
    right to have an education as such, it was not a right protected  under
    Article 8, see  Pankina  and  Patel.   The  Judge  had  considered  the
    evidence of the Appellant's Article 3 claim and found that she was  not
    as helpless as painted.  She sought employment  and  supported  herself
    and her son through lawful means.  Paragraph 41  of  the  determination
    (see paragraph 6 above) clearly contained a typographical mistake.   It
    should have read that P.'s best interests had been  considered  to  the
    fullest not that they had not  been  so  considered.   The  educational
    needs of P. were that he had a reading and maths  age  lower  than  the
    average but there was nothing to  say  he  would  not  be  offered  any
    assistance in India.  P. came here four years ago, he  had  adapted  to
    the British system and therefore could readapt to the system in  India.
    There was no error in the Judge's determination.

17.  In conclusion it was acknowledged by Counsel that the  Judge  had  made
    some findings about past behaviour but there were no findings about the
    conditions the Appellant would face on return.

Findings

18.  The Appellant's Article 3 claim was rejected by the Judge on the  basis
    that  even  if  the  Appellant  had  given  credible  evidence  of  her
    circumstances in India she  was  far  more  resilient  than  was  being
    credited by her lawyers.  She had taken  up  employment  and  supported
    herself and her son.  Even on her own case (of abuse and  being  forced
    to leave her accommodation) the Judge found that the Appellant would be
    able to support herself and her son upon return.  In fact the Judge did
    not find the Appellant to be a credible witness in relation to what the
    Appellant claimed had happened to her in India and he  did  not  accept
    the Appellant's account of abuse particularly that said to be caused by
    her mother-in-law.  These were findings of fact which were open to  the
    Judge on the  evidence  and  the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submissions made to me amount  in  reality  to  no  more  than  a  mere
    disagreement with those findings.

19.  The Judge rejected the Appellant's account of  ill-treatment  from  the
    mother-in-law  (see  paragraph   36)   pointing   out   a   number   of
    inconsistencies  for  example  that  the  mother-in-law  had  not  been
    concerned when the Appellant left with P. but was  now  threatening  to
    kill the Appellant for running away with the "heir" of the family  that
    is to say P.  In the light of those findings the Article 3  case  could
    not succeed and the case before the Judge remained on the basis of  the
    Article 8 claim including  an  assessment  of  what  was  in  the  best
    interests of P.

20.  Much of the argument in this case  turned  on  whether  the  Judge  was
    correct in  describing  the  post-July  2012  Immigration  Rules  as  a
    complete code for determining Article 8 matters.  I interpret what  the
    Judge said at paragraph 46 to  mean  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    evidence before him to indicate that these appeals  should  be  allowed
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The  Judge  had  specifically  directed
    himself  (contrary  to  the  submission  made  in  Counsel's   skeleton
    argument) at paragraph 45 that the Appellant had not demonstrated  that
    there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the new Article 8 Rules.  Although in considering P.'s  best  interests
    under the proportionality  exercise  the  Judge  had  not  specifically
    referred to EV (Philippines), he had set out at some length  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Azimi-Moayed and in doing so had encompassed the
    factors set out by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines).

21.  I agree with the submission of the Respondent  that  paragraph  41  did
    contain a typographical error and that it should have  read  that  P.'s
    best interests had been considered to the fullest. When  looked  at  in
    the context of  the  rest  of  the  determination  this  error  becomes
    clearer. The alternative, that the Judge  meant  what  he  said,  would
    imply that he could have gone on to find that P.'s best interests would
    be served by remaining in this country.  The Judge's findings were  the
    exact opposite.  Thus whilst the Judge perhaps did not express  himself
    as felicitously as he might concerning the issue of  whether  the  July
    2012 Rules were or were not a complete code, the Judge was  well  aware
    of  the  issues  that  he  had   to   consider   when   assessing   the
    proportionality of interference with family and private life caused  by
    the pursuit of the legitimate aim of immigration control.

22.  The Appellant attacks the Judge's findings on certain  conclusions  for
    example as to the relative merits of the British and Indian educational
    systems.  P. had not been in education a particularly long  time,  only
    four years and as the Judge pointed out P. had  already  been  able  to
    adapt to the educational system  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  any
    apparent difficulty.  If the  two  educational  systems  were  in  fact
    different then P.'s ability to adapt to a different educational  system
    when coming to the United Kingdom showed his remarkable resilience.  It
    would also indicate an ability to adapt back to the Indian  educational
    system that he had previous experience of.  It was open to the Judge on
    the evidence before him to find as he stated at paragraph  37  that  it
    was "not simply credible  that  [P.]  cannot  readapt"  to  the  Indian
    system.  The  Judge  did  not  place  much  weight  on  the  additional
    assistance that P. was receiving in the United Kingdom finding that  P.
    could access education in India.  The criticism  made  of  the  Judge's
    consideration of P.'s best interests is that the  Judge  did  not  give
    sufficient weight to the fact that P. had special educational needs.  I
    do not accept that that criticism has any basis to it either.  For  the
    Appellants to succeed with this argument they would have to  show  that
    it would not be possible for P. to receive  an  adequate  education  in
    India.  The evidence is far from showing that and it  is  difficult  to
    see how far this argument takes the Appellants.

23.  The fourth ground given by Judge White in granting permission  was  the
    rather sweeping  ground  that  the  Gulshan/Nagre/Shahzad  approach  to
    Article 8 was arguably wrong in the  light  of  MM.   Counsel  for  the
    Appellant, rightly, did not go as far as Judge White appeared to go  in
    his grant  of  permission.   Indeed  it  is  rather  difficult  to  see
    precisely what Judge White was intending to say.  The Court of Appeal's
    decision in MM has not swept  away  the  jurisprudence  that  built  up
    regarding the application of the July 2012 Rules to Article  8  claims.
    The Immigration Act 2014 has replaced the  July  2012  Rules  with  the
    force of statute and now expresses the public  interest  in  Article  8
    cases differently.  However in considering whether Judge Lawrence  made
    an error of law I have to consider the state of the law at the date  of
    the hearing before him not as it is now.

24.  The Judge very carefully considered the Article  8  arguments  in  this
    case and found that neither of the  Appellants  had  lost  any  of  the
    social, cultural or language ties to India in the four years that  they
    had been in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 45 the Judge  wrote  that
    he had considered whether he should go outside the post-July 2012 Rules
    when assessing Article 8 but was satisfied that he need not because the
    Appellants  had   not   demonstrated   that   there   were   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.  There  were
    no insurmountable obstacles facing them in India.

25.  The Judge was dealing with a mother and son who had been in the  United
    Kingdom for a relatively short period of time, some  four  years.   For
    most of that time neither Appellant had had any leave to  remain.   The
    Appellant had put P. into the British educational system within a short
    period of time of arriving, she had no intention to  return  to  India.
    She did not however bring herself to the attention of  the  authorities
    of the Home Office by making an application to regularise her stay  but
    instead sought to evade the attention of  the  authorities.   In  those
    circumstances the private life of the Appellants such as it was in this
    country for that relatively short period was built up at  a  time  when
    neither had leave to remain.

26.  The Judge considered P.'s best interests in some detail but found  that
    there were no compelling circumstances such that the Appellants  should
    be allowed to remain in this country  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Whether the Judge did or did not express himself well regarding whether
    the July 2012 Rules were or were not a  complete  code  is  beside  the
    point. The Judge was aware of the correct  test  he  had  to  apply  in
    assessing Article 8 and applied  it.  The  Judge  had  disbelieved  the
    Appellant's Article  3  claim;  that  was  not  a  factor  which  would
    influence him regarding what P. and the Appellant could expect to  face
    upon return.  The Judge evidently felt that the Appellant and P.  would
    manage in India as they had managed before.  P's best  interests  would
    be to be removed with the Appellant as a family unit to  their  country
    of origin with which they were both familiar.  In my view the Judge did
    not  make  any  material  error  of  law  in  his  determination.   The
    conclusions he arrived at both in relation to Article 3 and  Article  8
    were open to him on the evidence before him.  In those circumstances  I
    do not find that there was an error of law and I uphold the decision of
    the Judge to dismiss the Appellants' appeals.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellants' appeals.

Appeals dismissed.

I make no anonymity orders as there  is  no  public  policy  reason  for  so
doing.  As I have dismissed the appeals and they  were  dismissed  at  first
instance there can be no fee award.

Signed this 16th day of October 2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


