
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05969/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2015                    |On 8 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                  umer raja
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born on 7 September 1988  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Pacey who in a determination promulgated on 18 May 2015  dismissed  his
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to  grant
    him leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student.

2.   The reasons for the refusal were set out in  a  letter  of  30  January
    2015.  That stated that the appellant  was  awarded  no  points  for  a
    Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies (CAS) because  the  CAS  provided
    had been checked on 30 January 2015 and it was found that the  CAS  had
    been withdrawn by the appellant's sponsor.  He  was  therefore  not  in
    possession of a valid CAS.

3.   The appellant appealed arguing that the  decision  was  unfair  because
    the sponsor's licence had been withdrawn by  the  respondent  and  that
    this was something which was beyond his control.  He  referred  to  the
    determination in Patel (revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India
    [2011] in which it had been stated that where  a  sponsor  licence  was
    revoked by the SSHD during  an  application  a  reasonable  opportunity
    should be given to the applicant to vary the application by identifying
    a new sponsor.  The appellant further argued that the decision  was  in
    breach of his rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   The appellant asked that his appeal be dealt with on the basis  of  the
    papers.  Judge Pacey considered the papers before her and, in  a  brief
    determination,  stated  that  the  appeal  was  dismissed  because  the
    appellant had not had a valid CAS when the decision was made.

5.   The appellant appealed.  The focus of his appeal was that the  decision
    was wrong because he had not had a  valid  CAS  because  the  college's
    licence had been revoked and that therefore he should have been granted
    a period of grace during which to make a further application.   It  was
    on that basis that Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  McClure
    granted permission.

6.   There was no appearance by the appellant before  me.   I  am  satisfied
    from a perusal of the file that not only did the appellant not  have  a
    representative but that he had been properly served with  a  notice  of
    hearing.  I heard from Mr Avery who pointed out that  the  reality  was
    that the CAS had  been  withdrawn  by  the  sponsor  -  that  had  been
    independent of the decision to revoke the sponsor's licence  and  there
    was nothing to indicate that the sponsor had been wrong to withdraw the
    CAS and accordingly the Secretary of State was entitled to  refuse  the
    application.

7.   The reality is  that  the  revocation  of  the  sponsor's  licence  was
    independent of the withdrawal of the CAS - or, at least,  there  is  no
    evidence on the file before me that the two events were  interconnected
    and moreover there is nothing to show that the sponsor was not entitled
    to revoke the CAS.

8.   Accordingly I find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  her
    decision dismissing this appeal shall stand.

9.   It was not argued that the rights of the appellant under Article  8  of
    the ECHR are infringed by the decision but, in any event, there  is  no
    evidence before me that would suggest that the removal of the appellant
    would be a disproportionate interference with those rights.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on both immigration and human rights grounds.

Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
