
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05928/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 6 February 2015                   |On 16 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                               ABIGAIL MARQUEZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby counsel instructed by the Appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Heynes promulgated on 24 June 2014 which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 15 August 1973  and  is  a  national  of  the
    Philippines.

 4. On 29 December 2008 the Appellant entered the United Kingdom with entry
    clearance as a student valid until 28 February 2011. The Appellant  was
    granted further leave as a student until 30 December 2012.

 5. On 19 December 2012 the Appellant made an  application  for  one  years
    discretionary leave outside the Rules as her son  had  had  open  heart
    surgery in late October  2012  and  according  to  her  representatives
    letter dated 27 December 2012 her son  would  need  a  long  period  of
    recovery in  the  UK.  The  supporting  letter  also  stated  that  the
    Appellant and her ex husband share custody of their son and that her ex
    husband was applying with her son as family members of an EEA  national
    and had been granted a certificate  of  application.  The  letter  also
    suggested that the Appellant had established a private life with family
    and colleagues  and  friends  within  the  meaning  of  Article  8  and
    suggested that the right to private life included a right to  work  and
    pursue her studies.

 6. On 9 January 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The health care plan provided by the Appellant  dated  21  November
         2012 stated that the Appellant's son  had  made  a  full  recovery.
         Further documentation provided from the NHS stated that  within  12
         months the Appellant's son would be fully capable  of  engaging  in
         vigorous exercise and contact sports as by  this  time  the  breast
         bone would have fully healed.

      b) From the evidence  provided  the  Appellant's  son  is  capable  of
         returning to his home country and the Appellant could care for  him
         there if she wished.

      c) The Appellant had also failed to respond  to  a  request  dated  10
         December  2013  requesting  further  information  to  be  used   in
         consideration of her application. No response was received  by  the
         deadline of 24 December 2013.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Heynes  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judges full  findings  were  as  follows  at
    paragraph 7 of the decision:

    "The Appellant has provided no up to date medical evidence to show that
    he requires anything more than monitoring. It is not even clear whether
    the removal of the Appellant would trigger the removal of her son  who,
    it appears, is seeking to stay in the United Kingdom with his father on
    the basis of an application under EU law."

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged and permission was initially refused. The
    application was renewed and on 18 December 2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen gave permission to appeal stating that he was:

    "... concerned at the minimal reasoning in the  determination.  It  may
    make no difference at the end of the day, but  the  matters  raised  in
    particular at paragraphs 1.3, 1.4 and  ground  2  of  the  grounds  are
    matters of concern."

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Sowerby  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that :

      a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) There was a statutory duty to consider the best  interests  of  the
         child and he relied on JO and  Others  (Section  55  duty)  Nigeria
         [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) to suggest  that  extensive  fact  findings
         were required. Neither the refusal letter nor the decision  of  the
         Judge referred to the best interests of the child in this case  and
         there had been no proper assessment of the facts.

      c) The circumstances of the family as a whole had not been  considered
         as there was reference to the  father's  situation  in  the  letter
         accompanying the application.

      d) There was no consideration of the mothers Article 8 rights  in  the
         decision and these were raised in the accompanying letter.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Wilding submitted that :

      a) It was the Appellant's decision to have her case considered on  the
         basis of the papers presented to the Judge.

      b) The application was for leave outside the Rules in  order  for  her
         son to rest and recuperate.

      c) The witness statements from the Appellant  and  her  son  were  not
         before the Judge as they post date the decision.

      d) The Tribunal was not required to make additional  enquiries  beyond
         the information provided by the applicant.

      e) He relied on AJ (India) and Others v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1191  the
         Court of Appeal considered  whether  the  Tribunal  can  deal  with
         Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
         even  where  the  respondent  has  not.   The  court  concluded  in
         paragraph 24 that it can and it  is  not  necessary  to  remit  the
         matter.  The court also concluded that it is not necessary to refer
         to Section 55 in terms if it is clear that it has been applied.

      f) The Judge in this appeal concluded that the Appellant, on the basis
         of the evidence before him, did not require more than monitoring.

      g) He reminded the tribunal that  this  was  an  appeal  made  by  the
         Appellant not her son as he was not to be  removed:  there  was  no
         evidence of any care she gave to her son.

      h) The Judge could not have come to  a  different  conclusion  on  the
         basis of the evidence before him.

11. In reply Mr Sowerby on behalf of the Appellant submitted :

      a) This was not just an application made for leave outside  the  Rules
         on the basis of the Appellant's child's ill health, there had  also
         been reference made to the Appellant's private life.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no errors of law that were material to the outcome of the
    decision.

13. The Appellant made an application for leave to remain outside the rules
    on 29 December 2012 and this was accompanied by a letter from her legal
    representatives  dated  27  December  2012.  The  letter  set  out  the
    background to the application that the Appellant  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom as a student in 2008 leaving her husband and child Dale in  the
    Philippines until at some point prior to 2012 they joined  her  in  the
    United Kingdom. The Appellant and her husband divorced  in  March  2012
    and the letter indicated that her ex husband and son were  applying  as
    family members of an EEA national for a permit to remain in the  United
    Kingdom. The letter went on to say that prior to her  sons  ill  health
    the Appellant intended either to continue her  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom or seek overseas employment.  In mid 2012  Dale  was  diagnosed
    with a heart murmur and required open heart surgery  which  he  had  in
    October 2012. The letter asked for  1  years  discretionary  leave  'to
    allow Ms Marquez to look after her son as he recovers.' The application
    was refused for the reasons set out above.

14.  It  was  against  this  background  that  the  Judge  dealt  with  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal of  leave  on  the  papers.  The
    Judge had before him the application  and  supporting  letter  together
    with letters from Barts Health up to and including a health plan  dated
    21 November 2012. There were no  witness  statements  from  either  the
    Appellant, her son or her ex husband enlarging upon  the  evidence  set
    out in the supporting letter and  accompanying  documents.  Although  a
    request was made in a letter dated 10 December 2013 for more up to date
    information in relation to her son's health given that in fact  a  year
    had passed since the date of the application, there was no response  to
    that request. The Appellant has now produced a letter dated 26 November
    2013 from Dr Graham Derrick but I have looked at the file of papers the
    Judge had and there is no correspondence to suggest that the letter was
    before Judge Heynes and indeed the  copy  of  Dr  Derrick's  letter  is
    attached to statements from the Appellant and her son that clearly post
    date the date of the decision.

15. The Judge dismissed the appeal and his findings were  on  any  analysis
    extremely brief and do not  make  explicit  findings  by  reference  to
    Article 8 either in relation to Dale or to the Appellant herself, refer
    to any caselaw or refer to the best interests of the child. They  could
    not be described as the 'scrupulous analysis' referred to in JO.  I  am
    satisfied that the findings made by the  Judge  were  inadequate  given
    their brevity and the material he had been before him and the facts  in
    issue.

16. However I have looked at the recent Court of Appeal  decision in SSHD v
    AJ (Angola) [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 that an error of law by the First-tier
    Tribunal may be considered immaterial -

     " ... if it is clear that on the materials  before  the  Tribunal  any
    rational Tribunal must have come to the same conclusion  or  if  it  is
    clear that,  despite  its  failure  to  refer  to  the  relevant  legal
    instruments, the Tribunal has in fact applied the  test  which  it  was
    supposed to apply according to those instruments."

17.  I am satisfied that on any rational analysis of the material that  was
    before the Judge any Tribunal would inevitably have come  to  the  same
    conclusion albeit they may have set out the  basis  for  reaching  that
    conclusion more fully. It is clear that if the Tribunal had adopted the
    structured approach set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  the  issue  would
    have been one of proportionality as the first  4  questions  in  Razgar
    would have been answered affirmatively.  In  assessing  proportionality
    the starting point would be that the best interests of Dale would  have
    been a primary consideration. I remind myself that in Azimi-Moayed  and
    others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT  197
    (IAC) (Blake J) which was relied on by Mr  Sowerby  the  Tribunal  held
    that although in some cases this may require a judge to explore whether
    the duty requires further information to be obtained or inquiry  to  be
    made, the judge primarily acts on the evidence in the case. Where  that
    evidence gives no hint of a suggestion that the welfare of the child is
    threatened by the immigration decision in question, or that the child's
    best interests are undermined  thereby,  there  is  no  basis  for  any
    further judicial exploration or reasoned decision on the matter.

18. The material before the Judge showed that Dale  had  been  successfully
    operated on in October 2012 and there was a health care plan  dated  21
    November 2012 that stated that he had made a full recovery  and  within
    12 months would be fully capable of participating in vigorous  exercise
    and contact sports as his breast bone would  have  been  fully  healed.
    What he required was 6 monthly check ups. Indeed the  medical  evidence
    dated 26 November 2013, while not seen by the Judge, confirmed that  he
    was 'generally well' and again simply required a six monthly follow up.



19. The year that the Appellant had originally applied for  had  passed  by
    the time the Judge came to decide this case and there was  no  evidence
    before the him on which he could have concluded that the removal of his
    mother would impact on his well being in  any  way  given  the  medical
    evidence and factually the period of recuperation she had requested had
    passed by and there was no indication that  Dales  condition  had  done
    anything other than improve.

20. While the best interests of a child  are  to  be  brought  up  by  both
    parents this had never been the expectation in this case: the Appellant
    and her son had lived apart when she came to the United Kingdom by  the
    choice of her and her then husband and then they had divorced while she
    was in the United Kingdom and were never going to be brought up by both
    parents. What brief  information  was  provided  with  the  application
    suggested that the Appellant had anticipated the possibility of working
    abroad while her son lived in the United Kingdom with  his  father  and
    his father's new partner and again this was their  choice.  Looking  at
    the evidence that the Judge had before him I am  satisfied  that  while
    his findings were brief they reflected a  conclusion  that  would  have
    inevitably have been reached by any Judge  applying  the  relevant  law
    that there was nothing to suggest that the Appellant's removal was  not
    in his best interest.

21. In relation to the failure to assess  the  Appellant's  own  Article  8
    claim I am satisfied  that  the  principal  basis  for  the  claim  for
    discretionary leave was  Dale's  health.  The  only  reference  to  the
    Appellant's circumstances was that she had established 'a private  life
    with family, colleagues and friends within the  meaning  of  Article  8
    .....(and) the right to private life includes the right  to  work,  and
    pursue her studies.' Even had the Judge addressed this  aspect  of  the
    claim I am satisfied that he would inevitably have  concluded  that  it
    was proportionate to  remove  the  Appellant.  There  was  no  evidence
    provided as to  the  Appellant's  private  life  claim  other  than  in
    relation to Dale and the undisputed fact that she  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a student and had apparently completed the course for  which
    she had been granted leave. On the basis of  the  material  before  the
    Judge there was no evidential basis for concluding that  it  was  other
    than proportionate to remove the Appellant.



CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that errors of law have  been  established  but  they
    were not material to the outcome of the decision.



DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 6 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

