
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05671/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd February 2016                 |On 26th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Jein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Appellant is a citizen of the Netherlands  born  in  1975.  His  appeal
    against deportation was allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Perry
    under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  and  on  human  rights
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 7th August 2015.

2.   The Respondent appealed on the following grounds:

         (i)  The judge had misdirected himself in law  in  reassessing  the
             risk of reoffending contrary to the assessment  in  the  OASys
             Report.  Further, in doing so the judge failed to give reasons
             for  finding  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  not   be
             justified under Regulation 21;

         (ii) The judge failed to give adequate reasons for why he disagreed
             with the OASys Report and why the oral evidence and statements
             from the Appellant's partner were compelling. The judge failed
             to give adequate reasons for why the  Appellant's  deportation
             was not proportionate under the EEA Regulations 2006;

         (iii)     The  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  why  the
             Appellant's removal would have an unduly harsh impact  on  his
             wife or children given that there was  no  evidence  that  the
             children would be neglected or suffer any harm.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  on
    14th October 2015 on the ground that it was arguable  that  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  had  not  adequately  engaged  with  the  OASys  Report
    conclusions on  risk  of  reoffending  and  harm  in  coming  to  their
    conclusions, and thus had not  properly  considered  relevant  evidence
    before them. It was also arguable that the conclusion that it would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to go to the Netherlands was inadequately
    reasoned.

4.   The Appellant's immigration history is as follows.  He entered  the  UK
    in April 2003 and applied for residence as  an  EEA  national  in  June
    2003.  He was issued with a residence permit valid until July 2008.  On
    14th October 2003 he applied for a residence document as  a  spouse  on
    behalf of his wife. It was accepted that the  Appellant  had  permanent
    residence and his wife and eldest two children had since become British
    citizens.  The Appellant's third child was in fact a Dutch national.

5.   The Appellant was convicted in January  2005  of  battery,  in  October
    2009 of assault  occasioning  actual  bodily  harm  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to six months suspended for 24 months, and in July  2011  the
    Appellant was convicted of battery  and  sentenced  to  a  three  month
    restraining order.  He was also convicted on the same date  of  failing
    to comply with the community requirements of a suspended  sentence.  He
    was sentenced to five months' imprisonment.

6.   On 16th May 2014 the Appellant was convicted of conspiracy  to  defraud
    and sentenced to  sixteen  months'  imprisonment.  He  did  not  appeal
    against the conviction or the sentence. In light of the  conviction  he
    was served with a notice of liability to deportation.

Submissions

7.   Ms Sreeraman submitted that, although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    rehearsed the evidence at length in his conclusions  and  findings,  he
    failed to provide reasons for his conclusion at paragraph 68 that:

         "Taking these matters together, I am satisfied and so find that the
         Appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  wife
         and the three children and this being the case I further find  that
         the deportation of the Appellant would prejudice his  prospects  of
         rehabilitation. I further find that there is no real risk  that  he
         may reoffend in the future and  that  his  deportation  is  neither
         justified or proportionate or in accordance with the principles  of
         Regulation 21(5)."

8.   At paragraph 60 the judge set out the Respondent's case  and  then  the
    Appellant's case but  did  not  give  reasons  for  which  position  he
    preferred. The judge continued with this  approach  in  the  subsequent
    paragraphs but failed to give any reasons to  support  his  finding  at
    paragraph 68.

9.   The judge's conclusion that there was no real risk that  the  Appellant
    will reoffend in the future was at odds with the  OASys  Report,  which
    indicated that the Appellant was at low risk of reoffending. The  judge
    made no reference to this in the decision.  He referred  to  the  OASys
    Report at paragraph 65 and acknowledged that the Appellant  constituted
    a medium risk in the community, to the three children and his wife, but
    there was no acknowledgement of the assessment that the  Appellant  was
    at low risk of reoffending. Further, the judge failed to give  adequate
    reasons for why he found there was no  real  risk  that  the  Appellant
    would reoffend in the future.

10.  The judge failed to set out his reasons for finding that the  Appellant
    was not a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society. The judge failed  to  look
    at all the requirements of Regulation  21(5)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    2006, considering the Appellant's personal conduct as a whole, not just
    his own assessment of the OASys Report.

11.  Mr Slatter relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that the  judge
    referred to the OASys Report at paragraphs  59  and  65.   The  reasons
    given in the refusal letter by the Respondent that the Appellant  would
    be at risk of reoffending was on the basis that he would be  unable  to
    find employment and accommodation.  The judge found that the  Appellant
    when released on bail had returned to live with his wife and  children.
    This post dated the OASys assessment.  He found that the Appellant  was
    at no real risk of reoffending because he had stable accommodation  and
    was supported by his wife.

12.  In relation to his wife and family, the judge gave clear reasons.   The
    Respondent  had  disputed  this  relationship.   However,  on   hearing
    evidence from  the  Appellant's  wife  and  reading  letters  from  his
    children it was open to the judge to find  that  the  relationship  was
    genuine and subsisting. There has been no challenge to this finding  in
    the grounds of appeal. There was also no  basis  for  saying  that  the
    Appellant was a risk to his family given that he had been  living  with
    them and his wife supported his appeal.

13.  The assessment of low risk in the OASys  Report  was  premised  on  the
    fact that the Appellant  would  be  unable  to  obtain  employment  and
    accommodation. That was not in fact the case because the Appellant  had
    the support of his wife.  The  judge  clearly  identified  the  crucial
    issues in  this  case  which  were  rehabilitation  and  propensity  to
    reoffend. The judge acknowledged that lack of a stable environment  may
    tempt the Appellant to commit further offences, but given he was now in
    a stable family environment, the judge's finding that there was no real
    risk of reoffending was one which was open to him.

14.  In any event, any error in  relation  to  the  assessment  of  risk  of
    reoffending  was  not  material.   The  OASys  Report  found  that  the
    Appellant was at low risk of reoffending and since  the  Appellant  had
    obtained permanent residence the test to satisfy was  that  of  serious
    grounds for concluding that the Appellant would be a threat  to  public
    policy. The assessment of low risk of reoffending set out in the  OASys
    Report did not meet that test.

15.  The judge at paragraph 46  correctly  directed  himself  on  Regulation
    21(5) and identified the factors which he had taken  into  account.  It
    was  clear  to  the  Respondent  why  the  Appellant  succeeded   under
    Regulation 21, namely because of a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his wife and children he was at no real risk  of  reoffending  and
    therefore there were no serious grounds of public policy in this  case.
    There was no material error of law in  the  judge's  decision  and  the
    Respondent's grounds amounted to a reasons challenge.

16.  In response, Ms Sreeraman submitted that the  judge  acknowledged  that
    if the Appellant got into financial difficulties he may be  tempted  to
    reoffend.  This was relevant to his  propensity  to  reoffend  and  the
    conclusion  at  paragraph   68   was   unreasoned.    The   Appellant's
    relationship with his wife was subsisting at the time  of  the  offence
    and  therefore  there  were  no  adequate  reasons  why  the  risk  had
    diminished.

17.  In relation to the remaining grounds, Ms  Sreeraman  accepted  that  if
    there was no error in relation to the EEA  Regulations  2006  then  the
    remaining grounds were irrelevant.  However, if an error was  found  in
    relation to the EEA  Regulations  2006,  in  that  there  were  serious
    grounds of public policy in the Appellant's case, then  the  assessment
    of Article 8 was fundamentally flawed because the judge had  approached
    it on the basis that he was not a serious threat to public policy.  The
    judge's  conclusions  at  paragraphs  69  onwards  were  not   in   the
    alternative to his findings under the EEA Regulations 2006.

Discussion and Conclusion

18.  It was accepted that the Appellant had  been  resident  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations 2006 for  a  continuous  period  of
    five years. He had therefore acquired a permanent  right  of  residence
    and deportation could only be justified on serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security.

19.  The judge properly directed himself on Regulation  21(5)  and  referred
    to the components  of  the  Regulation  at  paragraph  56,  namely  the
    decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of  proportionality;  the
    decision must be based exclusively on the Appellant's personal conduct;
    the personal conduct of the Appellant must represent a genuine, present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society; matters isolated from the particulars of the case
    do not justify  deportation  decision;  and  the  Appellant's  previous
    convictions do not in themselves justify deportation.

20.  The judge took into account the  nature  of  the  Appellant's  offence,
    namely that he was a willing participant in a conspiracy to tamper with
    ATM machines in order to defraud bank account holders.  The  enterprise
    was organised and sophisticated and  involved  obtaining  and  adapting
    skimming devices, placing miniature cameras to capture the  input  PINs
    of innocent customers and downloading the results to  laptops  so  that
    fraudulent  withdrawals  could  thereafter  be  made.  The  Appellant's
    involvement was limited to driving fellow gang members to and from  the
    bank. The crime was a serious one and the Appellant received a sentence
    of sixteen months.

21.  It is clear from the decision that the  judge  took  into  account  the
    OASys Report and he specifically referred to it at  paragraphs  59  and
    65, although he made no specific reference to the assessment of risk of
    reoffending. The weight to be attached to the OASys Report was a matter
    for the judge. The judge also acknowledged at  paragraph  60  that  the
    Appellant may be at risk of reoffending if he faced financial  hardship
    and was therefore tempted to engage in similar illegal activity,  as  a
    driver, as he did in relation  to  his  conviction  for  conspiracy  to
    defraud in 2014.

22.  The judge took into account the Appellant's  previous  convictions  for
    domestic violence and the evidence that the Appellant had  been  living
    with his wife and children since his release on bail,  a  matter  which
    post dated the OASys Report. The judge set out his findings in relation
    to the Appellant's relationship with his family at paragraphs 61 to 67.

23.  Taking into account all these matters, the judge's finding  that  there
    was no real risk that the Appellant would reoffend in  the  future  was
    one which was open to him on the  evidence.  The  matters  set  out  at
    paragraphs 56 to 67 demonstrate adequate  reasons  to  support  such  a
    finding.

24.  Insofar as the  judge  may  have  erred  in  reassessing  the  risk  of
    reoffending, contrary to what was stated in the OASys  Report,  such  a
    reassessment was not material to the decision that deportation was  not
    justified  or  proportionate  in  accordance  with  the  principles  in
    Regulation 21(5).

25.   The  threshold  test  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  should   be
    justified on serious grounds of public policy or  public  security  was
    not made out on the basis of the OASys Report.   The  Appellant  was  a
    driver in  the  conspiracy  and  had  been  assessed  at  low  risk  of
    reoffending.

26.  The failure to give reasons was not material because the assessment  in
    the OASys Report that the Appellant was at low risk of reoffending  was
    insufficient, given the judge's unchallenged findings  in  relation  to
    his family circumstances, to support a  finding  that  deportation  was
    justified on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

27.  Accordingly, I am of the view that there was no error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision to allow the appeal under the  EEA  Regulations  2006.
    His reasoning might well have been clearer, but the reasons given  were
    adequate.

28.  In any event, on the facts of the case and the assessment in the  OASys
    Report it cannot be said that the personal conduct of  this  Appellant,
    taking into account all the facts of his case, justify  deportation  on
    serious grounds of public policy or public security.

29.  Since there was  no  error  in  the  judge's  decision  under  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006, there is in effect no requirement to consider Article
    8 and I agree with Ms Sreeraman that grounds 2 and 3 would  only  merit
    further consideration if the Respondent's appeal succeeded in  relation
    to ground 1 under the EEA Regulations 2006.

30.  There was no error of law in the judge's decision  promulgated  on  7th
    August 2015 and I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  J Frances     Date: 22nd February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
