
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05941/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |     Determination & Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 25 February 2015                      |     On 27 May 2015                  |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                             eromosele ebekozien

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Omorere, Solicitor, Bestway Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 14 October 1989.   On  24
    February 2012 he made an  application  for  a  residence  card  as  the
    extended family member  of  an  EEA  national.   That  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 16 August 2012.

 2. His appeal against the decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bell at a hearing on 1 July 2014.  Judge Bell dismissed the appeal with
    reference to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations").  He further concluded that Article 8  was  not
    engaged.

    The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 3. In this summary of the grounds of appeal it will be  evident  that  the
    way that the grounds were drafted is at best intemperate and  at  worst
    thoroughly unprofessional.  Paragraph 1 of the grounds sets the tone by
    stating as follows:

         "The case before the learned judge was  a  very  simple  one.   But
         somehow she manages to complicate what would have been a simplistic
         summation."

 4. At paragraph 4 of the grounds, in criticising the judge's reference  to
    various authorities, it is stated that it is  "very  hard  to  see  the
    relevance of these elaborate conjectures to  the  matter  before  her."
    The paragraph goes on to state that:

         "It is therefore the case that from the outset the learned judge is
         clearly oblivious of the simplicity of the matter  before  her  and
         only a gross exaggeration of the matter would suffice."

 5. In essence, it is contended that the judge's assessment of the issue of
    dependency, and membership of a household is flawed.  At  paragraphs  6
    and 7 of the grounds one finds the following:

         "During the hearing the HOPO and I agreed that  the  appellant  was
         living with the sponsor in Nigeria and that if that  was  the  case
         all other incidental matters like free  accommodation,  free  meals
         and if the dependant was at school going age, then the school  fees
         would naturally flow from being a member of his household.

         This agreement was reached in the full view of  the  learned  judge
         and therefore sitting as an impartial arbiter  of  the  hearing  we
         should  have  at  least  have  the  benefit   of   properly   being
         represented.  Her decision therefore is tainted with bias and needs
         to be revisited by a panel so that justice can be seen to be done."



 6. At paragraph 11 of the grounds it is stated:

         "The learned judge has done herself no favours by clearly  ignoring
         what was clearly before her."

    Lastly, it is said at paragraph 13 that:

         "the learned judge was on a nice walk of her own  into  the  bright
         summer noon day of  British  sunlight  and  completely  missed  the
         simple matter placed before her."

 7. In submissions  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  before  me  Mr  Omorere
    contended that First-tier Judge Bell  had  in  effect  disregarded  the
    documentary evidence in relation to dependency and  membership  of  the
    sponsor's household.  Reference was made to a tenancy agreement, family
    photographs and evidence of the payment of school fees.

 8. It was also submitted that bank statements showed bank transfers to the
    appellant and there was other evidence in the appellant's bundle  which
    was not considered by the judge.

 9. So far as dependency is concerned, it was submitted that this need  not
    be complete  dependency  on  the  sponsor  as  decided  in  RK  (OFM  -
    membership of household - dependency) India [2010] UKUT 421 (IAC).

10. Mr Smart said that he did not have a copy  of  the  appellant's  bundle
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal, although did have  a  copy  of
    the tenancy agreement.

11. The suggestion that the judge had ignored certain documentary  evidence
    is not apparent from the grounds  as  drafted.   The  judge  took  into
    account the  tenancy  agreement  as  can  be  seen  from  [22]  of  the
    determination.  However, because Mr Smart did not have a  copy  of  the
    appellant's bundle, he said that  he  was  not  able  to  make  further
    submissions on the issue raised about the judge's failure to take  into
    account relevant documents.

12. It was however submitted on behalf of the respondent that  one  of  the
    factors considered by the judge was that the appellant had come to  the
    UK in 2008 to study.  The tenancy agreement was for the period 2006  to
    2009 when the sponsor was in the UK.  Dependency  or  membership  of  a
    household has to be a recent event, and a lapsed dependency would  have
    no meaning within the EEA Regulations.  This is a matter that is  dealt
    with at [22] of the determination.

13. In reply, Mr Omorere submitted that there was no lapsed dependency  and
    there was evidence  of  the  appellant  being  wholly  reliant  on  the
    sponsor, as the appellant was unable to work.

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal

14. Judge Bell set out the background to the application  for  a  residence
    card, that being that the appellant claims to be the  dependent  nephew
    of a Spanish national exercising Treaty rights in the UK.  He  set  out
    the legislative framework and cited relevant authorities in relation to
    extended family members, dependency and membership of a household.

15. Within the "Findings" section of the determination there are  two  sub-
    headings being "Dependency in Nigeria/membership of same household" and
    "Current dependency/membership of household".  Under the former, it was
    noted that the appellant claims to have been  dependent  on  his  uncle
    when living in Nigeria and that his  evidence  was  that  he  left  his
    family home with his parents and siblings to live with his  uncle  when
    he was aged 9.  It was noted that the appellant claimed that his  uncle
    rented a flat for them in Lagos and when  he  was  11  his  uncle  left
    Nigeria, leaving him in the flat.  An  aunt  apparently  came  to  live
    there with him but his uncle continued to pay the rent and support  him
    and pay his school fees.

16. There then  follows  an  analysis  of  the  evidence  and  the  judge's
    conclusions that he was not satisfied  that  the  evidence  established
    that the appellant and his uncle shared a  household  or  that  he  was
    dependent on his uncle in Nigeria.  He concluded that the oral evidence
    was not credible.  With reference to the appellant's  uncle  apparently
    having paid for the appellant's schooling since the age of 9, he  found
    it unclear as to why the only school letter provided would  only  refer
    to the year 2004/5.  He also  found  that  it  was  unlikely  that  the
    appellant's uncle would install him in a flat in Lagos, away  from  his
    parents and siblings at the age of 9 and then leave  Nigeria  only  two
    years later, having to bring in an aunt to look after the appellant  in
    the flat.  It was noted that the appellant has two other  siblings  and
    parents  in  Nigeria  and  the  sponsor  said   that   he   took   over
    responsibility  for  the  appellant  when  his  father  lost  his  job.
    However, Judge Bell thought it unclear as  to  why  the  sponsor  would
    single out the appellant, his nephew, to live with rather than keep the
    family together.  He concluded that it was far  more  likely  that  the
    appellant was living with his parents and siblings in their family home
    before coming to the UK to study.  If he had been sharing  a  household
    with his uncle since the age of 9, he was of the view that there  would
    be much more documentary evidence of this.

17. Thus, he was not satisfied that the appellant had  shown  that  he  was
    living in the same household as his uncle in Nigeria  or  that  he  was
    dependent on him there.

18. As to the second sub-heading, he noted that the appellant came  to  the
    UK in 2008 to study and did not apply for a family permit as the family
    member of the sponsor at that  point.   He  found  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence to show that his uncle was the person who paid his
    university fees.  The evidence from the appellant's uncle was  that  he
    was not the only one who paid the appellant's school fees and  he  said
    that his other brothers also sent money.  It  was  noted  that  in  the
    witness statement  the  appellant  said  that  his  uncle  "contributed
    towards" his university costs.  There is reference to a payment  on  16
    April 2013 to the university which is likely to be for fees  the  judge
    found, but that payment did not come from the sponsor.

19. Consideration was given to receipts for transfers of  funds,  and  bank
    statements.  Judge Bell concluded  that  whilst  those  did  show  some
    payments of money from the  sponsor  to  the  appellant,  most  of  the
    deposits into the  appellant's  account  come  from  elsewhere.   Those
    payments are further analysed at [28].   He  concluded  that  the  bank
    statements did not demonstrate financial dependency on the  appellant's
    uncle in the period February to June  2013.   It  was  noted  that  the
    appellant's uncle's income is not substantial and he appears to  be  in
    receipt of housing benefit.

20. Consideration was given to documentary evidence submitted in support of
    the contention that the appellant lived, and is living, at his  uncle's
    address.  At [30] however, Judge Bell concluded  that  the  documentary
    evidence was not reliable evidence of actual residency in that property
    as the appellant confirmed that he had always used his uncle's  address
    as a correspondence address since being in the UK, even when living  at
    university.  In the next paragraph, it was noted that the appellant had
    said that he was no longer working.  He had not  submitted  any  up-to-
    date bank  statements  that  would  show  his  financial  activity  and
    circumstances as at present.  Judge Bell found that there was no up-to-
    date documentary evidence linking  him  to  his  uncle's  address,  the
    documentary evidence to which he had referred all relating to  2013  or
    before.  It is to be noted that the  hearing  before  Judge  Bell  took
    place on 1 July 2014.

21. Thus, Judge Bell concluded that the appellant had not shown that he  is
    currently financially dependent on his uncle or that he had been  since
    coming to the UK.  Nor had he demonstrated that he was a member of  his
    uncle's household since coming to  the  UK,  or  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  Likewise, he had not shown  that  he  was  a  member  of  his
    uncle's household or dependent on him before coming to the UK.

    My assessment

22. 'Dependency' means financial support needed to  meet  essential  living
    requirements (see SM (India v Entry Clearance Officer  (Mumbai)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 1426).  There is no need  to  establish  the  reason  for  the
    dependency or that  it  is  a  dependency  of  necessity  (Lim  (EEA  -
    dependency) [2013] UKUT 00437 (IAC) and  Reyes  (EEA  Regs:  dependency
    [2013] UKUT 314 (IAC)).  Similarly, dependency  does  not  have  to  be
    whole or main but there does need to be economic dependency in fact (SM
    (India)).

23. The grounds seem to  suggest  that  there  was  agreement  between  the
    Presenting  Officer  and  the  appellant's  representative   that   the
    appellant  was  living  with  the  sponsor  in  Nigeria,  an  agreement
    apparently made before the First-tier Judge.  However, there is nothing
    at all to support the assertion that there was  any  agreement  between
    the parties, still less that there was any concession made on behalf of
    the respondent.  As was pointed  out  by  Mr  Smart,  at  [19]  of  the
    determination it is clear that the respondent disputed both  membership
    of a household and dependency, both in Nigeria and in the UK.

24. At the hearing before me it was suggested on behalf  of  the  appellant
    that Judge Bell had failed to take into account documentary evidence in
    the appellant's bundle.  Despite my repeated attempts to ascertain from
    Mr Omorere what documents it was suggested the judge did not take  into
    account, I was referred to only one document in this respect.  This  is
    a letter dated 15 July 2013 at page 122 of the bundle from one Blessing
    Iwezuife who is the sister-in-law of the sponsor.  That letter  is  not
    specifically referred to in the judge's  determination.   However,  all
    that it materially says is that there is a loving relationship  between
    the sponsor and the  appellant  and  that  the  sponsor  supported  the
    appellant "during his school in Nigeria and also his  degree  programme
    in the United Kingdom."  The letter is typed  but  not  signed  and  no
    detail of the extent of any support is revealed  in  the  letter.   The
    witness seemingly did not attend to give evidence.

25. I cannot see that the failure by the judge to mention specifically this
    particular item of evidence is in any way significant.  The  judge  was
    not required to mention every piece of evidence before him.  The letter
    itself provided scant support for the claimed dependency or  membership
    of a household and it is abundantly clear from the  determination  that
    the judge did take  into  account  the  documents  in  the  appellant's
    bundle.

26. It is suggested that Judge Bell did not have regard to the  appellant's
    bank statements.  That is plainly not the case, as is evident from [27]-
    [28].  It was then suggested that the appellant's driving  licence  was
    not considered, the driving  licence  showing  the  sponsor's  address.
    However, again the driving licence is referred to at [30].

27. There is no basis for suggesting that the judge did not have regard  to
    all the documentary  evidence  put  before  him.   He  considered  that
    evidence in detail as is plain from the determination.

28. Complaint is made about the judge's assessment of the appellant's  bank
    statements (contrary to the suggestion that bank  statements  were  not
    taken into account).  It is submitted  that  the  judge  was  wrong  to
    conclude  that  because  the  appellant  received  payment  from  other
    sources, he could not have been dependent on  his  uncle,  because  the
    appellant is  not  required  to  be  wholly  dependent  on  his  uncle.
    However, Judge Bell was entitled, indeed bound, to consider the  extent
    to which there appeared to be financial support from  his  uncle.   The
    fact that there were numerous sources of  other  deposits  and  only  a
    small proportion of funds coming  from  the  appellant's  uncle  was  a
    sufficient basis for him to conclude that he was not dependent  on  his
    uncle at all.  It is also to be noted that the  appellant  had  savings
    but had not submitted his savings account and his uncle at the  hearing
    was apparently unaware that he had a savings account.

29. As regards documentary evidence  addressed  to  the  appellant  at  his
    uncle's address in the UK, Judge  Bell  concluded  that  this  was  not
    reliable  evidence  of  actual  residency  because  the  appellant  had
    confirmed in evidence that he had always used his uncle's address as  a
    correspondence address since being in  the  UK,  even  when  living  at
    university.  He also noted that there  was  no  up-to-date  documentary
    evidence linking him to his uncle's address.

30. The evidence in relation to membership of a household and/or dependency
    in Nigeria was, according to Judge Bell, "woefully insufficient".   His
    analysis of the evidence is such that he was entitled to come  to  that
    view.

31. Similarly, he gave careful consideration to the evidence  in  terms  of
    the situation in the UK, and similarly found that the appellant had not
    established either membership of his uncle's household since coming  to
    the UK or dependency on him.  The findings are carefully reasoned, take
    into account the  documentary  and  oral  evidence,  and  are  entirely
    legally sustainable.

32. Nothing in the grounds or in the oral submissions before me reveals any
    error of law in the determination of Judge Bell in any respect.

33. In relation to my initial observations on the grounds of appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, the  way  they  are  drafted  does  no  credit  to  the
    appellant's representatives and the Upper Tribunal does not  expect  to
    see grounds drafted in that manner again.







    Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek


