
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/05698/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons promulgated
On 16 September 2014   On 29 January 2015


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Donald Scott Dubay
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For  the  Respondent:     Ms.  S.  Akinbolu  of  Counsel  instructed  by  CK
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Scobbie promulgated on  11  June  2014,  allowing  Mr  Dubay's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision dated  11  January  2014  to
      refuse to issue a 'derivative residence card'  under  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Dubay is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr  Dubay  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.

Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of the United States of America born on 25
      August 1968. He entered the UK as a visitor on  24  May  2011.  On  24
      November 2011 he made  an  application  for  a  'derivative  residence
      card'. The application was refused on 28 February 2012.

   4. The Appellant made a further application for a  'derivative  residence
      card' on 5 April 2012. The application was based on  his  relationship
      with Ms Kimberley Davis, a British citizen, to whom he was married  on
      27 October 2011. The application was refused for reasons set out in  a
      'reasons for refusal' letter dated 11 January 2014, and  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision was issued on  the  same  date.  Essentially  the
      Respondent was not satisfied that Ms Davis needed such a level of care
      from the Appellant that she would be unable to reside in the UK or  in
      another EEA state if the Appellant were required to leave the UK.

   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

   6. The appeal was dismissed under the EEA Regulations (albeit  the  Judge
      mistakenly referred to the Respondent's decision having been  made  in
      accordance with the Immigration Rules  in  his  concluding  paragraph,
      paragraph 42), but allowed on human rights grounds,  for  the  reasons
      set out the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

   7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on 31 July 2014.

   8. It is be noted that in granting permission to appeal Judge Kelly  made
      the following observation: "Although  the  respondent  argued  at  the
      hearing that mere refusal of an EEA Residence Card could not  lead  to
      removal of the applicant, and thus to the potential engagement of  the
      operation of Article 8 [see paragraph 35], this argument has not  been
      renewed in the application for permission to  appeal".  The  scope  or
      jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal to  determine  the  appeal  on
      human rights grounds accordingly was not a live issue before  me,  and
      Ms Isherwood did not seek to make it so.

Consideration

   9. In considering the appeal under the  EEA  Regulations  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge made a number of favourable findings in respect of  the
      relationship between the Appellant and Ms Davis, and the extent of the
      care which the Appellant provided  to  his  wife:  see  in  particular
      paragraphs 26-30. Nonetheless, the Judge did  not  consider  that  the
      circumstances reached the threshold - which he described as "something
      almost extraordinary" (paragraph 32) - such that  Ms  Davis  would  be
      unable to continue living in the UK if the Appellant were required  to
      leave the UK (paragraph 32).

  10.  Having  rejected  the  Appellant's  appeal  under   the   Regulations
      (paragraph 33), the Judge in an  analysis  consistent  with  the  five
      Razgar questions, identified the  key  issue  to  be  proportionality:
      (paragraph 37).

  11. The Judge clearly took into account his positive findings  as  to  the
      nature of the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Davis  -
      including necessarily his understanding of Ms Davis's health and  care
      needs and  the  extent  to  which  the  Appellant  met  these  -  when
      considering the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  Respondent's
      representative "made it absolutely clear in his  submissions  that  he
      was not expecting the Sponsor to move to the United States of America"
      (paragraph 27). This is particularly germane given the high  level  of
      medical input that Ms Davis receives in the UK, and it being  unlikely
      that she would have the necessary health cover were she to relocate to
      the USA with a pre-existing condition.

  12. The Judge had regard to the submissions  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent (paragraphs 38 and 39), before concluding in these terms at
      paragraphs 40 and 41:

 "It is perfectly clear that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  enjoy  a  very
      strong family life together. It  is  also  perfectly  clear  that  the
      Appellant is committed to providing a level of care and support to the
      Sponsor which she is not going to get anywhere else. If the  Appellant
      has to go back to the United State there can  be  difficulties  in  my
      view of them continuing their family life even by visit  visas.  There
      has to be some question as to whether or not the Sponsor is fit to  go
      on a visit to the United States. Further, having overstayed  his  visa
      on this occasion it would seem to me quite likely that  the  Appellant
      would be refused permission to come back on  a  visit  to  the  United
      Kingdom if he were to apply.

The volume of evidence of a medical nature  and  from  friends  relative  to
      what it means to the Sponsor to have the Appellant in her life  on  an
      everyday basis both from the  point  of  view  of  the  assistance  he
      provides to a person who is seriously  ill  and  also  moral  support,
      backed up by various pieces of evidence from other sources,  leads  me
      to the view that it would  be  disproportionate  for  the  application
      under Article 8 to be refused."

  13. The Respondent's grounds of challenge  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision as set out  in  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
      ultimately come down to an assertion that "the  Judge  has  materially
      erred  in  his  finding"   because   "[t]here   are   no   exceptional
      circumstances in this case that would result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
      consequences" (grounds at paragraph 5). The  remaining  paragraphs  of
      the grounds are essentially a rehearsal  of  the  relevant  facts  and
      procedural history.

  14. It seems to me that that is essentially an assertion  of  disagreement
      with the outcome and does not in and of itself identify  an  error  of
      law.

  15. Ms Isherwood, however, emphasised that the Judge had not overtly taken
      as a starting point the Immigration Rules, there being no analysis  of
      Appendix FM and how it might apply to the Appellant. To  that  extent,
      it  was  submitted,  the  Judge  had  not  adequately   identified   a
      justification for departing from the Rules.

  16. The representatives debated the appropriate approach to the  Rules  in
      light of the decisions in Edgehill [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and Haleemudeen
      [2014] EWCA Civ 558. In any event Ms  Akinbolu  identified  that  were
      regard to be had to the requirements of Appendix FM for a partner, the
      Appellant would meet sufficient requirements of E-LTRP such  that  the
      issue would ultimately be that of the applicability of EX.1, and  that
      in context the Judge's findings were tantamount to an acceptance  that
      EX.1 would be met. In the alternative, it was submitted, the Appellant
      would be able to meet the entry clearance requirements of E-ECP, - and
      therefore without needing  to  resort  to  EX.1  -  and  that  in  the
      circumstances of being a significant carer for his wife the  principle
      in Chikwamba should  apply  to  render  it  disproportionate  for  the
      Appellant to be expected to quit the UK simply to make an  application
      to return. Accordingly, any failure  by  the  Judge  to  have  express
      regard to the Rules, if required so to do, made no material difference
      to the outcome of the appeal.

  17. I accept Ms Akinbolu's submission. Further, it seems to me plain  that
      the Judge identified very particular features of this case  that  were
      not found in most other cases by reference to the serious  illness  of
      the Appellant's wife, and came to a  conclusion  consistent  with  the
      notion that the  removal  of  the  Appellant  in  consequence  of  the
      Respondent's decision would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences
      for the Appellant's wife - necessarily whose  Article  8  rights  were
      also to be considered pursuant to the ratio in Beoku-Betts.

  18. In such circumstances it  is  unnecessary  for  the  purposes  of  the
      instant appeal for me to resolve any  perceived  tension  between  the
      decisions in Edgehill and Haleemudeen.  Irrespective  of  whether  the
      Judge was required to consider human rights with reference to the 'new
      rules' as a starting point, or by a wider ranging freestanding Article
      8 analysis, he reached unchallenged conclusions as  to  primary  facts
      that realistically and sustainably supported an obvious conclusion. In
      my judgement the Respondent's  challenge  is  indeed  fundamentally  a
      disagreement with that outcome, and does  not  identify  any  material
      error of law.

  19. For completeness I note that the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  pre-
      dated the introduction of Part 5A into the 2002 Act by reason  of  the
      Immigration Act 2014, and so there is, and can be, no challenge to the
      absence of reference to sections 117A-117D

Notice of Decision

  20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  contained  no  material
      error of law and stands.

  21. The Secretary of State's challenge is  dismissed.  Mr  Dubay's  appeal
      remains allowed on human rights grounds.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     28 January 2015
