
[pic]


First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06022/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2014                        |On 9th December 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JDUGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON

                                   Between

                                aicha traore
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Bahja, Counsel instructed by Blue Trinity Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant applied for a residence card on the basis that she is the
    family member of an EEA national, Mr Diakite, a French national.  It is
    asserted that he is a qualified person under the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (EEA  Regulations)  in  that  he  is  a
    worker and that she is a member of his family under  Regulation  7  and
    therefore she qualifies for a residence card.  The  Respondent  refused
    her application on the basis that the evidence provided by her  of  her
    EEA Sponsor's employment was payslips which contained discrepancies and
    enquiries were made of his employer and these established that  he  was
    not employed by them.

 2. The matter was listed for an oral hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Ruth  (the  Judge).   The  Appellant  did  not  attend  but  was
    represented.  The Respondent was not represented.  The Judge found that
    at the date  of  hearing  before  him,  being  29th  August  2014,  the
    Appellant's EEA Sponsor was not a qualified person.

 3. The Appellant appealed against that decision and permission was granted
    by Judge Grant-Hutchison on 21st October 2014 on the basis that it  was
    arguable that the Judge made a material misdirection  of  law  when  he
    referred to Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 when deciding what evidence he was going to consider and  that  he
    may also have erred in his definition of 'qualified worker' in reaching
    his decision.

 4. I heard submissions from Mr Bahja acting for the Appellant and from  Mr
    Wilding  acting  for  the  Respondent.   Taking  into   account   their
    submissions and the grounds of application, my findings are as follows:

 5. In the grounds of application it is asserted  that  because  the  Judge
    referred to S 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    within his determination, the Judge was confused between "any  evidence
    which it (the Tribunal) thinks is relevant  to  the  substance  of  the
    decision" and "any matter which is relevant to  the  substance  of  the
    decision" and he therefore did not consider properly all  the  evidence
    before him.  On that point I find that although the Judge  referred  to
    Section 85A of the 2002 Act at paragraph 4 of his determination he  did
    in fact consider all the evidence  that  was  before  him.   Additional
    evidence was provided of  the  EEA  Sponsor's  employment  between  1st
    January 2014 and June 2014.  The Judge shows no  confusion  as  to  the
    evidence that he should have considered.  In fact one  of  the  reasons
    why he dismissed the appeal was that there was a gap  in  the  evidence
    provided by the Appellant in relation to his new employment so that  no
    evidence was provided between June 2014 and the date of hearing.

 6. Mr Bahja submits because the Judge was confused as to what evidence  he
    was required to consider, he confused the question of  whether  or  not
    the EEA Sponsor was a qualified person as a matter of EU law  with  the
    admissibility of evidence of employment  postdating  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision.  In support of this submission he states  that  as  a
    matter of EU law the Judge should have considered only whether the  EEA
    Sponsor was a qualified person; not whether he was a  qualified  person
    at the date of hearing.  He states that in  deciding  this  issue,  the
    Judge should have considered whether the period of  employment  between
    January and June 2014 was in fact merely ancillary or  purely  marginal
    and he did not take that into  account.   I  think  this  confuses  two
    points.

 7. The first is that the Judge in fact found that the EEA  Sponsor  was  a
    worker for that period of time (i.e, between January  and  June  2014).
    There was therefore no need for the Judge to consider  whether  or  not
    that employment was purely ancillary  or  marginal.   Consideration  of
    that point was irrelevant for the purposes of the appeal.   The  second
    point Mr Bahja makes is that because the EEA  Sponsor  was  in  fact  a
    worker for six months it was not open to the Judge to find that he  was
    no longer a worker between June 2014 and August 2014 when  the  hearing
    took place.  He states that it was  wrong  for  the  judge  to  require
    evidence that the EEA Sponsor was a qualified person down to  the  date
    of decision.  This does not follow; the status of an  EEA  Sponsor  can
    change, a residence card, even if issued, can be revoked on  the  basis
    that an EEA Sponsor is no longer a qualified person  exercising  Treaty
    rights.  What Mr Bahja means,  on  the  basis  of  his  submissions  at
    paragraph (ii) of the grounds of application, is that the Judge  should
    have inferred that it was more likely than not that the Sponsor was  in
    fact employed down to the date of decision on  the  basis  of  the  six
    months employment between January and June 2014.  On  this  point,  the
    Judge considered all  the  evidence  before  him,  which  included  the
    reasons given by the Respondent as to why a residence card was refused,
    i.e.  discrepancies  relating  to  evidence  submitted   for   previous
    employment. There was evidence before the Judge that the Appellant  had
    provided evidence that was  unreliable  in  relation  to  the  previous
    employment of the Sponsor for which a reasonable  explanation  was  not
    offered at the hearing before him or in the submissions made on  behalf
    of the Appellant.  The Judge in the round  was  therefore  entitled  to
    take into account the lack  of  explanation  in  relation  to  previous
    employment and the lack of information  provided  up  to  the  date  of
    hearing and entitled to find that he could not  draw  an  inference  in
    favour of the Appellant.  The findings that the Judge made were open to
    him  on  the  evidence  before  him.   They  were  not  irrational   or
    unreasonable and in fact permission was not granted on the  basis  that
    the Judge made irrational or unreasonable findings.

 8. The grounds amount to no more than a disagreement with the findings  of
    the Judge.  Mr Wilding was right to point out that if evidence was  now
    available that the Appellant's EEA Sponsor was a qualified person,  the
    proper course of action was for a new application to be made.

 9. Finally, by way of considering all the points raised, it  seems  to  be
    implied in the grounds at paragraph (ii) that once an  EEA  Sponsor  is
    shown to be a worker he cannot lose that status in EU law terms if  his
    work is shown not to be marginal or ancillary.  This cannot  be  right.
    What the  EEA  Regulations  require  is  that  the  EEA  Sponsor  is  a
    'qualified person'. There are a number of ways in  which  an  Appellant
    can be a 'qualified person' as set out in Regulation  6;  this  is  not
    just as a worker. Regulation 6 recognises that the status of worker can
    be lost without losing the status of 'qualified person' and  the  Judge
    was alive to this possibility.  At paragraph 19  of  the  determination
    the Judge states that "there is no evidence before me that the  Sponsor
    is temporarily unable to work or that he is duly recorded involuntarily
    unemployed".  He was therefore alive to the possibility  that  the  EEA
    Sponsor may well be a qualified person  under  the  provisions  of  the
    Regulations, albeit not a worker; however there was no evidence  before
    him to establish that the Sponsor was a qualified person.  I find  that
    there are no material errors of law in the determination of Judge  Ruth
    and his determination must therefore stand.

Decision

10. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

11. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  on
    the facts of this case I see no reason why  an  order  should  be  made
    pursuant to Rule 13 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.





Signed                                  Date


Judge Robertson

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date


Judge Robertson

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

