
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06719/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 3 February 2015                  |On 23 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            LOPETI TAUWELAGI FAHA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:      Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms R Harrington, Counsel instructed by Ahmed Rahman
Carr


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Holder in which he allowed the  appeal  of
    Mr Faha, a citizen of Fiji, against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    to refuse to vary leave to remain. I shall refer  to  Mr  Faha  as  the
    Applicant, although he was the Appellant in the proceedings below.

 2. The application under appeal was made on 3 October 2011 and was refused
    by reference to paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules (HC395) on 20
    January 2014.  The Applicant exercised his right of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came before Judge Holder on  6
    August 2014 and was dismissed under the Immigration Rules  but  allowed
    by virtue of Article  8  ECHR.  The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth on  4  November
    2014 in the following terms

         An arguable error of law has arisen in  relation  to  the  need  to
         apply the criteria in Gulshan.

 3. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Richards  appeared  to  represent  the
    Secretary of State and Ms  Harrington  represented  the  Applicant.  Ms
    Harrington submitted a written skeleton argument  and  a  copy  of  the
    Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  the   remitted   case   of   Haleemudeen
    (IA/24252/2012).

Background

 4.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Applicant was born in Fiji on 23 October 1984.
    He came to the United Kingdom with leave to enter as a  visitor  on  26
    April 2011. His intention was to join the Royal Navy.  His  application
    to join the Navy was not accepted and on 3 October 2011, prior  to  the
    expiry of his leave to remain, he applied to vary leave to  enable  him
    to enlist in another branch of HM Forces. The Respondent took until  23
    January 2014 to refuse this application on the basis that it  was  made
    for a purpose not covered by  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  the  period
    whilst the application was under consideration the  Appellant  met  and
    formed a relationship with a British Citizen, began cohabiting with her
    in April 2012 and formed a parental  relationship  with  her  son.  The
    Appellant and his partner married on 5 July 2014.

 5. At the appeal hearing on 6 August 2014 the Appellant accepted  that  he
    did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  was
    submitted on his behalf that his application, having been made prior to
    the change in the Immigration Rules in  2012,  fell  to  be  considered
    under the regime in force at the time  of  his  application  and  that,
    although he did not meet the requirements of the Rules,  there  was  no
    requirement to consider his Article 8 appeal through the prism  of  the
    revised rules. The Judge accepted  this  argument  (see  para  20)  and
    considered Article 8 using the jurisprudence applicable at the time  of
    the application and, as he was required  to  do,  taking  into  account
    section 117A and 117B of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  act
    2002.

Submissions

 6. On behalf the Secretary of State Mr Richards relied on the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. He said that the issue was Gulshan [2013]
    UKUT 00640 (IAC) although he recognised  that  Gulshan  was  no  longer
    universally approved. He was instructed to rely on  Gulshan  and  Nagre
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin). The Judge had failed to give adequate  reasons
    why the Applicant's circumstances were either compelling or exceptional
    and had not adequately reasoned why the appeal  should  be  allowed  by
    reference to Article 8.

 7. For the Applicant Ms Harrington referred to her skeleton  argument  and
    said that Gulshan does not apply. The application was made  at  a  time
    prior to the change in  the  Immigration  Rules.  In  any  event  ample
    reasons are set out showing clearly why the Judge allowed this  appeal.
    There is no challenge to the  factual  findings.  There  is  no  public
    interest in the Applicant's removal. This is  clearly  demonstrated  by
    reference to section 117B. The  Applicant  has  a  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child. On this basis  the  Applicant  is
    bound to succeed whether or not the Gulshan threshold test is followed.



Error of law

 8. In my judgement the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    disclose a material error of law. The facts  are  simple  and  are  not
    disputed. The Applicant is, and at all times has been, lawfully present
    in the United Kingdom. He made his application for variation  of  leave
    to remain in October 2011 prior to the introduction of paragraph 276ADE
    and Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. Whilst the Secretary of State
    was considering his application he formed a relationship with a British
    citizen that, by the time the Secretary of State reached her  decision,
    was well established and which has  since  resulted  in  marriage.  The
    Applicant's relationship with his partner involved the formation  of  a
    parental  relationship  with  her  son  who,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted, suffered from certain emotional difficulties and the positive
    relationship between the Applicant and  the  child  contributed  to  an
    apparent improvement in the child's mental health.

 9. It was accepted at the outset of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  that
    neither the Immigration Rules in force at the time of  the  application
    nor those in force at the time of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    were met and that the appeal fell to be considered only by reference to
    Article 8 ECHR.  Ms  Harrington  submits  succinctly  in  her  skeleton
    argument that the authorities of MF Nigeria [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192  and
    Gulshan apply only to applications  where  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE apply. Mr Richards did not seek to engage with this argument. In
    my judgment and following Edgehill and another [2014] EWCA Civ  402  it
    is clear that the application under appeal having been made before  the
    entry into force of the new rules it is the regime pertaining  at  that
    time that must apply to the decision made by the Secretary of State  on
    20 January 2014. However there is no suggestion that facts relied  upon
    by the Applicant in respect of his Article 8 appeal (and this was  only
    ever an Article 8 appeal) were put to the Secretary of State  prior  to
    the decision on 20 January 2014. These  factors  were  raised  for  the
    first time in the Notice  of  Appeal  lodged  by  the  Applicant  on  3
    February 2014 well after the new Rules came into effect.

10. In any event with it being  accepted,  even  taking  into  account  his
    current  circumstances,  that  the  Applicant  could   not   meet   the
    requirements of the Rules either as they  stood  at  the  date  of  his
    application  or  at  the  date  of  the  Respondent's  decision  it  is
    unnecessary to decide whether the old Rules or the new Rules would have
    applied. I agree with Ms  Harrington's  submission  that  even  if  the
    developing regime following the change in the rules  applied  it  would
    still have  been  inevitable  that  the  Applicant's  appeal  would  be
    allowed.

11. The grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  referring  to  Gulshan,
    submit that an Article 8 assessment should only be  carried  out  where
    there are compelling circumstances not recognised by the rules and that
    as no such compelling circumstances are identified  the  findings  made
    are unsustainable. The developing case law shows that this approach  is
    flawed. Compelling or exceptional circumstances can only be  identified
    by considering the Article 8 assessment. There is no threshold to cross
    prior  to  such  consideration  because  it  is  only  by  making  such
    consideration that  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances  can  be
    identified. In Aliyu v SSHD [2014] EWHC  3919  (Admin)  Judge  A  Grubb
    sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge found at paragraph 59

         In my judgment, the Secretary of State (apart from 'complete  code'
         situations) always has a discretion  to  grant  leave  outside  the
         Rules.  That discretion must be exercised on the basis of Article 8
         considerations, in particular assessing  all  relevant  factors  in
         determining whether a decision is proportionate under Article  8.2.
         There is, in principle, no "threshold" criterion of  "arguability".
         I respectfully agree with what Aikens LJ said in this regard in  MM
         (at [128]).  However that factor, taken together with other factors
         such as the extent to which the Rules have taken  into  account  an
         individual's circumstances relevant to Article  8,  will  condition
         the nature and extent of the consideration required as a matter  of
         law by the Secretary  of  State  of  an  individual's  claim  under
         Article 8 outside the Rules.  If there is no arguable case, it will
         suffice for the Secretary of State simply briefly to say so  giving
         adequate reasons for that conclusion.  At the other extreme,  where
         there are arguable good grounds that the Rules  do  not  adequately
         deal with  an  individual's  circumstances  relevant  in  assessing
         Article 8, the Secretary of State must consider those circumstances
         and identifiably carry  out  the  balancing  exercise  required  by
         proportionality  in  determining  whether  there  are  "exceptional
         circumstances" requiring the grant of leave outside the Rules under
         Article 8.

12. In the present case having identified at the outset (paragraphs 19  and
    20) that neither the old nor  the  new  Rules  apply  the  Judge  quite
    correctly considers the situation outside the  Rules  by  reference  to
    Article 8. In doing so he very carefully and correctly self-directs  by
    reference to Razgar and section 117A and section 117B of the 2002  Act.
    Thereafter he examines each of the Razgar criteria against the accepted
    facts and having found that a  proportionality  balancing  exercise  is
    required  he  takes  into  account  the  public  interest  question  by
    reference, inter alia, to particular factors required to  be  addressed
    by the 2002 Act (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014). Having  found
    that it was not disputed that the Applicant spoke English, that he  was
    financially independent (his  wife  being  in  full  time  professional
    employment in the NHS) and that he has parental responsibility for a 15
    year old child and it would not be reasonable to expect that  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom the result, as submitted by Ms Harrington, was
    inevitable.  Primary  legislation  makes   it   clear   that   in   the
    circumstances of the Applicant there is no public interest in removal.

13. My conclusion from all of the above is that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contains no error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal by reference to Article 8  ECHR.  The  appeal  of  the
    Secretary of State is therefore dismissed.

Summary

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



Signed:     Date: 23 February 2015

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
