
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/06580/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 August 2014                             |On 17 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                           udo christopher ukpong

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Martin Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant who is a national of Nigeria born 23  November  1973  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bradshaw who for reasons given  in  his  determination  dated  17
    April 2014 dismissed the appeal by the appellant under the  Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 15 January 2014 to refuse to vary Mr Ukpong's  leave  to
    remain and her further decision to remove him.

 2. The background facts are  these.   The  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 3 September 2002 with entry  clearance  as  a  student.   He
    obtained successive periods of leave to remain on this basis, the  most
    recent granting him leave until 1 October 2013.  On 18 January 2013  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain based on ten  year's  continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom  with  reference  to  paragraphs
    276B & C of HC 395.   The  appellant  is  married  and  they  have  two
    children.  Neither had lived in the United Kingdom  for  at  least  the
    seven years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  application.   These
    family members are also nationals of Nigeria.

 3. The respondent refused the  application  because  of  a  break  in  the
    appellant's period of lawful residence between 10 September 2010 and  5
    January 2011.  The appellant had made an application on 25 August  2010
    for leave to remain which was rejected on 10  September  2010.   It  is
    undisputed that he did not seek to vary his leave to  remain  until  47
    days later on 28 October 2010 and thus outside the 28  days  period  of
    grace provided for in the Rules.   The  respondent  did  not  make  her
    decision on the further application  until  5  January  2011  when  the
    appellant was granted further leave until 24 January 2012.

 4. The respondent also considered the appellant's case under  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph 276ADE giving detailed reasons why these could not assist
    the appellant.

 5. The grounds relied on before the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  that  the
    appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276C  of  the  Rules.
    Although  it  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet   the
    requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE it was a good  arguable
    case  on  Article  8  grounds  taking  account   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances and those of his family including his  daughter  who  has
    Down's syndrome.  Article 3 was  also  relied  on  in  respect  of  the
    hostility anticipated in Nigeria due to the daughter's disabilities and
    the risk of FGM.

 6. These grounds of challenge were amended by Mr  Martin  at  the  hearing
    before me; he no longer relied on the assertions  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in his consideration of the Article 3 factors.
     The remaining grounds argue that the judge had failed to refer to  the
    full terms of the Secretary of State's policy  regarding  out  of  time
    applications on a long residence basis and this was the  focus  of  his
    submissions.

 7. The case put by the appellant for applying for  further  leave  outside
    the 28 day grace period in 2010 was that this  had  been  caused  by  a
    serious medical problem he had encountered in the course of  his  study
    and by his daughter's ill-health.  He had been diagnosed  with  type  2
    diabetes and before the  diagnosis  had  been  suffering  from  serious
    depression, a migraine headache and an eye problem which eventually led
    to his eyes  giving  tears  uncontrollably  which  caused  him  blurred
    vision.  He could not read properly or see letters effectively and this
    problem had eventually  led  to  the  omission  of  a  section  of  the
    application form which had resulted in its rejection in September 2010.

 8. The application for further leave to  remain  as  a  student  dated  21
    August 2010 had been refused because the appellant did not have a valid
    CAS in that he had failed to provide the CAS details on the application
    form.  His evidence was that he had filled in three  application  forms
    for his then only child and for his wife in addition. By mistake he had
    missed providing  the  information  which  he  attributed  to  his  eye
    problem.

 9.  The  appellant  had  relied  on  medical  evidence  corroborating  his
    condition before the judge.  This included a report from Dr  Coupar,  a
    registered psychologist,  and  from  Dr  Lucy  Reynolds,  a  consultant
    paediatrician as to the daughter's state of health.

10. My conclusions are as follows.

11. Paragraph 276B of the Rules (relevant to this appeal) provides:

         "276B.   The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
               leave to remain on the  ground  of  long  residence  in  the
               United Kingdom are that:

               (i)(a) he has had  at  least  10  years'  continuous  lawful
                    residence in the United Kingdom.

              ..."

12. "Continuous residence" is defined  in  paragraph  276A  as  is  "lawful
    residence".  In summary, "continuous residence" means residence in  the
    United Kingdom for an unbroken period but such a period  shall  not  be
    considered to have been broken where there has been  absence  from  the
    United Kingdom for six months or  less  or  steps  taken  for  removal.
    "Lawful residence" means -

         "... Residence which is continuous residence pursuant to:

             (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or

             (ii) temporary admission within s.11 of  the  1971  Act  where
                  leave to enter or remain is subsequently granted; or

             (iii)    an  exemption  from  immigration  control,  including
                  where an exemption ceases to apply if  it  is  immediately
                  followed by a grant of leave to enter or remain."

13. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant  confirmed
    to the Presenting Officer that he had a valid  CAS  when  he  made  the
    application on 21 August 2010.

14. The judge noted the policy guidance at [18] of  his  determination  and
    concluded at [68] and [69] as follows:

         "68. In terms of the policy guidance  founded  upon  by  Miss  Dune
             examples given are of a postal strike, hospitalisation  or  an
             administrative error made by the Home Office.  In  respect  of
             example (3) about a single gap  in  lawful  residence  due  to
             submitting an application 34 days out of time it was specified
             that this would be granted because the individual in  question
             had provided a letter from their consultant stating that  they
             were hospitalised during this period.  The guidance  specifies
             that the individual had proved there were exceptional  reasons
             for the late application.

         69.  I do not consider that such  exceptional  reasons  apply.   It
             seems to me that the gap in the appellant's  lawful  residence
             was not due to extenuating circumstances which were beyond his
             control."

15. These observations were followed by a detailed analysis of the  medical
    evidence.  The judge observed at [85] that the important  question  was
    not why the CAS number had been omitted from the  original  application
    but why there was delay by  the  appellant  in  submitting  the  second
    application which was  clearly  filled  in  properly  as  it  had  been
    granted.  The guidance to which the  judge  was  referred  was  in  the
    bundle of documents before him and replicated in the skeleton argument.

16. The complaint made in the grounds of application relates to a different
    limb of the policy.  It is argued that the judge had not considered the
    policy's remaining terms which state that "exceptional reasons  include
    'serious illness'."  It is argued that both sections of the policy were
    specifically highlighted before the judge. Reference is made to page 53
    of the appellant's bundle as to the further limb which it is argued the
    judge had failed to take into account.  As I observed  at  the  hearing
    pages 49 to 54 are missing from the appellant's bundle and I am  by  no
    means certain that the further terms of the  policy  were  specifically
    drawn to the judge's attention.  Nevertheless I consider the  challenge
    on the basis that they were.

17. Pages 20 to 22 of the  policy  are  under  the  heading  "Out  of  time
    applications".  It is explained that the page "...tells you about  'out
    of  time'  applications  submitted  for  ten  years'   long   residence
    applications".  The policy refers to changes in the  Immigration  Rules
    after 1 October 2012 and states that the  changes  affect  applications
    which were made on or after 9 July 2012 and are decided on or  after  1
    October 2012.  I pause here to observe that the application was made on
    26 September 2013.

18. The policy guidance provides in addition:

         "If the continuous residence period includes periods of overstaying
         before further leave being granted before 1 October 2012,  you  may
         disregard these  periods  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  (ILR)
         provided the period does not exceed 28 days.

         For applications made before 9 July 2012 there  is  no  requirement
         for applications for indefinite leave to remain (ILR)  to  be  made
         'in-time' under the ten years' long residence Rules.

         For applications made on or after 9 July 2012 an applicant applying
         for an extension of stay or indefinite leave to remain (ILR) on the
         basis of long residence must not be in breach  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.  However, for the purposes of the application  a  period  of
         overstaying of 28 days or less on the date of application  will  be
         disregarded."

19. The guidance proceeds to advise on out of time applications made on  or
    after 9 July 2012 and includes the instruction that:

         "When refusing an application on the grounds  it  was  made  by  an
         applicant who has  overstayed  by  more  than  28  days,  you  must
         consider any evidence of exceptional circumstances which  prevented
         the  applicant  from  applying  within  the  first   28   days   of
         overstaying."

20.  There  follows  an  explanation  of   what   constitutes   exceptional
    circumstances. This includes reference to serious illness.

21. I am not persuaded  by  Mr  Martin's  submissions  that  this  guidance
    embraced situations where an appellant had been  without  lawful  leave
    for more than 28 days during the currency of the  ten  year  period  as
    opposed to late applications made after its expiry.  It is clear to  me
    that the policy is directed towards the handling of applications  after
    completion of ten years' continuous lawful  residence  which  are  made
    late.  Accordingly the best the appellant could expect from the  policy
    were the provisions addressed by the  judge  on  which  he  came  to  a
    rational conclusion giving adequate reasons for doing so.

22. The guidance the appellant was entitled to rely on  provides  that  the
    caseworker "can use [his] judgment and use discretion  in  cases  where
    there may be exceptional reasons why a single application was made more
    than 28 days out of time".  Examples are given which were considered by
    the judge.  Such examples are not exclusive and I consider that serious
    illness could be a valid consideration.

23. There is no doubt that the judge undertook a careful  analysis  of  the
    medical evidence and  was  rationally  entitled  to  conclude  for  the
    reasons given that there was no  provision  for  exercising  discretion
    favourably in the circumstances advanced by the appellant.  It is clear
    to me that the judge was not ruling out the possibility that  a  health
    concern could result in a favourable exercise of a waiver but  that  in
    appellant's case this was not  appropriate.   Accordingly  I  find  the
    judge did not err in  his  consideration  of  the  policy  which  might
    otherwise have assisted the appellant.  This is the sole extent of  the
    remaining challenge.  The appeal is therefore dismissed.

24. At the conclusion of the hearing  Mr  Matthew  sought  leave  to  lodge
    further evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A) in the event that error of law
    was found.  The evidence advanced seeks to support the  assertion  that
    it was not because of any medical problem that the appellant had failed
    to complete the form correctly but because he did not have a CAS  which
    he could have referred to.  In the light of my conclusion I do not make
    a ruling on the application.



Signed                                  Date 16 September 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
