
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06939/2014
     IA/06956/2014
     IA/07092/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20th October 2014            |On 24th November 2014            |
|                                |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             Miss Afshan Noureen
                                 Miss Nusrat
                                Mr Ali Adnan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Iqbal, Iqbal Law Chambers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan  and  appealed  against  the
    refusals of the Secretary of  State  dated  21st  July  2014  and  23rd
    January 2014 to confirm their right to reside in the UK  as  dependants
    of the EEA sponsor and national Miss Edita Umantaite.

 2. Judge Pacey dismissed  all  of  the  appeals  and  an  application  for
    permission to appeal was made on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge had failed to acknowledge the fact that  the  male  appellant  in
    question was one of  the  dependants  and  did  not  submit  a  witness
    statement or give oral  evidence  although  this  was  referred  to  in
    paragraph 3 of the judge's determination.   It  was  submitted  in  the
    application for permission to appeal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    had not only relied on the evidence given by the EEA national sponsor's
    spouse but considered him as  the  male  appellant  and  therefore  the
    determination contained a material error of fact.

 3. Further the judge had failed to consider or provide adequate  reasoning
    as to the raising of the unfairness issue as  to  why  the  appellant's
    real brother was issued with a residence card on the same circumstances
    and the judge had unfairly shown an unwillingness to attach any  weight
    to that unfairness argument and had failed to give adequate reasons  in
    that respect.

 4. The judge had failed to give reasons as to why the appellants' case did
    not fall within the ambit of Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012]
    UKUT 79.

 5. Further the appeal hearing was rushed.

 6. I am not persuaded that there is any merit in the contention  that  the
    judge did not take on board the fact that the brother had been  granted
    a right to reside.  As the judge stated at paragraph 8 "I do  not  know
    what evidence was provided in relation to the brother."

 7. It was clear that the application had been granted to the  brother  but
    as stated by the judge he did not know what evidence  was  provided  in
    relation to the dependency and/or connection between  the  EEA  sponsor
    and the brother.  I therefore consider that there is no merit  in  this
    ground at all.

 8. The judge made reference to the male appellant instead of  the  sponsor
    giving evidence.  I can see that no reference was made to the  evidence
    of the sponsor's husband and indeed there was a  witness  statement  to
    that effect.

 9. I therefore consider this to be a piece of evidence which  is  critical
    to the assessment of  this  appeal.     It  is  clear  that  the  judge
    confused the male appellant with the husband of the sponsor  and  could
    not remember what evidence was given by which witness and there was  no
    reference to the witness statement of  the  sponsor's  husband  in  the
    determination.  That is a material error of law.

10. I set aside the determination of Judge  Pacey.   Bearing  in  mind  the
    nature and extent of the findings to be made, I remit the matter to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.



Signed        Date 10th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


