
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06179/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th August 2013                             |On 13th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                 NAVID AHMAD
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Saleem of RKS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Atkinson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 20th June 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 16th  March  1986.   He
    applied for a residence card as the extended  family  member  of  Agata
    Wloch on 4th September 2012 on the grounds that he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with her.  The application was  refused  on  6th  February
    2013.

 3. The Respondent was not satisfied that the couple were  living  together
    as claimed and the judge agreed with her.  The Appellant first  arrived
    in the UK with a visa which expired on 15th September 2011 and remained
    in the UK following expiry of his leave.  He  first  had  contact  with
    Miss Wloch in January 2011 via a Polish website  and  met  her  on  9th
    April 2012 at Manchester Airport. Six weeks later the couple  underwent
    an Islamic marriage ceremony on 20th May 2012.

 4. The judge said that the circumstantial evidence tended to show that the
    arrangements more closely resembled that of a marriage  of  convenience
    rather than a genuine relationship.  The parties provided virtually  no
    detail about how their relationship could  have  developed  so  quickly
    given the  cultural  differences  and  the  initial  lack  of  physical
    proximity.  The  Appellant  is  a  Pakistani  national  with  a  Muslim
    background whose first language is Urdu and Miss Wloch  is  a  Catholic
    woman speaking Polish and resident in Poland.

 5. The judge  also  considered  that  it  was  unusual  that  the  Islamic
    religious ceremony of marriage took place in Dewsbury  rather  than  at
    the  Appellant's  local  mosque  in  Wakefield.  Moreover   there   was
    inconsistent evidence about whether Miss Wolch's parents  knew  of  the
    marriage and significant inconsistencies as to what their view  of  the
    marriage was.

 6. He accepted that there was documentation showing that the Appellant and
    Miss Wloch lived the same accommodation for a period of ten months  but
    he attached limited weight to that evidence.  There was little  support
    for the Appellant from other witnesses.  Taken as a whole  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant  had  shown  that  he  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred  in  making  assumptions  about  the  mariage  ceremony,  and
    repeated the Appellant's evidence  that  he  was  not  aware  that  his
    partner's parents  knew  of  it,  had  not  adequately  considered  the
    evidence before him and did not mention the raid carried out by UKBA on
    the Appellant's residence,  which  established  that  the  couple  were
    living together.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Landes  on  9th  July  2013.
    Judge Landes said  that,  apart  from  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    circumstances of the marriage, the rest of the grounds appeared to be a
    disagreement with the decision, but he gave permission for all  grounds
    to be argued.

 9.  On  17th  Jul  2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

10. Mr Saleem relied on his grounds  and  submitted,  in  relation  to  the
    marriage, that the judge had not given  adequate  reasons  for  finding
    that the circumstances were unusual.  He said that the  judge  had  not
    taken into account the evidence of the UKBA raid.  He  had  documentary
    evidence that the couple were  living  together  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing and in fact were continuing to live  together.  He  had  placed
    undue weight on the Respondent's submissions.

11. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the grounds  amounted  to  a  disagreement
    with the decision. The judge had given a number of reasons for  finding
    that the couple were not in a durable relationship, including the speed
    of its progress, the cultural differences and inconsistent evidence  on
    an important matter.

12. She said the UKBA visit was not an unannounced  marriage  visit  but  a
    check on the Appellant's address as an overstayer. UKBA wanted  to  see
    his travel documents and no report had been  produced.

13. Even on his own evidence the Appellant had  only  cohabited  with  Miss
    Wloch for nine months as at  the  date  of  decision  and,  whilst  she
    accepted that it would have been open to the judge  to  find  that  the
    relationship was durable even if it had lasted for less than two years,
    the caseworker instructions were that there should be cohabitation  for
    a period of two years in order for a residence card to be issued on the
    grounds of a durable relationship.

Findings and Conclusions

14. There is no error in this determination.   The  judge's  findings  were
    open to him for the reasons which he gave.

15. The judge was entitled to  consider  that  the  speed  with  which  the
    Appellant, who  was  an  overstayer,  entered  into  the  relationship,
    undermined his contention that he was in a  durable  relationship  with
    her.  He clearly did not believe the Appellant when he said that he had
    looked at a Polish website by chance, and would have  been  aware  that
    marriage to  an  EEA  national  could  have  resolved  his  immigration
    difficulties.  The couple come from very different cultural backgrounds
    and met for the first time only six weeks before the marriage.  It  was
    open to the judge to conclude that the relationship did not develop  as
    claimed by the Appellant and Miss Wloch. It is not even clear  if  they
    have any common language.

16. With respect to the question of where the  Islamic  religious  ceremony
    took place, the judge did not assume that  the  ceremony  had  to  take
    place at the Appellant's local mosque. He was entitled to say that  the
    fact that the ceremony took place elsewhere required  explanation.  The
    Appellant after all had the opportunity to address  the  issue  in  his
    statement but did not do so.  Had  this  been  the  sole  or  even  the
    principle reason for the judge's conclusions, it may well be  that  the
    submission that the Appellant was not asked a specific question in oral
    evidence may have had more merit. However the judge gave  a  number  of
    other wholly sustainable reasons for his decision.

17. With respect to the parental involvement, it was clearly  open  to  the
    judge to find  that  the  inconsistent  evidence  between  the  parties
    undermined the claim. It is most unlikely, if the couple  were  closely
    emotionally involved with each other, that the attitude of  Ms  Wloch's
    parents to the marriage would be a matter of great importance to  them.
    The fact that the Appellant said that Miss Wolch's parents did not know
    that they had married whereas she said that they  accepted  mariage  is
    highly significant.

18. The judge  took  into  account  the  documentary  evidence,  which  was
    supportive of the Appellant's claim that the  couple  lived  under  the
    same roof, but was entitled to find that it was outweighed by the other
    evidence before him. With respect to the visit by UKBA,  there  was  no
    report forming a part of the Respondent's evidence. It seems that  this
    was not an unannounced check, but made in order for the  Respondent  to
    see the Appellant's travel documents.

19. On the evidence before the judge the couple had produced  documents  to
    show that they were living under the same roof for  a  period  of  nine
    months by the date of decision.  The Home Office test that there should
    be cohabitation of two years is by reference to the unmarried partner's
    rule. To require two years  is  not  necessarily  consistent  with  the
    examination of the personal circumstances of  extended  family  members
    required  by  the  Directive.   In  this  case  however  the  point  is
    immaterial because the Respondent did not refused the  application   on
    the basis that the couple had been living together for  less  than  two
    years.

Decision

20. The original judge did not err in law and  the  decision  stands.   The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


