
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/06503/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 30 September 2013                          |On 14 October 2013           |
|Prepared 1 October 2013                       |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                SUKHJEET KAUR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Horsley, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sullivan  promulgated  on  27  June  2013,
    dismissing her appeal against a decision of  the  respondent  dated  13
    February 2013 to refuse to grant her further leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 29 November 2009 with leave
    to enter as a Tier 4 Migrant until 2 November 2011. She made an in time
    application for her leave to remain to be extended but this was refused
    initially in a decision dated 27 January 2012 on  the  basis  that  her
    sponsoring college had not confirmed that  the  course  she  wished  to
    pursue represented academic progress and thus did not comply  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 120A of Appendix A of the  Immigration  Rules
    which at that date provided as follows:

         "120A    Points will only be awarded for a  valid  Confirmation  of
               Acceptance for Studies (even  if  all  the  requirements  in
               paragraphs 116 to 120A above are met)  if  the  Sponsor  has
               confirmed that the course  for  which  the  Confirmation  of
               Acceptance for Studies has been assigned represents academic
               progress from previous  study  undertaken  during  the  last
               period of leave as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  or  as  a
               Student except where: ..."

    Judge Harris allowed the appeal on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's
    decision was unfair in  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  given  an
    opportunity to address the grounds of refusal which  she  did  not  and
    could not have known.

 3. Subsequent to that, on 13 April 2012, the  appellant  forwarded  a  new
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS") (issued by Citizen  2000
    Education Institute, signed on 8 February 2012)  and  other  supporting
    documents to the respondent, the CAS due to expire on  9  August  2012.
    This CAS states that the appellant "is making academic progress and  is
    currently studying the Diploma in Business Management level  6  course,
    the course is an accredited Ofqual qualification  and  will  achieve  a
    recognised qualification".

 4. The respondent refused the application  afresh,  stating  in  a  letter
    dated 13 February 2013 that the CAS had assigned on 8 February 2012 had
    not been taken into consideration as  it  had  not  been  submitted  in
    support of the application  made  on  1  November  2011,  and  that  it
    required a further application.

 5. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  on  the  grounds  that,
    amongst other matters:-

      i) the respondent had erred  in  not  taking  into  account  the  new,
         amended CAS and that as the parties were bound by  the  un-appealed
         findings of fact, it was not open to  the  respondent  following  a
         successful appeal to make a further adverse decision  on  the  same
         issue relying on the same evidence as before, the matter  therefore
         being "res judicata" and that the appellant on that basis  met  the
         requirements of the Rules [13];

     ii) the respondent's decision was  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's
         obligations pursuant to Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention;
         and, was contrary to the law.





 6. In her determination, Judge Sullivan found:-

      i) that Judge Harris's determination  was  not  determinative  of  the
         current appeal [16] as the earlier refusal had  been  based  on  an
         absence of evidence that the appellant's proposed course  of  study
         represented academic progression; that that determination  had  not
         determined that issue, the matter being remitted to the  respondent
         for further consideration and to give the appellant an  opportunity
         to demonstrate that she met the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules;

     ii) that the earlier determination did not make findings of fact as  to
         whether or not the appellant's proposed course of study represented
         academic progression [17];

    iii) that the current CAS does not  deal  with  the  issue  of  academic
         progression as between the earlier,  ABE  course  and  the  current
         course of study [18];

     iv) that  paragraph  120A  of  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         stipulates that points will only be awarded for a valid CAS if  the
         sponsor has confirmed that the course for which the CAS is assigned
         represents academic progress [19] which is defined in the Rules;

      v) that although the evidence  from  the  sponsor  confirms  that  the
         appellant is making academic progress generally [21]  it  does  not
         confirm either that its level 6 course represents academic progress
         from the ABE course or that it complements that course and thus she
         did not fulfil the requirements of paragraph 120A of Appendix A  of
         the Rules [22];

     vi) that the decision to remove the appellant pursuant to Section 47 of
         the Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  was  not  in
         accordance with the law that the appeal against her decision should
         be allowed;

    vii) that the decision to refuse to vary the appellant's leave to remain
         did not interfere with her right to respect for  her  private  life
         [25] the appeal therefore fell to  be  dismissed  on  human  rights
         grounds.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal against the decision, quoting
    paragraph 120A of Appendix A as set out above [2] and submitting:-


      i. that the judge erred by permitting the re-litigation  of  an  issue
         already determined  by  Judge  Harris,  the  respondent  erring  by
         repeating the decision previously made without taking into  account
         the new evidence [9 to 11];


     ii. that the determination is factually flawed and  the  fact  findings
         are against the weight of the evidence, the judge failing  to  note
         whether the appellant was refused on the  basis  of  a  CAS  issued
         previously for a course level 5, not on the basis of a  CAS  issued
         for a Diploma in Business Management QCF6 [12];


    iii. that the new CAS states  that  the  appellant  is  making  academic
         progress [14] and that the judge's construction of  paragraph  120B
         (sic) is inconsistent with the language  of  the  Rule,  the  judge
         erring in assuming (wrongly) that the appellant has to  demonstrate
         that she has made academic progress or the college is to give  some
         type of justification for its statement and academic progress [15];


     iv. that the wording of paragraph 120 represents a  significant  change
         from paragraph 60(v) of the Rules, the  new  Rules  requiring  only
         that the sponsoring institution confirms that the course for  which
         the CAS has been assigned represents academic progress and that the
         construction imposed by her of the Rules is  legally  flawed  [18],
         arguing that a Rule preventing students from  making  a  change  of
         courses may well be arbitrary or unnecessary: relying on GOO v SSHD
         [2008] EWCA Civ 747.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Latter  on  14
    August 2013.  Judge Latter stated:-


         "The grounds satisfy me it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal
         may have erred in law.  So far as ground 1 is  concerned,  it  does
         seem that the issue crystallises into whether  the  respondent  was
         entitled to disregard the  CAS  dated  8  February  2012  submitted
         following the decision of Judge Harris issued  on  10  April  2012.
         The issue also arises of whether in  any  event  the  CAS  met  the
         requirements of the Rules.  In this context the position should  be
         clarified as to which provisions of the Rules applied at  the  date
         of decision in the light of the various amendments which  are  made
         to paragraph 120A."


The hearing on 30 September 2013


 9. Mr Malik submitted that Judge Sullivan had taken the updated  CAS  into
    account, and had been entitled to do so given that the decision of  the
    Court of Appeal in SSHD v Raju [2013] EWCA Civ 754 did not disturb  the
    findings made by the Tribunal in Khatel [2012] UKUT44  (IAC)  regarding
    the effect of Section 85A of the 2002 Act.


10. Mr Malik accepted that none of the exceptions set out in paragraph 120A
    applied, submitting that the phrasing in the CAS of 8 February 2012 was
    sufficient  to  show  that  the  appellant  had  been  making  academic
    progress.  He submitted that nothing in the Immigration Rules  required
    the sponsor to assess the progress being  made  and  that  the  current
    Rule, unlike the previous Rule 60(iv) did not require an assessment  as
    to whether progress was in fact being made.  He said that he would  not
    make any points regarding paragraphs 1 to 12 of the grounds as drafted.


11. Ms Horsley submitted that the version of the Immigration Rules  at  the
    date of decision did define "academic progress".  She provided  a  copy
    of the relevant Rule, as set out in Naeem (para  120A  of  Appendix  A)
    [2013] UKUT 00465 (IAC).


12. Mr Malik accepted that the appellant could not  succeed  if  that  Rule
    were in effect but sought permission to amend the grounds of appeal  to
    argue that, following Munir & Anor v SSHD [2012] UKSC 32 Odelola v SSHD
    [2009] UKHL 25 was no longer good law and thus there was no longer  any
    reason why the presumption against retrospectivity should not apply  to
    the Immigration Rules.  He submitted also that it was incorrect for the
    respondent now to say that the version of the Immigration Rules set out
    in the grounds of appeal was not that which  is  applicable,  something
    not challenged until after he had finished his submissions.


13. Mr Malik further submitted that until now the Secretary  of  State  had
    not set out in detail the version of the Immigration Rules on which she
    sought to rely and that it was unclear whether Judge Sullivan  had  had
    the correct version introduced with effect from 8  July  2012  (see  Cm
    8423) in reaching her decision.  He asked me  to  note  also  that  the
    point had not been taken below as to which version was in effect.


14. Ms Horsley objected to the amendment of the grounds at this stage,  the
    appellant having been put on notice that the relevant  version  of  the
    Immigration Rules was an  issue  identified  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Latter when granting permission to appeal.


15. Mr Malik submitted that the respondent had been on notice  as  to  what
    version the appellant thought was applicable yet had decided not to put
    in a Rule 24 letter.  I refused the adjournment for the reasons set out
    below.


Decision and Reasons


The history of paragraph 120A of the Immigration rules


16. There is some confusion over the relevant paragraph of the  immigration
    rules which relates to the  requirement  for  an  academic  sponsor  to
    confirm an applicant's  progress.   The  provision  was  introduced  as
    paragraph 120B with effect from 4 July 2011 by HC  1148.  It  was  then
    with effect from 6 April  2012  re-numbered  as  120A  (HC  1888).  The
    paragraph was again renumbered by Cm 8423 and became 120A (a). The only
    change relevant  to  the  facts  of  this  case  relates  to  amendment
    introduced by Cm 8423, so that the provision (so  far  is  relevant  to
    this appeal) now reads:

      120A (a) Points will only be  awarded  for  a  valid  Confirmation  of
      Acceptance for Studies (even if all the requirements in paragraphs 116
      to 120A above are met) if the Sponsor has confirmed  that  the  course
      for which the Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies has been assigned
      represents academic progress from previous study  as  defined  in  (b)
      below  [emphasis added]undertaken during the last period of leave as a
      Tier 4 (General) Student or as a Student, where the applicant has  had
      such leave, except where:

      ... (omitted)

      (b) For a course to represent academic progress from  previous  study,
 the course must:


         (i) be above the  level  of  the  previous  course  for  which  the
         applicant was granted leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student or  as  a
         Student, or

         (ii) involve further study at the same  level,  which  the  Tier  4
         Sponsor confirms as complementing the previous course for which the
         applicant was granted leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student or  as  a
         Student.



The application to amend the grounds of appeal


17. The proposed amendment to the grounds of appeal seeks to  introduce  an
    entirely new basis of  challenge,  that  is,  that  the  appellant  had
    acquired a vested right  as  a  result  of  the  immigration  rules  as
    previously drafted, and that it was not open to the respondent to amend
    the immigration rules with retrospective effect.  The  changes  in  the
    rules and the decision of the Supreme Court in Munir on which Mr  Malik
    seeks to rely predate the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a
    substantial period.


18. I do not consider that it  is  arguable  that  the  decision  in  Munir
    affects materially the decision  in  Odelola  or  there  is  any  other
    arguable basis to depart from the established law that  an  application
    is to be decided according to  the  rules  in  place  at  the  date  of
    decision, absent any  exception  to  that  rule  such  as  transitional
    provisions.


19. For reasons which are not clear, the grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal cite a  version  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  had  been
    superseded by the date of decision. The tenor of the grounds of  appeal
    is that paragraph 120A simply required there to be a confirmation  that
    a new course represented progress and did not require an assessment.  I
    accept that was so prior to the amendment introduced by  Cm  8423,  but
    the effect of that was to introduce such requirements.  The grounds  do
    not engage with the fact that paragraph 120A had been amended prior  to
    the date of the respondent's decision.


20. It is not disputed that the provisions of paragraph 120A  were  amended
    by Cm 8423 with effect from 20 July 2012 nor  is  it  submitted  by  Mr
    Malik that there are any  transitional  arrangements  with  respect  to
    those changes.  It is evident from Judge Sullivan's determination  [19]
    that she had in mind the amended of the Rules  as  is  clear  from  her
    reference to academic progress being defined within the Rules.  I  find
    no merit in the submission that in referring to that the judge had  had
    in  mind  the  provisions,  defining  academic  progress,   which   had
    previously been within the guidance.  Although  academic  progress  had
    been defined in the  rules,  the  determination  clearly  records  that
    progress is defined within the Rules.


21. Further, I do not accept that Mr Malik was taken  by  surprise  by  the
    respondent's argument as to which version of the immigration rules  was
    applicable. It is unclear why the grounds of  appeal  use  the  earlier
    version of paragraph 120A. It is not clear either why they do  not,  if
    it is alleged that that version of the Rules was  in  fact  applicable,
    raised that issue or indeed the grounds put to the First-tier Tribunal.
    Further, the difficulties of the different versions of  paragraph  120A
    were drawn to the attention of the parties in the grant  of  permission
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Latter.


22. I am not satisfied that any failure to comply with  Rule  24  restricts
    the respondent from raising here the fact that the judge's decision was
    correct from the basis of the Immigration Rules or to submit  that  the
    grounds appear to  have  been  drafted  in  error  as  to  the  correct
    provision of the Immigration Rules.


23. I do not accept that the respondent is deemed by failure  to  submit  a
    Rule 24 notice to have accepted the propositions  put  forward  in  the
    grounds of appeal and Mr Malik cited no authority for that  proposition
    nor did he submit that the effects of the Procedure Rules or  for  that
    matter the directions made in this case had that effect.


24. Given that the doubts regarding which version of the Immigration  Rules
    was applicable had been raised within  the  grant  of  permission,  the
    appellant had ample time in which to seek to amend  or  supplement  the
    grounds of appeal but did not do so.


25. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that it is not in the interests of
    justice to permit the  amendment  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  and  I
    indicated that that was so.  Mr Malik had, however, indicated  that  he
    would require an adjournment but confirmed to me that this  would  only
    have been had I been minded to grant his request to amend  the  grounds
    of appeal.  I indicated that had I been minded to do so  then  I  would
    have of course adjourned the matter to permit further argument but this
    eventuality did not arise.


Decision


26. I am satisfied that for the purposes of this appeal Judge Sullivan  was
    entitled to take into account the most recent CAS given that  this  had
    been supplied to the respondent in support of  the  application.   That
    was not challenged by the respondent.  I find, however, that the  judge
    was correct  to  conclude  that  this  CAS  did  not  comply  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 120A as amended by Cm 8423 with effect from 8
    July 2012, which Mr Malik accepted.


27. Given that Mr Malik no longer sought to pursue paragraphs 1  to  12  of
    the grounds of appeal it is unnecessary for me to reach a conclusion on
    these other than to note that Judge Sullivan set out in adequate detail
    why she considered that Judge Harris's decision was  not  determinative
    of the facts giving rise to this appeal, not least  because  there  had
    been a change in the Immigration Rules and because  the  appellant  had
    adduced a new CAS. Accordingly, I am satisfied that  the  determination
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of  an  error  of
    law and I uphold it.


SUMMARY OF DECISIONS

1    The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law and I uphold it.

Signed                                  Date: 14 October 2013
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
