
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06557/2014
                                                               IA/06551/2014
                                                               IA/06562/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2014                           |On 14 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                         upper tribunal judge DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr John Anthony
                         Mrs Mary Helen John Anthony
                      Miss Christina Anna John Anthony
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mrs A Huneewoth, Solicitor of Raj Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal from a determination made by the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Majid) and promulgated on 11 September 2014.  To avoid confusion
    we shall refer to the appellant as "the Secretary of State" and to  the
    respondents to this appeal as "the appellants". The appeal  is  brought
    by the Secretary of State with permission of  a  single  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grimmett).

 2. The Tribunal allowed the appeals by the three  appellants  against  the
    Secretary of State's decisions on 20 January 2014 to  refuse  to  issue
    residence cards to them on the  basis  that  the  first  appellant,  Mr
    Anthony, is an EEA  national  (of  Germany)  exercising  Treaty  rights
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    (as amended), ("the EEA Regulations") and the remaining appellants, his
    wife and daughter, are his dependants.

 3. The Secretary of State asserts that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred
    in failing to give any, or any adequate reasons  for  the  decision  to
    allow the appeals.  The grounds are set out extensively in  the  notice
    of appeal. Reliance is placed upon the guidance given in a judgment  of
    Henry LJ quoted in the determination of the President in  MK  (duty  to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) at paragraph 8:

         "More recently, in Flannery v Halifax Estate Agencies [2000] 1  All
         ER 373, one finds a comprehensive exposition of the duty imposed on
         today's professional judge.  The Court of  Appeal  observed,  first
         (at page 377):

             'It is not a useful task to attempt to make absolute rules  as
             to the requirement for the judge to  give  reasons.   This  is
             because issues are so infinitely various.

             The following passages in the judgment of Lord  Justice  Henry
             are deserving of full reproduction:

             '(1) The duty [to give reasons] is a function of  due  process
                  and therefore of justice.  Its rationale has two principal
                  aspects.  The first is that fairness surely requires  that
                  the parties - especially the losing party - should be left
                  in no doubt why they have won or lost.  This is especially
                  so since without reasons the losing party  will  not  know
                  .... whether the court has  misdirected  itself  and  thus
                  whether he may have an available appeal on  the  substance
                  of the case.  The second is that  a  requirement  to  give
                  reasons concentrates the mind; if  it  is  fulfilled,  the
                  resulting decision is much more likely to be soundly based
                  on the evidence than if it is not....'"

 4. The Secretary of State also refers to a passage in MK at paragraph 12:

         "The final word on this subject goes to Lord Neuberger:

             'Decisions without reasons are certainly not  justice:  indeed
             they are scarcely decisions at all.'

         [The Bailii Annual Lecture, 20 November 2012]".

 5. The Secretary of State is  not  to  be  criticized  for  bringing  this
    appeal.  There were apparent deficiencies in the reasoning on the  face
    of the determination.  Moreover, Mr Whitwell, who  presented  the  case
    for the Secretary of State before us today, explained that at the  time
    when the grounds of  appeal  were  settled  (and  indeed,  until  quite
    recently) the Secretary of  State  had  no  access  to  the  bundle  of
    documents that had been presented by the appellants to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Therefore there was no opportunity to see what evidence  the
    Tribunal had relied upon, other than what appeared on the face  of  the
    determination, and that in and of itself was insufficient to enable the
    Secretary of State to work out why it was that the Tribunal had allowed
    the appeal.

 6. The high water-mark of the Tribunal's reasoning appears  in  paragraphs
    13 and 22 of the determination.  In paragraph 13 the Tribunal refers to
    the submissions of Counsel for the appellant and states this:

         "He drew my attention to various documents and said that there  was
         documentary evidence illustrating  that  he  [that  is,  the  first
         appellant] was a 'qualified worker' and for the respondent to doubt
         that fact could not be beyond criticism given  the  fact  that  the
         documents presented to the respondent contained a P60 issued by the
         HMRC."

 7. There is then a reference to the oral evidence of the first  appellant,
    which is related in great detail. In summary, his evidence was that  he
    was working for a company called Haran Foods in Croydon,  in  which  he
    owns shares. The address of that business, the telephone number and fax
    number were given, as were the contact details for the man who prepared
    the first appellant's wage slips.

 8. After reciting various relevant provisions of the EEA  Regulations  the
    Tribunal then said this in paragraph 22:

         "Accordingly,  in  view  of  my  deliberations  in  the   preceding
         paragraphs and having taken  into  account  all  of  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence as well as the  submissions  at  my  disposal,
         cognisant of the fact that the burden of proof is on the  appellant
         and the standard of proof is the balance  of  probabilities,  I  am
         persuaded that the appellants should benefit from  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended)."

    That  is  all  the  reasoning  that  appears  on  the   face   of   the
    determination.

 9. On behalf of the appellants, Mrs Hunneewoth submitted that paragraph 22
    was sufficient.  She submitted that  the  inexorable  inference  to  be
    drawn from that paragraph was that the First-tier Tribunal had accepted
    all of the evidence, documentary and oral, that was placed before it in
    support of the appellants' case, and that it  was  satisfied  that  the
    first appellant was exercising his Treaty rights.

10. In our judgment that may be a generous interpretation of paragraph  22,
    but it is probably the correct one.  However,  even  if  we  are  wrong
    about that and there is an absence of reasons, it consists at  most  of
    the absence of a sentence saying "I accept as truthful the evidence  of
    the first  appellant,  which  is  supported  and  corroborated  by  the
    documents in the bundle before me."

11. Unlike the Secretary of State, we have had the advantage of seeing that
    bundle. It is clear that the documentation  in  it  assists  the  first
    appellant in proving that he does indeed work for Haran Foods  UK  Ltd,
    which is a genuine business, and  that  he  is  exercising  his  Treaty
    rights as  he  claims.   Those  documents  include  the  P60  which  is
    expressly referred to in paragraph 13 of  the  determination,  and  the
    payslips, which appear to be perfectly normal payslips. There is also a
    photograph of the premises of Haran  Foods,  which  is  plainly  in  an
    industrial area and is not a residential address  (as  claimed  in  the
    decision letter rejecting the first appellant's application).

12. All of the information in the P60 and payslips (which state  the  first
    appellant's national insurance number and appear to be authentic) could
    have been checked by the Secretary of State with HM Revenue  &  Customs
    if there were any queries about it.  As to the premises of Haran Foods,
    they plainly exist. It is  not  surprising  that  attempts  to  contact
    people there during the daytime might have failed because of the nature
    of the business. We expect that people who work there would be  up  and
    about early in the morning and then going about their  business  during
    the day.  It looks like a fairly small enterprise, and therefore  there
    is nothing sinister about an inability by the Home  Office  to  contact
    people there if the attempts were made during the daytime.

13. So even if we had been minded to find that there was a  material  error
    of law in the determination and to set it  aside  on  that  ground,  we
    would  have  re-made  the  decision  and  reached  exactly   the   same
    conclusion. The first appellant's evidence is credible and supported by
    the documentation he provided.

14. However, we  are  just  about  persuaded  by  Mrs  Huneewoth  that  the
    inference that she submits can  be  drawn  from  paragraph  22  of  the
    determination,  read  in  conjunction  with  the   preceding   passages
    (including in particular paragraph 13). Therefore we will dismiss  this
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  determination  as  alleged.
Therefore the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed  [pic] Date 14th November 2014


Mrs Justice Andrews
