

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/06972/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 January 2014                             |On 19 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           JERRY UGOCHUKWU AJAEGBO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Bhachu, instructed by Bhogal & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham that was  promulgated
    on 18 September 2014.  Judge Graham allowed Mr Ajaegbo's appeal against
    the immigration decisions of 29 January 2014 refusing to vary his leave
    as a tier 2 (general) migrant and to remove him by way of directions to
    Nigeria.

 2. The Secretary of State pleaded two grounds.  First, it was argued  that
    the  judge  failed  to  properly  apply  s.85A  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It was  evident  from  her  reasoning
    that she took into account evidence that had not been provided with the
    application and which  was  relevant  to  the  acquisition  of  points.
    Secondly, Judge Graham failed to deal properly with the issue of common
    law fairness, not having regard to the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  in
    Rahman v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 11.  The Secretary of State  argued  that
    she had been under no obligation to give Mr Ajaegbo an  opportunity  to
    address  the  deficiency  in  the  certificate  of  sponsorship,   that
    deficiency being an issue between him and his employer.

 3. Mr Mills relied on these grounds.  He submitted that Judge  Graham  did
    not engage at all with the provisions of s.85A and therefore the appeal
    could not have succeeded under  the  immigration  rules.   Whether  the
    immigration decisions were otherwise not in  accordance  with  the  law
    would have engaged with issues of common law fairness but even on  this
    point the judge erred because she did not consider the context of  such
    fairness properly.  In effect, she ascribed to the Secretary  of  State
    the failings of Mr Ajaegbo's employer.

 4. In the rule 24 reply prepared by Ms Bhachu,  it  was  argued  that  the
    original immigration decision was unlawful  because  the  Secretary  of
    State had no power to make a removal  decision  at  the  same  time  as
    making a decision to refuse to vary leave.  Ms Bhachu admitted that she
    was not fully up to date with  the  legal  issues  on  this  point  and
    accepted that the law  had  changed  from  8  May  2013  to  enable  to
    Secretary of State to make  such  combined  decisions  thereafter.   As
    such, there is nothing in this ground of response.

 5. I turn to the core of the appellant's response.  Ms Bhachu engaged with
    the issue of fairness and argued that  Rahman  did  not  apply  to  the
    appellant because her there was not a deficiency in the application  or
    the certificate of sponsorship but a simple human error.  Judge  Graham
    had identified at paragraph 15 of her determination that an  error  had
    been made by the employer as to which occupational code applied.  There
    was no deficiency that had to be corrected but an  error.   In  such  a
    situation there was a duty on the Secretary of State to act fairly  and
    to advise the applicant of the error so that it could be corrected.

 6. In pursuing the  case  in  terms  of  fairness,  Ms  Bhachu  relied  in
    particular on paragraph 27 of the reported decision  of  this  Chamber,
    Owolabi (Tier 2 - skilled occupations) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 313 (IAC):

        27.  We would observe, however, that  the  analysis  we  have  just
        given is confirmed to the basis on which Ground  (2)  was  advanced
        before us, namely as a challenge to the  meaning  of  the  relevant
        immigration rules.  We do not rule out that in  terms  of  our  "in
        accordance with the law" jurisdiction a failure on the part of  the
        respondent [SSHD] to consider a different job classification  might
        in certain circumstances conflict with the duty to act fairly.  But
        that was not the basis  on  which  Ground  (2)  was  made  and  the
        conclusions we reach below on Ground (1) mean there is no need  for
        us to consider the matter in any event."

 7. I have considered  the  competing  grounds  and  submissions  and  have
    concluded that the determination of Judge Graham contains an error on a
    point of law.  My reasons are as follow.

 8. In allowing the appeal on the  ground  that  the  immigration  decision
    refusing to vary leave was  not  in  accordance  with  the  immigration
    rules, it is evident that Judge Graham relied on evidence not  supplied
    with the application.  That is contrary  to  s.85A  of  the  2002  Act.
    Although there are circumstances where post-application evidence can be
    admitted, Judge Graham does not identify that  any  of  the  exceptions
    were engaged and it is difficult to  see  how  they  could  be  as  the
    requirement to provide a certificate of sponsorship goes to  the  issue
    of the acquisition of points under the Points Based System.

 9. I recognise this error may not be sufficient to set aside the  decision
    because Judge  Graham  considered  arguments  relating  to  common  law
    fairness.  There are no restrictions under s.85A to the  evidence  that
    could be considered in that context.  Although it was not open to Judge
    Graham to find that the immigration decision was not in accordance with
    the immigration rules, it was open to her to find the decision was  not
    otherwise in accordance with the law.  Therefore, I consider the  issue
    of fairness.

10. I begin by considering whether there is, as claimed by the appellant, a
    difference between a "deficiency" and an "error" in an application.  Ms
    Bhachu submitted that the Court of  Appeal  had  decided  the  case  of
    Rahman in terms of their being a deficiency  and  not  an  error.   She
    relied on the Oxford English Dictionary's definitions  of  "deficiency"
    and "error" and  argued  that  this  also  entitled  the  appellant  to
    distinguish his case.

11. This ground must fail because it is clear from the case of Rahman  that
    the Court of Appeal  described  Rahman's  situation  in  various  ways,
    describing it in paragraphs  27  and  32  as  being  the  result  of  a
    "mistake"  of  the  college.   As  per  Ms  Bhachu's  submissions  (and
    paragraph 12 of the  rule  24  reply),  an  error  is  defined  in  the
    dictionary as a mistake.  Hence, it is clear that the Court  of  Appeal
    was not drawing a distinction between deficiency and error as suggested
    by Ms Bhachu and this argument must fail.

12. I move on to consider what the Upper Tribunal said in Owolabi.   It  is
    clear that the Upper Tribunal was not  providing  guidance  on  when  a
    conflict between a simplistic application of the immigration rules  and
    the duty to act fairly might arise.  Earlier in its decision, the Upper
    Tribunal identified that it was for the sponsoring employer to identify
    the relevant occupational code and not the role  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  It is difficult to see when, therefore, it might be open  to  a
    judge to consider the issue of fairness.  No submissions were  made  to
    me about such situations but one would appear to be where it  comes  to
    light that the information in  a  certificate  of  sponsorship  is  not
    correct because of human error.

13. The  issue  of  when  the  Secretary  of  State  might  go  behind  the
    information contained in a certificate of acceptance of  studies  (CAS)
    has been considered by the Court of Appeal in a  number  of  relatively
    recent cases.  None deals specifically with the issue  of  certificates
    of sponsorship but as they fulfil very similar functions to CAS letters
    under the Points Based System it seems appropriate to  draw  analogies.
    I draw on two specific judgments: R (Global Vision College Ltd) v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 659 and Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568.

14. In simple terms, the issue in the former related  to  the  question  of
    when the Secretary of State or other guardian  of  immigration  control
    could go behind the information in sponsorship documentation.   It  was
    confirmed that the  Secretary  of  State  could  do  so  to  check  the
    truthfulness of the content of the document in order to prevent  fraud.
    It also confirmed there was no requirement to check each case.  In  the
    latter the issue was who should assess academic  progress  and  it  was
    accepted this was the role of the sponsoring college unless  there  was
    fraud.  Without such suspicions, going behind such points would not  be
    lawful.  From both cases it is clear that there  is  no  duty  for  the
    Secretary of State  to  go  behind  the  contents  of  the  sponsorship
    documentation and it was open to her to  assume  that  the  information
    contained therein  was  accurate.   These  points  weaken  Ms  Bhachu's
    arguments significantly.

15. Ms Bhachu's  arguments  are  completely  undermined  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal's consideration of common law fairness in Rahman.   I  mentioned
    at the hearing that a different composition of the  Court  had  reached
    similar conclusions in respect of the duty of common law fairness in EK
    (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.  The principles in both  are
    clear.  It is for the appellant to provide  the  relevant  evidence  of
    sponsorship  and  they  have  a  contractual  relationship  with  their
    sponsor.  To ensure the smooth operation of the PBS system, which is in
    the public interest in terms of efficiency, there is  no  duty  on  the
    Secretary of State to question why  a  sponsorship  document  has  been
    withdrawn by a sponsor.  It can be assumed that such a  withdrawal  has
    been done for a legitimate reason.  The fact  that  such  a  withdrawal
    might be because of a mistake or error does not impose a  duty  on  the
    Secretary of State to allow the error to be corrected since it is  open
    to the applicant to make a fresh application with the correct document.
     Such an application might be made from within or outside  the  UK  but
    that will depend on the specific circumstances.  Where a person suffers
    some loss, they will  have  recourse  against  their  sponsor  and  not
    against the Secretary of State.

16. I can find nothing to distinguish the  existing  case  from  the  above
    principles even though  this  case  revolves  around  the  issue  of  a
    certificate of sponsorship and not a CAS letter.

17. Judge Graham did  not  consider  any  of  these  issues.   All  of  the
    authorities other than EK (Ivory Coast) were available to  her  but  do
    not appear to have been considered.  The principles set  out  in  those
    authorities were binding and there is no explanation why  Judge  Graham
    thought this case could be distinguished from them.  It follows that  I
    must find that Judge Graham erred on a point of law by finding that the
    immigration decision originally appealed against was not  otherwise  in
    accordance with the law.

18. For the above reasons  I  not  only  find  that  the  determination  is
    infected with errors on points of law but that they  are  such  that  I
    must set the decision aside and remake it.

19. There was no need to adjourn  the  hearing.   The  Upper  Tribunal  had
    issued directions prior to the hearing reminding the  parties  that  it
    might proceed directly to remaking the decision and that any additional
    evidence should be provided in case that happened.  No further evidence
    was provided by either party.  Therefore, the remaking of the  decision
    relies on the evidence previously submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. The witness statement of 4 August 2014 does not  refer  to  any  issues
    relating to Mr Ajaegbo's private life rights other than  the  issue  of
    fairness because the error in the certificate of  sponsorship  resulted
    from his employer as his employer had confirmed.

21. It is clear from my findings and considerations above that the original
    appeal  cannot  succeed  under  the  immigration  rules  or  under  the
    "otherwise not in accordance with the law" provisions.  The only remain
    ground, and one not considered by Judge Graham, relates to Mr Ajaegbo's
    private life rights.  It is  accepted  that  he  cannot  succeed  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the immigration  rules  but  that  in  light  of  R
    (Oludoyi and others) v SSHD (Article 8 -  MM(Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
    [2014]  UKUT  539  (IAC)  it  will  be  necessary   to   consider   the
    proportionality of the immigration decision in any event.

22. I mention that I am considering article 8  of  my  own  initiative,  Ms
    Bhachu conceding that the issue had not been  raised  as  a  ground  of
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  However, she  did  not  concede
    that there was no article 8 issue arising from the facts of this case.

23. Mr Mills reminded me, contrary to the submissions of Ms Bhachu, that it
    remained open to  Mr  Ajaegbo  to  make  a  fresh  application  to  the
    Secretary of State which if supported with the correct  evidence  would
    be a valid application and would be properly considered. He pointed out
    that Mr Ajaegbo had continuing leave under s.3C of the Immigration  Act
    1971 and that as long as he  applied  within  28  days  of  the  appeal
    process ending (which would bring such leave to an end), then he  would
    meet the requirements of paragraphs 245HD(b) and (p).  This meant there
    would not be a need for him to apply from overseas,  although  that  of
    course remained a possibility which would not be unfair  in  any  legal
    sense.

24. Ms Bhachu had sought  to  rely  on  the  House  of  Lords  judgment  in
    Chikwamba  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40  to  argue  that   it   would   be
    disproportionate to expect Mr Ajaegbo  to  go  abroad  merely  for  the
    formalities  of  immigration  control.   Not  only  is   her   argument
    undermined by Mr Mills's submission but it is  not  clear  whether  the
    principle she drew from Chikwamba is reliable.  Not only was  Chikwamba
    decided on its own particular facts, including the  difficulties  of  a
    family being separated even temporarily and  the  hardships  they  were
    likely to face in Zimbabwe, the duty  of  migrants  to  comply  with  a
    country's immigration law has been confirmed by the European  Court  of
    Human Rights in Jeunesse v Netherlands (appl no 12738/10)  [2014]  ECHR
    1036 including an  expectation  they  will  leave  to  make  a  further
    application from overseas when they do not meet those requirements.

25. Mr Ajaegbo has not provided evidence to show that his moral or physical
    integrity would be undermined by the immigration decision.  Bearing  in
    mind what I have already considered, it follows from Nasim  and  others
    (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC)  that  his  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds cannot succeed.

26. In light of all these  points  I  am  satisfied  that  the  immigration
    decision is proportionate.  Although  it  may  cause  Mr  Ajaegbo  some
    inconvenience, such inconvenience is not  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in maintaining immigration control.

27. Having considered all possible grounds, I conclude  that  the  original
    appeal had to be dismissed and that is the decision I make.



Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  because
the determination of Judge Graham contains errors  on  points  of  law  that
require it to be set aside.

I  remake  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  original  appeal   against   the
immigration decision of 29 January 2014.


                               Signed        Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
