

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06073/2015
                                                               IA/06074/2015
                                                               IA/06075/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 5 April 2016                               |On 11 April 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between


                                    [A A]
                                    [S A]
                                    [D A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Not represented
For the Respondent:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The first appellant is the mother of the second and third  appellants.
      Each is a citizen of Nigeria. The first and second appellants  arrived
      in the United Kingdom in November 2005 and were admitted as  visitors.
      They overstayed that leave and have remained  unlawfully  since  then.
      The third appellant was born in the United Kingdom on [ ] 2007 and has
      not been the recipient of any leave  to  remain.  An  application  for
      leave to remain on the basis of rights protected by article 8  of  the
      ECHR was refused on 28 September 2010. This appeal is  concerned  with
      the respondent's decision of 28 January 2015 to  refuse  a  subsequent
      application made on behalf of all three appellants.


   2. The appellants have been granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart who, by a  decision
      promulgated on 23 August 2015, dismissed their appeal. At the date  of
      the hearing before the judge the first appellants' children were  aged
      12 and 7 years old respectively.


   3. The grounds for seeking permission to  appeal  are  drafted  by  Ms  P
      Solanki, counsel who appeared before the judge, and are  supported  by
      written notes made by both her and Ms F. Clarke who was at  that  time
      undertaking a mini-pupillage with counsel's chambers at 1  Pump  Court
      and who had accompanied Ms Solanki on this day to observe  proceedings
      at Taylor House. Those grounds raise some serious  complaints  calling
      into question the fairness of the hearing and  sustainability  of  the
      conclusions reached by  the  judge  in  dismissing  the  appeal.  [AA]
      appears before  the  Upper  Tribunal  without  the  benefit  of  legal
      representation because she has been unable to fund representation. She
      was assisted in presenting her case by Mr Daniel, who is a  Pastor  at
      the church attended by [AA] and who  gave  oral  evidence  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal.


   4. In challenging the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant
      adopts the grounds settled by  counsel.  For  present  purposes  those
      grounds, distilled to their essence, can be assembled under four  main
      headings and summarised as follows.


      The appellants were denied a fair hearing





        a.  The judge was "rude ,  dismissive  and  she  simply  failed  to
           engage with the case and arguments advanced"

        b. The  judge  "displayed  anger"  towards  the  first  appellant's
           youngest child, saying that he should not be present;

        c. The judge "appeared completely distracted;  she  looked  out  of
           window;  she  did  not  make  notes  and/or  wrote  notes   very
           infrequently, she made no eye contact and spoke only to  dismiss
           my arguments";

        d. The judge failed to address material issues and submissions

        e. The judge did not take time to consider large  bundle  submitted
           on the day of the hearing, it being important for  her  to  have
           familiarised herself with that evidence as  the  respondent  was
           not represented.






      The judge refused an  application  for  an  adjournment  but  gave  no
      reasons, contrary to Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010




   f. The purpose of seeking an adjournment was because the first  appellant
      wished to instruct an  independent  social  worker  to  consider  best
      interests of the children;

   g. The judge should also have considered  an  adjournment  to  allow  the
      respondent to consider the new documentary evidence: see  MNM  v  SSHD
      [2000] INLR 576 and to allow the respondent an opportunity to  respond
      to submission that she failed  to  apply  a  relevant  and  applicable
      policy.




      Policy issues:




   h. The judge did not engage with the arguments and so  missed  the  point
      being made and did not address it in her decision.

   i. The judge was referred  specifically  (both  in  submissions  and  the
      skeleton) to the need for "strong reasons" (see paragraph  16  of  the
      decision) but does not deal with this or consider that  submission  in
      the decision.



      The approach taken by the judge to her assessment of  the  appellants'
      case under article 8 and 276ADE was fundamentally flawed:




   j. This assessment should have been informed  by  issues  of  the  policy
      above but was not;

   k. The finding made by the judge at  para  19  that  employers  would  be
      "desperate" to retain mother's services on return was speculative  and
      unsupported by any evidence;

   l. At para 26 the judge wrongly imported a test that is absent  from  the
      immigration rule, that the appellants are required to show  that  they
      could not reasonably integrate on return to Nigeria. There is no  such
      requirement in 276ADE

   5. It can be seen from this that counsel who appeared  before  the  judge
      has set out a comprehensive challenge to the way in which the  hearing
      was managed and what is said to be a failure of the  judge  to  engage
      with the case being advanced. Counsel said in her  written  note  that
      her clients and their witnesses  were  "very  unhappy  and  said  they
      wished to make a formal complaint about the  judge".  In  her  written
      note, Ms Clarke said of the application being made for an adjournment:


           "... Mrs Solanki advanced two separate arguments in favour of an
           adjournment of the case. These  arguments  were  dismissed  very
           quickly, both times with Mrs Solanki mid-sentence when  she  was
           rebuked."


   6. For the respondent,  Mr  Wilding  submitted  that  when  each  of  the
      complaints raised is examined in isolation it can be  seen  than  none
      is, in fact, made out to the extent of identifying  an  error  of  law
      that can properly be considered to be material to the outcome of  this
      appeal. The complaint about the  way  in  which  the  judge  conducted
      herself  is  expressed  in  vague  and   particularised   terms.   The
      application for an adjournment was properly refused. He described  the
      complaint at failure to have regard to an applicable policy, such that
      strong reasons were required to refuse the  application,  as  a  "non-
      point" because this simply reflected the fact that there was a sliding
      scale informed by the length of residence of the child, something that
      the respondent plainly had regard to  in  arriving  at  her  decision.
      Finally, while it may be possible to detect an expression of what  was
      required by para 276ADE that was not absolutely  correct,  read  as  a
      whole it can be seen that the judge applied the appropriate tests  and
      was doing no more than to try to reach an assessment of the rights  of
      the family unit as a whole rather  than  artificially  considering  as
      separate issues the claims of the children and their mother.


   7. In respect of that last point, it  might  be  observed  that  such  an
      approach does not sit comfortably with the recent guidance provided by
      a presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal in PD and Others (Article 8
      - conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC).


   8. There is some merit in Mr Wilding's submission in respect of  each  of
      the grounds considered individually, although difficulties do  remain.
      I have looked carefully at the  record  of  proceedings  made  by  the
      judge. This is by any view a brief document but there is no obligation
      upon the judge to make a verbatim record of what has been said at  the
      hearing.  It can be seen that an application was indeed  made  for  an
      adjournment, although the written decision of the judge is  silent  as
      to this. The record of proceedings opens with this note:


           "Application


              Solicitor has been unwell - Home Office not seen bundle
              Trying to gather funds for independent social worker's
              report. Whether in best interests of children. Supported by
              church.
              CBC- Not going to adjourn - has support of her church-had
              since January 2015."


   9.  It is hard to see how an adjournment could be justified  for  further
      time to secure a social workers report when the  explanation  for  its
      absence was an inability to fund it.  However,  [AA]  and  Mr  Daniels
      asserted that the judge had been  told  not  that  the  appellant  was
      trying to gather funds for the report but that the church had actually
      provided the funds required for it. The second reason advanced for  an
      adjournment, which was that the respondent should have the opportunity
      to  see  the  new  bundle  of  documentary  evidence,   was   entirely
      unpersuasive, given that it  was  open  to  counsel  to  draw  to  the
      attention of the judge anything upon which reliance in particular  was
      being placed.


  10. Similarly, it is clear that  the  respondent  did  not  leave  out  of
      account the length of residence in the United Kingdom  accumulated  by
      the children and the judge was alert to the submission being  made  in
      that respect because she referred to it, specifically.

  11. Despite that, the grounds must be considered as a whole. When  counsel
      feels able to make a written assertion to the effect set out above  of
      that which is said to have gone wrong at the hearing, one is left with
      an uncomfortable feeling that a reasonable and well  informed  observe
      may very well have been left with the impression  that  the  appellant
      has not received a fair hearing.  That  concern  is  reinforced  by  a
      number of other matters.


  12.  The record of proceedings certainly does suggest that  a  reason  was
      given for refusing the adjournment. But the  note  from  the  observer
      suggests that not only was counsel interrupted before completing  that
      submission but that in refusing the application the judge  was  giving
      the appearance of delivering a "rebuke".

  13.  Also, even  accepting  that  which  is  recorded  in  the  record  of
      proceedings, it appears that no reason was  given  by  the  judge  for
      refusing the second limb of that application.  As  the  grounds  point
      out, the Presidential Guidance Note anticipates  something  more  than
      this in explanation of a decision to  refuse  an  application  for  an
      adjournment:


           "If a judge receives an adjournment application at a hearing and
           refuses it, the judge should give reasons to  the  parties.  The
           reasons should be noted in the record of  proceedings  with  the
           expectation that the adjournment application and  decision  will
           be  included  in  the  decision   and   statement   of   reasons
           subsequently issued."

  14. Given what I have said about the fact that this was not  a  compelling
      or cogent application for an adjournment,  it  is  unlikely  to  be  a
      material error of law that the application was  refused.  However,  it
      seems that no reason at all was given for rejecting the second limb of
      the application and the way in which the judge did so, taken  together
      with the complaint of how the judge conducted herself in  the  hearing
      means that the very decision to refuse to adjourn, even if  justified,
      was taken in a manner that contributed to a concern that the complaint
      about fairness is reinforced.


  15. At paragraph 19 of her decision the judge explains  why  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect the children  to  return  with  their  mother  to
      Nigeria. An important part of this reasoning was that:


           "... Their mother is a qualified microbiologist  and  while  she
           claims she was unable  to  find  work  as  a  microbiologist  in
           Nigeria, on her oral evidence she limited her search to  private
           companies making no reference to the many Government clinics and
           hospitals which are likely to be desperate for her services."


      The difficulty with that is that in the brief note of the  appellant's
      oral evidence made by the judge in the record of proceedings the judge
      recorded that her evidence was precisely the opposite,  and  that  she
      had tried to find work with "Government hospitals" as well as "private
      places" but she said that few had  called  her  back.  This  error  in
      reciting the appellant's oral evidence in respect of a pivotal finding
      of fact contributes further to the concern  that  there  has  been  an
      appearance of unfairness, even if that was not intended by the judge.


  16. I take account of the fact that this is a decision by  an  experienced
      judge who was entitled to manage the hearing robustly.  However,  this
      particular hearing was conducted in a manner that left  the  appellant
      and her witnesses feeling upset and  in  a  manner  that  led  equally
      experienced counsel to consider it appropriate to record the  concerns
      that she did. I am satisfied  that  a  reasonable  and  well  informed
      observer of these proceedings would have entertained real concerns  at
      the fairness of the hearing.


  17. Drawing all of this together, I am satisfied  that  the  grounds  have
      identified that there has been an appearance of procedural  unfairness
      such as to constitute an error of law.


   Summary of decision:

  18. First tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Steward made an error of  law  material
      to the outcome of this appeal.


  19. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      decision is set aside and the appeal  is  remitted  to  be  determined
      afresh by a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.




      Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    6 April 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


