

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06665/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 23 January 2015                        |On 23 February 2015         |
|                                          |                            |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DRABU CBE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MS AYGUL HUMMEDOVA
                                                                  Respondent
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma of Counsel instructed by Karis Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State who was  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Shamash, a Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shamash  had
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR. The respondent in  this
    appeal is a citizen of Turkmenistan and her date of birth  is  22nd  of
    June 1982.


 2. The respondent first arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance
    as a student on 16 January 2006. Her leave was renewed  until  she  was
    granted Tier 1 (Post Study) dependent visa on  8  September  2012.  Her
    visa expired on 10 December 2013 and on 9  December  2013  she  made  a
    further application for leave to remain outside of the  Rules.  As  set
    out  in  the  determination  of  Judge  Shamash,  the  basis  for   the
    application  was  straightforward.  "The  appellant  needs  one  year's
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom in order to complete  her
    ACCA examinations and practical training. The appellant cannot meet the
    immigration Rules because she cannot obtain leave as  Tier  4  student,
    because she only has two examinations to take and no college will issue
    a CAS  to  a  student  with  less  than  three  examinations  to  take.
    Furthermore, the appellant is not eligible for a post-study work visa."



 3. At the hearing of the appeal before Judge Shamash, the  appellant  gave
    evidence, adopting her written witness statement. . She said that there
    are no testing centres  in  Turkmenistan.  The  closest  centre  is  in
    Uzbekistan, which is 3 hours by plane. There are also  testing  centres
    in Ukraine and Russia  and  both  are  4  hours  flight  away  and  the
    respondent will need a visa to take the examinations in  any  of  these
    centres. She stated that she had explored all the avenues open to  her.
    She is in the middle of her work experience and there is unlikely to be
    anywhere in Turkmenistan where  she  can  get  experience  as  an  ACCA
    accountant.

 4. In the determination the Judge noted that there had been no dispute  on
    the facts of the case. It had been accepted by the Secretary  of  State
    through  Mr  Sedgwick  that  the  respondent  was  in  employment,  had
    completed almost 2 years of the 3 years required in order to obtain the
    practical  component  of  her  training  and  that  she  has  two  more
    examinations left to complete. It was also, noted the Judge, implicitly
    accepted by Mr Sedgwick that she would not be able to obtain a CAS or a
    further student visa because she only has two modules left to complete.

 5. The Judge properly directing himself on  the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof reminded herself that the matter before him was outside the rules
    and came under common law principles  of  Article  8.  The  Judge  then
    carried out a detailed review of relevant  case  law  such  as  Shahzad
    [2014] UKUT 00085, Nagre [2013] UKUT EWHC 720, Gulshan [2013] UKUT  640
    (IAC), MM Lebanon {2014] EWCA Civ 985, OA [2008] EWCA Civ 82 and Razgar
    [2004} UKHL. The Judge took into account  Section  117A  to  D  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

 6. Taking account of all the facts established before him, the Judge said,
    "The appellant has invested a huge amount  of  tie  and  money  in  her
    studies and her work is a main tranche of her life. In her case, I find
    that she developed a private life  in  the  UK,  which  is  limited  to
    obtaining  and  completing  her  qualification.   The   threshold   for
    establishing interference in private life is not  a  particularly  high
    one. The decision to remove is in  accordance  with  the  law,  as  the
    appellant does not meet the rules. "

 7. In addressing the issue of proportionality the  Judge  found  that  the
    facts of this case were rare and that the Secretary of State had failed
    to engage with the specific issue of the impact  of  removal  upon  the
    respondent. Her consideration of  "compelling  circumstances"  did  not
    bear a correct relation to the facts of the case  and  was  generic  in
    nature. The Judge went on to say, "It is this failure  to  engage  with
    the specific issue which makes the balancing exercise conducted by  the
    respondent meaningless. The facts of this  case  are  unusual  and  the
    respondent needed to engage with the impact  of  her  removal  at  this
    stage. I find that the decision is disproportionate." On this basis the
    appeal was allowed.

 8. Permission to appeal to Upper Tribunal was granted by  Judge  Deans,  a
    Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal.  He  took  the  view  that  the  grounds
    contending that in  allowing  the  appeal  Judge  Shamash  had  made  a
    material misdirection in law and had failed to  give  adequate  reasons
    for conclusions reached were arguable.

 9. After hearing Mr Sharma and Mr Walker and giving due  consideration  to
    the written "Supplementary Submissions" of Mr Sharma, I  was  satisfied
    that  the  grounds  supporting  the   application   were   more   about
    disagreement on facts found by Judge Shamash rather than any  error  in
    law on the part of the Judge. In a very  well  reasoned  determination,
    Judge Shamash  made  clear  and  reasoned  findings  of  fact  and  the
    conclusion she reached on those facts were perfectly in accord with the
    relevant case law on Article 8.

10. This appeal is dismissed. The decision of Judge  Shamash  allowing  the
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State stands.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
7 February 2015



DIRECTIONS REGARDING ANONYMITY NOT MADE.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

