
IAC-BFD- MD
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06923/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6th May 2015                        |On 28th May 2015                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MARIUSZ SZCZYGLO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    Howard) in which it allowed the appeal of Mariusz Szczyglo against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 25th September 2013 seeking to  remove
    him pursuant to Regulation 19(3) of the EEA Regulations 2006.

 2. I shall hereafter refer to the Respondent as "the  Appellant"  and  the
    Secretary of State as "the Respondent" which reflects their  respective
    positions when appearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Poland (born 4th April 1981), who entered
    the United Kingdom in May 2011 to seek  employment  thereby  exercising
    his Treaty rights. From  May  2011  to  July  2013  the  Appellant  was
    employed by Prezzo PLC; documentary evidence  to  show  this  has  been
    submitted and is unchallenged by the Respondent.

 4. The Appellant subsequently became unemployed, registered with  the  Job
    Centre and received Job Seekers Allowance.

 5. By 25th September 2013 the Respondent made a  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant pursuant to Regulation 19(3) of the EEA Regulations 2006. The
    Appellant was  accordingly  served  with  the  requisite  notice  which
    informed him that he had a right of appeal  against  that  notice.  The
    Appellant did not appeal.

 6. On 8th November 2013 the Appellant's detention was authorised.  He  was
    detained from 27th November 2013 until  24th  February  2014  when  the
    removal directions were cancelled. The Appellant was granted  temporary
    admission and a notice of appeal was lodged by him on 3rd January 2014.



 7. When the Appellant's appeal came before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Judge set out the background to the appeal. He took oral evidence  from
    the Appellant and noted amongst other things  that  the  Appellant  had
    been served with a notification of temporary admission.  That  document
    specifically prevented him from working or  engaging  in  any  business
    unless explicitly granted permission so to do.  The  Judge  also  noted
    that the issue before him  was  that  the  Appellant  is  no  longer  a
    qualified person under Regulation 6(4) of  the  2006  Regulations.  The
    Respondent sought to  remove  the  Appellant  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant could not show that he was a jobseeker i.e. a person who  had
    entered the United Kingdom in order to seek employment and  is  someone
    who can provide evidence that  he  is  seeking  employment  and  has  a
    genuine chance of being engaged. That was the issue before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. Having heard from the Appellant and considered the documentary evidence
    before him, the FtT Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal.

 9. The Respondent and was granted permission to appeal. There is only  one
    ground of appeal and that is set out in full below.

         "Failure to give reasons or any adequate reasons for findings on  a
         material matter.

         The First Tier Tribunal Judge has failed to  give  reasons  or  any
         adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant entered the  UK  to
         seek employment and had provided sufficient evidence to  show  that
         he had  a  genuine  chance  of  being  employed.  The  findings  at
         paragraph 16 is inadequate and the Judge  has  failed  to  properly
         determine on what basis there was sufficient  evidence  before  the
         Tribunal to show that the Appellant had demonstrated he was capable
         of being employed."

The UT Hearing

10. Before me  Mr  Bramble  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.  The
    Appellant did not attend. I heard submissions from Mr Bramble.  I  have
    decided to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and my  reasons  for
    so doing are set out here below.

11. I see no substance in the grounds seeking permission. At  paragraph  16
    of his determination, the Judge sets  out  his  findings  which  in  my
    judgment are clear enough. The Appellant's claim is that he entered the
    UK to seek employment. Indeed he gained employment  and  remained  with
    the same employer for over two years.  This  is  documented.  Following
    that period of employment, he obtained Job Seekers Allowance. He was in
    receipt of that benefit to which he was entitled, until he was arrested
    by UKBA and placed on temporary admission.

12. As the Judge clearly  found,  the  terms  of  his  temporary  admission
    prevented the Appellant from working.  The Judge accepted that this  is
    the main reason why the Appellant is  presently  not  working.  It  has
    always been the Appellant's case that he is available for work.

13. The Judge concluded therefore on  the  evidence  before  him  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements of Regulation 6(4) and  his  conclusions
    for reaching that decision is fully reasoned.

14. It follows therefore that the Judge has not fallen into legal error  by
    failing to give reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant  entered  the  UK  to  seek  employment  and  for   providing
    sufficient evidence to show he had a genuine chance of being  employed.
    The Respondent's appeal therefore fails and the  decision  of  the  FtT
    stands.

Decision

15. The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed. The decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature     Dated

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

